After a successful journey to the International Space Station, the SpaceX Dragon capsule was released by the station's robotic arm and started its journey back to earth.
ISS Expedition 31 crew members released the Dragon from its grips at 5:49 a.m. EDT. The spacecraft then began a series of departure burns and maneuvers that allowed it to move beyond the 656-foot "keep out sphere" around the ISS.
The Dragon is expected to land in the Pacific Ocean at approximately 11:44 a.m. EDT, hundreds of miles west of Baja, Calif., NASA said."The spacecraft returns to Earth like a burning comet, protected from extreme reentry temperatures by its powerful PICA-X heat shield. The landing location is controlled by firing the Draco thrusters during reentry," according to SpaceX.
Dual drogue parachutes will deploy at 45,000 feet to slow Dragon down, while the main parachute will deploy at 10,000 feet, slowing it to 16-18 feet per second. Once landed, SpaceX will retrieve Dragon using a 185-foot barge equipped with a crane, a dozen SpaceX engineers and technicians, and a four-person dive team.
In the future, SpaceX said, the company will be able to use thrusters so the spacecraft can utilize a landing pad.
Coverage of the splashdown will begin live on NASA TV at 10:15 a.m. EDT.
In total, the Dragon spent 5 days, 16 hours, and 5 minutes berthed to the station. During that time, ISS crew members unloaded 1,146 pounds of supplies and experiments contained within Dragon and re-packed the spacecraft with about 1,455 pounds of experiments, hardware, and cargo that needs to return to earth.
As SpaceX noted, Dragon is the only spacecraft that can bring back a significant amount of cargo from the ISS. "The other cargo vehicles serving the space station - from Russia, Japan and the European Space Agency - can carry cargo up but all are destroyed after leaving the station," SpaceX said.
The SpaceX Falcon 9 rocket launched the Dragon spacecraft from Cape Canaveral last week, and it arrived at the ISS several days later, making SpaceX the first commercial company to send a spacecraft to the ISS.
Last week, Michael Suffredini, manager of the ISS program office, said that if all goes well with the departure, SpaceX can start its formal Commercial Resupply Service (CRS) to the ISS "in the September timeframe."
Update: As scheduled, the Dragon capsule splashed into the Pacific Ocean at 11:42 a.m. EDT this morning a few hundred miles west of Baja.
For more from Chloe, follow her on Twitter @ChloeAlbanesius.