What is Meibomian gland inflammation?
The Meibomian glands (also known as tarsal glands) are unique specie of sebaceous glands located at the base of the eyelid, and are credit worthy for furnishing sebum, which is oily and forbids the eye tears from evaporating, and also from spilling of tears on the cheeks.
Also, it provides for making the shut eyelids air-tight. The upper eyelid contains around 50 glands, and 25 lie on the lower.
These glands owe their name to a physician of Germany, Heinrich Meibom (1638-1700).
The tarsal glands can be inflammable owing to allergies, acne during childhood, and acne rosacea, a situation known as meibomitis or meibomianitis. Severe kind of this inflammation can lead to the occurrence of vesicles known as meibomian cyst.
Its treatment includes watering the eyes by lubricating eye drops, warm eye compression, and carefully cleaning the eyelids.
What are the problems faced when these glands fail to function properly?
Non-functioning or failure of proper functioning of the tarsal glands leads to dry eyes, a common eye problem. It may also cause redness of the eyes, due to the dry eyeballs rubbing minor skin pieces from between the eyelids, so inflammation and infection can occur.
Such an inflammable state (called meibomitis, posterior blepharitis or meibomian gland dysfunction) leads to these glands’ obstruction by compact secernment, and the swelling that then occurs is called the chalazion, or meibomian cyst.
Apart from causing dry eyes, these blockages can further lead to bacterial enzymes, which then results in establishing of fatty acids, which causes irritation in the eyes and at times, can even result in punctuate redness.
How does one treat Meibomian gland inflammation?
A good way of treating dysfunctional meibomian gland is by the application of controlled heat to the eyelid which has the tarsal glands by subjecting them to a temperature just enough to melt the blockage in the tarsal glands and to put the obstacle in a liquid form, still supplying the heat till these obstructions are fully melted.
Prior to it, the tarsal glands can be traditionally dealt to the natural fluid from the meibomian gland, given that the treatment takes place either at the time or after that period of time, but the obstacle should still continue to be in the liquid form.
Disclaimer: The information presented on this website is not intended to replace the advice of your Doctor. The information is for educational purposes. All health conditions should be treated by a health practitioner. This site is not meant to dispense medical advice, and does not assume responsibility for those who choose to treat themselves.