Meaning: work, job, labor, service ... work; решительно взяться за работу = to attack one's work resolutely; усердно работать = to work hard; to ply one's oars.
A good man is hard to find. Дословный перевод: .... All work and no play makes Jack a dull boy. Дословный ..... The ends justify the means. Дословный ...
A PhD means you are sacrificing several years of valuable work experience .... This is a hard-headed ultra-quantitative program for people who want to be on ...
Verbs used with infinitive and gerund different in meaning .... He stopped to make /making himself a cup of tea and continued to work. 10. ... Try playing charades. ... Learning English means studying hard. 6. ... Try to work harder this year. 7.
19 апр 2014 ... The art of losing isn't hard to master; so many things seem filled with the intent to be lost that ... Love and work are the cornerstones of our humanness. ... Life is not a matter of holding good cards, but of playing a poor hand as well. ..... It means to be in the midst of those things and still be calm in your heart.
Вы услышите 6 высказываний. Установите соответствие между высказываниями каждого говорящего A–F и утверждениями, данными в списке 1–7.
Jun 24, 2010 ... That is, substituting the word you intend for one that has a similar meaning. "The word you're substituting is still within the context of the word ...
Translation: An artel's pot boils denser; Moral: Working as a team produces better results. ... Moral: If you want to sneak away from doing this hard part of the job, go ahead, ... Translation: For a poor(naked) man, to prepare for a trip [means] (as little as) belt himself. ... English version: When the cat is away, the mice will play.
15 сен 2015 ... Learning to read in English is harder than it is in any other European language, a study .... We make little money despite hard work," says Park.
o Never allow your children to play with pot and pans on the stove. They could/ might .... o You should try to work harder. (general ... (the meaning is: May I close the window? Is it all right if I ..... I haven't been able to work hard lately. Я не могу ...
Playing hard means that I am so contented that I can dance and play. Working hard means that I am feeling like a beggar. It means that I must work hard to attain something.
Basically means that one works hard at school or their job while they also party on the weekends (or weekdays as well, depending on how far they take it).
I work hard I play harder I'm a good time American daughter Redneck, Blue collar, I party down to my last daughter I work hard, I work hard, I work
About “Work Hard, Play Hard”. Arguably the most notorious and renown songs off the “O.N.I.F.C” album. This song has a simply meaning, the more harder one grinds the more fun that person can have.
Work Hard Play Hard: Founded Today July 4, 2016. Yesterday, we celebrated Independence Day. This day has very special meaning for me. As an American, the significance is obvious, and shared by hundreds of millions. As a son, the significance is more unique.
WHPH means "Work Hard, Play Hard".
It means to put an effort into both your work and your relaxation activities: to do both with energy and enthusiasm. A person who works hard during the day needs to make the most of such spare time he has and to do worthwhile things during his time off rather than snooze in front of the TV.
Песня “Work Hard, Play Hard” принадлежит известному американскому рэперу - Wiz Khalifa. Соавторами трека выступили: Stargate и Benny Blanco. Композиция была выпущена в формате лид-сингла.
"Work hard, play harder" means you should work hard at school or at work and when you're done, you should do whatever you want to do after.
Many people believe (and live by) the idea that working hard means rewarding yourself and playing hard. A new study published in the British Medical Journal found that people who espouse a “work hard, play hard” philosophy are not all talk, and are actually living by their motto.