Trichoptera: Lepidostomatidae of Gunnison County, Colorado
Lepidostoma roafi(Milne 1936)
Updated 18 Aug 2010
Good LinksOn this website:
Photos, Map, Museum specimens, DNA - Barcodinglife.org
Illustration - University of Alberta Entomology Collection Species page
Has illustration of male genitalia, description, habitat information, range and more.
ReferencesMilne, L.J. 1936 Studies in North American Trichoptera. Part 3. Cambridge, Mass. : Author's publication. 128 pages.
Descibed as Atomyia roafi.
Richardson, JS 2001 Life cycle phenology of common detritivores from a temperate rainforest stream. Hydrobiologia 455 (1) 87-95. DOI - 10.1023/A:1011943532162
Abstract: The timing of life cycles, including growth rates, was determined for eight common species of detritivorous insects in a second-order stream in southwestern British Columbia, Canada. Six of the species (Zapada cinctipes, Z. haysi, Malenka californica, M. cornuta, Capnia sp., and Lepidostoma roafi) had simple, univoltine life cycles. The leuctrid stonefly Despaxia augusta has a 2-year life cycle, with an apparent egg diapause of about 6 months. The chironomid Brillia retifinis produced at least three generations per year. The major growth periods for the set of species considered here span the entire year. Adults of several species exhibited seasonal declines in size at emergence, but one species had larger adults as the emergence period proceeded. Closely related taxa had more similar life cycle timing than more distantly related species suggesting a degree of phylogenetic constraint in phenology of their life cycles. The influence of the timing of leaf drop on timing of life cycles for these animals does not fit with proposed scenarios based on fast and slow leaf processing rates.
Weaver III, JS. 1983 The evolution and classification of Trichoptera, with a revision of the Lepidostomatidae and a North American synopsis of this family. Ph.D. dissertation, Clemson Univ. Clemson, South Carolina 411 pages.
Weaver,JS 1988 A synopsis of the North American Lepidostomatidae (Trichoptera). Contributions of the American Entomological Institute 24, 2.
Brown, Wendy S. 2005 Trichoptera (Caddisflies) of Gunnison County, Colorado, USA