Free. Covers 4.5 billion years of Earth's geological and atmospheric history. Great animations of continental drift. Informative. Easy to use. Glitch-free. Lets you choose data to display or graph. Tutorial.
Some cursory descriptions. Some data is inferred rather than directly measured.
EarthViewer (for iPad) covers 4.5 billion years of Earth's geological and atmospheric history, and has cool animations depicting continental drift.
EarthViewer (for iPad) is an informative and fun way to learn about our "deep history." This app, geared to science teachers and students, covers 4.5 billion years of geological and atmospheric information. Cool animations let you watch the continents drift on a virtual globe. The app shows changes to the planet's temperature, oxygen and carbon dioxide levels, the length of the day, and the Sun's luminosity, from the earliest eons through modern times. Even better, the app is free.
//Compare Similar ProductsCompare
EarthViewer belongs to the Howard Hughes Medical Institute's BioInteractive series of free resources geared to science teachers and students. The app is well researched and packed with referenced information. The app worked smoothly, without any glitches. It's for use with the iPad only; I tested it on an iPad 2.
When you open the app, a screen shows you how to move between three main timeline views: the default Phanerozoic view, which covers the past 540 million years; Deep History, which goes back 4.6 billion years; and Modern (the past 100 years). You are given the option of viewing a tutorial, with short movie clips showing the app's operation, or entering the app itself.
A Global Time Machine
A 3D globe, which can be rotated in any direction, takes up most of the right-hand part of the screen. To its left is a vertical slider; you can think of it as a "time machine" to take you back to earlier ages; by default the slider spans 540 million years. To the slider's left are strips showing the Eon (Phanerozoic, in this view); Era (Paleozoic, Mesozoic, or Cenozoic); and Period (11 periods, ranging from the Cambrian to the Neocene. (The current Quaternary Period, which spans the most recent 2.6 million years, is barely visible and too small an interval to be identified by name.)
Clicking on a label, whether for eon, era, or period, brings up a brief popup description. For example, the Phanerozoic Eon's name is derived from ancient Greek and means "visible life", and represents the time during which the majority of macroscopic organismswhether seaweeds, mushrooms, plants, or animalshave lived.
By moving the slider, you can watch the continents drift; for example, 110 million years ago (abbreviated to MYA in the app), West Africa was connected to Brazil, and 210 MYA, Africa, North America, and South America fit neatly together like pieces in a jigsaw puzzle. Beneath the slider, forward arrow, backward arrow, and pause buttons let you animate this motion forward or backwards in time to watch 540 million years of continents separating, colliding, merging, re-forming, and pulling apart. Meanwhile, the locations of modern cities slowly drift with their continents, migrating in latitude and longitude.
By vertically pinching the Eon/Era/Period list on the left side of the screen, you can backtrack 4.5 billion years in time to the "Hadean Eon" before the accretion of the oldest known rocks. The farther back in time you go, the less certain our geological knowledge goes, as much of the early geological record has been obliterated by our planet's evolution.