If you love working with children and have a passion for helping others, you might consider a career as a social worker or school counselor. School counseling and social work may appear to be similar professions, and both offer many of the same services. But there are significant differences in job role, education and training. Learning about these can help you make an informed career choice.
About Social Workers
Social workers are helping professionals who work in many different fields and settings, including, but not limited to, schools. Bachelor's level social workers provide direct services to help people in need. They might work with the homeless, substance abusers, victims of domestic violence and others who need help with concrete needs, such as housing, public assistance or clothing. Master's level social workers are licensed professionals who provide clinical services such as counseling and psychotherapy. They work in diverse settings, including private practice, health care and schools. Social workers who specialize in school social work provide behavioral and mental health support to students, consult with parents and teachers, provide individual and group counseling and address concerns such as learning disabilities or behavioral disorders, according to the School Social Work Association of America.
Most school social workers and all clinical social workers have master's degrees in social work from schools accredited by the Council on Social Work Education. A master's degree in social work, or MSW, is usually a two-year program if completed full time. It consists of coursework on human behavior, counseling and psychotherapy, social work interventions such as advocacy or case management, social work research, social policy and electives, such as social work with the elderly or social work in schools. MSW students must complete a supervised internship for each year of study. If you wish to work in a school, it's advisable to select an internship in an educational setting; most school districts prefer to hire candidates who have previous school experience.
About School Counselors
School counselors, also known as guidance counselors, are licensed or certified professionals who work in schools to provide counseling and support to students. They develop, implement and manage school guidance programs. They do this by helping students with a variety of issues that may affect academic achievement and assisting with career planning, according to the American School Counselor Association. They meet with students individually and in groups to provide counseling on academic and social issues. School counselors are part of an interdisciplinary educational team that also includes school social workers, psychologists, teachers and administrators.
School Counseling Program
Like school social workers, school counselors have at least a master's degree. They complete specialized programs in school or guidance counseling. These programs usually require two years of full-time study and completion of a supervised internship providing counseling services to students in schools. Master's programs in school counseling usually include coursework on counseling methods, human development, educational issues, career development and testing and assessment.
- Jupiterimages/Brand X Pictures/Getty Images