Find your own deep and compelling reason to successfully learn your subject and pass your exams. Plan your time to include study, revision and social commitments – a balance of having fun, taking breaks and studying is vital. Use multi-coloured Mind Maps for your notes.
Just scoring well in AIEEE is not enough. What is important is to choose the right field of engineering you wish to pursue and which college should you enroll? In this engineering admission season, Learnhub speaks to experts and students to help you choose the right college and stream of engineering. So get clicking to make the correct choice.
In this lesson, we will try to sort out your confusion on what should be the parameters to pick your engineering college. Should brand take precedence over placements or should faculty be given importance over infrastructure? Let’s find out…
The Indian Institute of Technology Joint Entrance Examination (IITJEE) is an annual college entrance examination in India. A total of seventeen colleges use JEE as a sole criterion for admission to their undergraduate programs.
The list of seventeen colleges are following
1. NCERT Physics
It is a must read book for every student.It will give good foundation to prepare for any competitive examination
2. H.C. Verma Concepts of Physics Vol I and II .
Highly recomended book for physics concept and Problems.Ist section of problems are very good.They will sharpen your acumen And try the objective question.They are quite nice
General topics: Concept of atoms and molecules; Dalton’s atomic theory; Mole concept; Chemical formulae; Balanced chemical equations; Calculations (based on mole concept) involving common oxidation-reduction, neutralisation, and displacement reactions; Concentration in terms of mole fraction, molarity, molality and normality.
Gaseous and liquid states: Absolute scale of temperature, ideal gas equation; Deviation from ideality, van der Waals equation;
Indian Institute of Technology Joint Entrance Exam (IIT-JEE),organized and conducted by IITs attracts the brightest minds of the nation every year and is attended by lakhs of students who aspire to get admission in Engineering and Technology. Getting admitted into the IITs is often considered the height of accomplishment due to high standards of the examination.IITs were first conceived by then prime minister Jawaharlal Nehru in 1950s as part of his vision to promote the growth of science and technology in India.