Whether you&rsquo;re running a small business from your home or have a location, you may be looking for ways to green your business. Running an environmentally friendly business is not only good for the environment, but businesses that go green can also save money. From cutting down on the use of office supplies to saving on utility bills, discover some of what you can do to green your business.
Some businesses require the use of hard copy documents, but most small businesses can turn the office into a paperless or close to paperless office. Reducing your use of paper can range from only printing documents when necessary to choosing to send documents to clients electronically instead of by mail. Reducing your paper use cuts down on the expense of buying office paper as well as storing the paper because you do not need file folders, hanging folders or as many filing cabinets as paper-using offices.
Rather than buying trinkets to decorate your office or workspace, consider natural options, such as green plants. Green plants can make a nice addition to your office decor, but can also help to clean the air in your business space because plants give off oxygen and suck up the carbon dioxide in the room.
Although installing solar energy panels green your office, you do not have to change everything at once for your business to go green. When an appliance or piece of equipment in your office needs replacing, replace it with an energy-efficient option. For example, appliances that carry the Energy Star rating can reduce your business use of water and electricity, which is ultimately better for the environment and for your utility bills.
Not only can you find ways to recycle products in your business, but you can also buy office supplies and products made of recycled products, according to CNN Money. Companies such as the Green Earth Office Supply and The Green Office are good sources to buy recycled paper products and other business supplies. You can install bins in the office break room so cans, office paper, newspapers and other recyclable items you use in daily business operations can go to the recycling plant rather than wind up in the landfill.
Office Depot suggests businesses can sell green to customers, vendors and suppliers as much as it can take actions to be green. For example, when using promotional items as giveaways, use items than can be used over again. Instead of disposable pens, give coffee mugs instead. If you sell products in packaging, make sure that you are using recycled and or recyclable packaging for the product.
- Recycle image by sarkee from Fotolia.com