Alto Odyssey Book 6 The Windsongs Series For Recorder, Orff or Kodaly Programs By Berthe Kulich and Joe Berarducci Book 67 pages
This recorder book for children is designed for classroom or individual instruction. It is the sixth in a sequential series of six books leading from the first steps in recorder playing to musical literacy and the threshold of consort playing.
Fingering for the alto recorder - upper register (lower register is introduced in Book 5) and traditional notation is used. Each book in the series serves as a workbook as there are tasks and exercises for the children to complete.
The material in the series draws on the heritage of folk songs in Canada (and the USA) relevant to children of all ages. This book adds intervals, bass clef, short history of the recorder,and ensemble playing. It also adds Medieval, Renaissance and Baroque music, with folk songs to sing and dance. There are some places for students to draw notes and other written activities.
For upper elementary grades.
How to Play the Recorder: A Review
Fingering E - D - C: Suo Gan
Fingering: A - G: Cruising
Fingering: A - G: La Bergamasca; Nonesuch; A Saint-Malo; Farandole
Fingering: Low Bb
Fingering: Low F: Song of the Ass
Fingering: F - G: Carousel 1 and 2; Gavotte; We Gather Together; Bolivian Dance
Fingering: F#: Three Blind Mice
Fingering: High A - Bb - C: Viva la Musica; G Major Scale (a round); Entendez-vous Sur l'Ormeau; Donkey Round; A Ram Sam Sam
Playing Up an Octave: G Major Scale; C Major Scale; F Major Scale; Grant Us Peace
Fingering: High D: Puer Nobis; Danish Lullabye
History of the Recorder
13th Century: Robin and Marion; Tempus Adest Florium; Estampie
14th Century: In Dulci Jubilo
The Bass Recorder
15th Century: Basse Dance
16th Century: Pavane d'Angleterre; Gavotte; Bouffons (Sword Dance); Ronde (Circle Dance); Now Is the Month of Maying; Pavana
17th Century: De Zoete Zoomer Tyden (The Sweet Summer Times); Divisions On the Carman's Whistle; Hornpipe
18th Century: Minuet; Cotillion; Menuet in G Major; Overture; The Alphabet
I used this series when I taught elementary school and really liked it. I have been looking for it for my private studio for a while. I started the Grade 2 (age 7) in Book 1 and went right through to book 6 by the time they were in Grade 6. Great series!