Another achievement of the studies of Professor Mugica and her group was the publication of the book “Water birds in Cuban wetlands”. A compilation of papers about the different Cuban wetlands, from coastal areas to freshwater habitats. The text includes natural wetlands and those which have been modified by men, such as rice fields, proving that this crop has played an essential role pain the preservation of Cuban water birds, as they spend part of their life cycle in the rice field and bordering wetlands; and both of them are necessary for their long-term survival.
Both publications show a complete and structured analysis on different aspects of the ecology of Cuban bird communities in different types of wetlands. Up to now there is not precedent of similar books in Cuba, tackling a group of birds in depth
Among other ecological aspects, the book deals with those related to the patterns of distribution and dynamics, reproduction, feeding, use of the habitat, as well as morphometric and behaviour studies. In addition, the book sets out the role and the impact of the birds which frequent wetlands modified by men, such as rice fields and aquaculture areas.
Wetland benefits and use
At present, wetlands are some of the most productive ecosystems of the planet and they offer important financial and social gains. Men use many of its resources for their consumption or industrialization, such as water, wood, plants, fishes, crustaceans, birds and forage species.
The sustainable use of wetlands resources is being gradually introduced in many places. At present, there is an increasing number of initiatives design to prove that it is a functional concept that, when properly applied, redounds to tangible social and financial gains and reduces the extinction pace of natural ecosystems and the associated loss of biodiversity and valuable environmental goods and services.
Cuba, where wetlands take up an area of about 10,410 km2, a 9.3 % of the country area, is not devoid of such sustainable and rational use which facilitates the use of this natural resource in such a way as the extraction pace does not overcome the reproduction or recruiting pace. The objective is to guarantee its survival in the long term, as well as the continuity of many activities of biological and socio-financial importance in the area.
Among the diversity of Cuban wetlands fauna, birds stand out with 186 species. This was the main reason that motivated Dr Mugica to study Cuban wetlands, the role of rice fields as feeding places and their importance both during winter migration and in the birds´ breeding stage. She has also analysed the importance of natural wetlands as places for hibernation and reproduction as well as their relevance for the survival of threatened species such as Yaguasa and White Puffin.
Cuban wetlands and their fauna are one of the most important natural resources of the country due to their ecological and conservationist importance, as they sustain a very high biodiversity in comparison with other ecosystems.
Nevertheless, they need an inspired gaze and a protective hand to survive. It is necessary to sumarse join Dr Mugica and the other writers of the book “Water birds in Cuban wetlands: “nature inspires, heals, comforts, strengthen and prepares the man for virtue. The only way to make it last is to respect and serve it”.
Antonio Marín Ruiz | alfa
Safeguarding sustainability through forest certification mapping
27.06.2017 | International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA)
Dune ecosystem modelling
26.06.2017 | Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg im Breisgau
An international team of scientists has proposed a new multi-disciplinary approach in which an array of new technologies will allow us to map biodiversity and the risks that wildlife is facing at the scale of whole landscapes. The findings are published in Nature Ecology and Evolution. This international research is led by the Kunming Institute of Zoology from China, University of East Anglia, University of Leicester and the Leibniz Institute for Zoo and Wildlife Research.
Using a combination of satellite and ground data, the team proposes that it is now possible to map biodiversity with an accuracy that has not been previously...
Heatwaves in the Arctic, longer periods of vegetation in Europe, severe floods in West Africa – starting in 2021, scientists want to explore the emissions of the greenhouse gas methane with the German-French satellite MERLIN. This is made possible by a new robust laser system of the Fraunhofer Institute for Laser Technology ILT in Aachen, which achieves unprecedented measurement accuracy.
Methane is primarily the result of the decomposition of organic matter. The gas has a 25 times greater warming potential than carbon dioxide, but is not as...
Hydrogen is regarded as the energy source of the future: It is produced with solar power and can be used to generate heat and electricity in fuel cells. Empa researchers have now succeeded in decoding the movement of hydrogen ions in crystals – a key step towards more efficient energy conversion in the hydrogen industry of tomorrow.
As charge carriers, electrons and ions play the leading role in electrochemical energy storage devices and converters such as batteries and fuel cells. Proton...
Scientists from the Excellence Cluster Universe at the Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität Munich have establised "Cosmowebportal", a unique data centre for cosmological simulations located at the Leibniz Supercomputing Centre (LRZ) of the Bavarian Academy of Sciences. The complete results of a series of large hydrodynamical cosmological simulations are available, with data volumes typically exceeding several hundred terabytes. Scientists worldwide can interactively explore these complex simulations via a web interface and directly access the results.
With current telescopes, scientists can observe our Universe’s galaxies and galaxy clusters and their distribution along an invisible cosmic web. From the...
Temperature measurements possible even on the smallest scale / Molecular ruby for use in material sciences, biology, and medicine
Chemists at Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz (JGU) in cooperation with researchers of the German Federal Institute for Materials Research and Testing (BAM)...
19.06.2017 | Event News
13.06.2017 | Event News
13.06.2017 | Event News
27.06.2017 | Power and Electrical Engineering
27.06.2017 | Information Technology
27.06.2017 | Physics and Astronomy