Hands-on, collaborative activities in the classroom will build your fluency with important coding skills so you can take your career to the next level – in product management, design, marketing, data science, or software engineering. Hackbright instructor Rachel Walker will be teaching the 10-week night course “Intro to Programming” at Hackbright Academy – designed for complete beginners to programming. She will provide you with a strong foundation for speaking to technical teams and exploring a more technical career.
Hackbright Academy’s part-time courses give women proficient coding skills to level up on the job, creating new opportunities by combining programming with other skills.
After taking this course, you will leave with a fundamental understanding of how software engineering works and the skills to build your own computer program from scratch. No prior coding experience required – really!
Our hands-on, collaborative activities in the classroom will build your fluency with important coding skills so you can take your career to the next level — in product management, design, marketing, data science, or software engineering.
Who is this introductory course geared toward?
We created this Hackbright course to help address the growing need we are seeing more and more from:
- • Product Managers – who are looking to understand the fundamentals of program architecture and the development cycle through personal experience,
- • Data Scientists – who want the programming skills to interact with data from across the web,
- • Designers – who want to get features launched faster by understanding the design choices that are easier to implement, and of course,
- • Women – generally interested in exploring a career as a software developer!
What is special about this Hackbright course?
We took a look at all the courses we could find out there to help beginners level-up their careers, and had a hard time finding anything that focused on today’s real-world skills, while at the same time providing a strong set of general skills that could be used even as today’s skills get replaced by tomorrow’s hottest technologies.
For example, being able to break down complicated, messy problems into simple, easier to implement units of code is one of the big emphases in this course. This is one of the key skills that make Hackbright Engineering Fellowship graduates so great and in demand by employers, and so we wanted to bring this into our part-time program as well.
Can I really start to code without any prior knowledge?
Yes, you can!
The biggest difficulty is finding a supportive environment that can simplify coding terms into normal, every-day language, while also give you a chance to practice applying those concepts in realistic ways, and that’s what we focus on in this course at Hackbright Academy.
How do I learn more?
Take a look at this page for details and how to enroll in the course, or feel free to get in touch with us if you have any questions!
Pictured above (from left): Anna Akullian (Junior Instructor) and Rachel Walker (Instructor) for the “Intro to Programming” course at Hackbright Academy starting January 26, 2015.
Before joining Hackbright Academy, Rachel Walker was a software developer at Thoughtworks, a global software consulting firm specializing in Agile software delivery. She mentors and volunteers for initiatives focusing on increasing the number of underrepresented minorities in tech. Rachel holds a degree in Computer Science from the Illinois Institute of Technology. Follow her on Twitter @raychatter.
Hackbright Junior Instructor
Anna is a Junior Instructor at Hackbright. Prior to working at Hackbright, she was a teacher, a researcher at Children’s Hospital, Oakland, and a Hackrbright engineering fellow. When she’s not at Hackbright, you can find her hiking in the Berkeley hills or biking around the city. Find out more about Anna at her website.
“Programming” is just a way of representing the world that you already know. Programming concepts like “functions” can be thought of as verbs, “objects” are nouns, and coding is just a way of giving a computer instructions on how to create experiences for people.