Clean eating is about enjoying a healthier lifestyle, and more and more people have been practicing it for years now. But another movement that’s been gaining traction this year is clean sleeping. Celebrities like Nicole Scherzinger and Gwyneth Paltrow credit their good looks with getting plenty of sleep.
Clean sleeping is achieving a healthy life by making sure one gets enough sleep, and by being strict with the schedule. To follow a sleep schedule religiously means dining and working will end on specified hours, no exceptions or excuses.
Here is the best way to practice clean sleeping to live a healthy, stress-free life.
Check your body clock, reset if needed
When there is an imbalance in your circadian rhythm or body clock, you either wake up too early or sleep too late. Having a balanced body clock means you take daylight and darkness signals well enough that you can sleep for a good eight hours and wake up naturally from it.
To reset your body clock, some would advise an outdoor trip where you can reconnect with nature and disconnect from the digital world. Others would also recommend a light therapy where you’d need to sit beside a light box for around 30 minutes each day.
Those who wake up too early will have to use the lamp in the evening while late sleepers should use it in the morning. Following that schedule will eventually reset one’s body clock.
Three hours before bedtime
You should have your dinner at least three hours ahead of your bedtime. And it is also important for you to keep your evening meal light. Remember that your lunch should be your biggest meal.
One hour before bedtime
If you can’t fight the evening hunger, a light snack will do. Eat a piece of fruit or take a non-caffeinated and non-alcoholic drink.
Studies have shown that potassium found in bananas can help one sleep. Walnuts also contain melatonin, which can help you sleep faster than usual. And some herbal teas can also soothe your mind and relax your body.
Just remember that it is important to give your body enough time to digest food. When you’re lying down while your body is digesting food, you are more likely to experience acid reflux, indigestion, and even asthma.
45 minutes before bedtime
With only 45 minutes left before your scheduled sleep time, you should stop checking your phone or laptops already. Avoid looking into the blue light that the devices emit.
The blue light of these devices prevents our body from producing melatonin, or our sleep hormone. That means, looking into our phones to check that email or Facebook notification is a surefire way to keep you awake.
Instead of using your phone to wake you up, try using an old alarm clock so you wouldn’t have to reach for your device late at night. If you can’t help but use your phone, check if it has the option to operate on Night Shift so you can turn the blue light off.
15 minutes before bedtime
Should you need to do something before lying down in bed, waiting for sleep to consume you, try reading for about 15 minutes? That will help calm your mind and bring your thoughts away from the stressful or exciting events of the day.
If you don’t feel like reading, try listening to some audiobooks. They’re a good alternative too and can also help soothe your brain.
You should also make sure your mattress is comfortable enough, and that you’re snugged down by this time. Choose cozy bedding, one that’s breathable and can help you sleep.
As you fall asleep, it is natural for your body to drop in temperature. A slight decrease signals the release of your sleep hormones. That is why it is also essential to be in a proper ambiance and to dress in a way that will help your body adjust its temperature well enough.
Train your body to adjust to a clean sleeping schedule, and you will surely reap its benefits. You will soon find that following a routine that helps reset your body clock and improve the quality of your sleep is essential to living a stress-free life.
Get Your Free Meal Plan!
Subscribe to our mailing list and get recipes, meal plans and health tips delivered to your inbox.
Thank you for subscribing
Something went wrong.