The Sea Trip To Great Britain
-to learn new vocabulary concerning the topic;
-to develop student’s ability to read effectively;
-to develop speaking skills;
-to enrich student’s knowledge on the topic;
Supplies: sheets of paper with a new vocabulary , cards, maps, hand out
”Match the Pairs”, Hidden Words”, “Odd One Out”, “Key-facts”
Type of the lesson: presentation of a new vocabulary
I. The beginning of the lesson
Good afternoon! How are you getting on?
The topic of our today’s lesson is “ The Geografical position of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland”.
By the end of the lesson you should be able to recognize and understand
new words and word combinations in the text, to read and understand
the gist and details despite the natural difficulties.
Would you like to check your knowledge of geography and answer the
Use the World map if you want.
Which island is the largest in the world?
Which river is the longest in the world?
Which ocean is the biggest?
What lake is the deepest in the world?
What is the resemblance between Kyiv, Ottawa and London?
Black, Red, White, Yellow — what word (not “colour”) can be added to
each of these to put them all in the same group?
Is the UK an European country?
(Yes, it is. It lies in the northwest of Europe).
to be situated
to be washed
c). Some words are hidden among the letters. Find them and then read
d). Odd one out
Warm, mild, hot, cosy
To be proud, to be washed, to be situated, to be separated
A river, a lake, a pool, a strait
e). Match the following words with their meanings.
climate continent island
territory population inhabitant
-the official line that separates two countries;
-one of the people who live in a particular place;
— a large mass of land surrounded by sea;
— the typical weather conditions in a particular area;
-a narrow passage of water between two areas of
land, usually connecting two seas ;
-a particular part of a country, town etc;
-the number of people living in a particular area,
— a piece of land completely surrounded by water;
— the land of a particular type or the land that is
owned or controlled by a particular state;
a) Read and pronounce the geographical names correctly:
Ben Nevis— a name of the mountain in Scotland
Loch Lomond— a name of the lake in Scotland
the Gulf Stream— a warm current which flows from
the Gulf of Mexico towards Europe
Wales — one of the countries of Great Britain
Northern Ireland — one of the countries of Great Britain
Thames — a river London stands on
b) Exercise 4 page 109
Read the article
THE UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND
Geography and Climate
The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland is situated on
islands. Northern Ireland occupies the northern part of Ireland. It is
situated of the separate island. Great Britain consists of three parts.
Their names are England, Scotland and Wales. Scotland is situated in the
north of Great Britain Wales — in the southwest, and England — in the
Great Britain is surrounded by seas on all sides and is separated from
the continent by the North Sea and the English Channel. The rivers in
Great Britain are not long, but many of them are deep. The capital of
Great Britain, London, is situated on the Thames River. There are many
mountains in the north of England and in Scotland, but they are not very
high. The highest mountain in Great Britain is Ben Nevis. There are
many lakes in Scotland. The most beautiful is Loch Lomond. There are
many countries which are connected with Great Britain by sea.
Thanks to the Gulf Stream the climate of Great Britain is mild. The
weather is often foggy and rainy. Summer is not very hot and winter is
not very cold. Winter temperature seldom falls below zero.
While – reading activities.
a) Write down the Key-facts about the UK
The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
Countries making up Great Britain:
4 parts making up the UK:
a). Listen to the following geographical names from teacher’s voice.
Read them together with the translation. Find them on the map.
England, Scotland, Wales, the North Sea, the English Channel, London,
the Thames River, Ben Nevis, Loch Lomond, the Gulf Stream
b). Put down on the map all geographical names mentioned in the text.
Indicate the names of the islands and parts of the country, oceans and
seas, mountains and rivers.
c). Look at the map of the UK and answer the question.
I. What is an island?
2. Is United Kingdom situated on an island on a continent?
What territory does Northern Ireland occupy?
How many parts does Great Britain consist of?
What are their names?
Where are they situated?
What is Great Britain surrounded by?
What can you say about the rivers in Great Britain?
Where are the mountains situated?
10.What do you know about London?
11.What do we say about a climate of a country where winters are not
very cold and summers are not very hot?
Why do we say that Great Britain has a very good geographical position?
Which countries are connected with Great Britain by sea?
What makes the climate of Great Britain mild?
What can you say about the climate of Great Britain?
III. Finishing the lesson
– E o y th L
did we discuss at the lesson? What task was difficult/ boring?
What task did you like most?
Homework. WB. Ex. 1 p. 34
I hope that our today’s lesson was both useful and interesting for you.