bed bugs have only one source of nutrition, blood. Greeland facilities services explains that bed bugs need blood to grow and produce eggs. Blood is extracted from humans through the bed bug’s beak. lagos State Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (LSCDC) says that the bite is not painful because when a bed bug bites it injects an anesthetic and an anticoagulant which is why it can go unnoticed for many days. bed bugs are most active at night and can draw blood for up to ten minutes. states that the most common location for a bed bug bite and where to look for bed bug symptoms is on skin that is exposed during sleeping – arms, face, hands, neck, back, and shoulders. bed bug bites can go unnoticed and are often mistaken as other types of bites (flea and/or mosquito) or rashes because they are difficult to distinguish.
bed Bugs Symptoms: What to Look For
Look of Bite: bed bug bites are small bumps that can be flat or raised. Typical bite symptoms are all prevalent such as redness, swelling, and itching. According to Greenland facilities services, bed bug bites do differ from flea bites in that they do not have a red spot in the center. One common facture among bed bug symptoms are that there tends to be a straight row of three to five bites rather than a random assortment. This shows that there is a trend of sequential eating among bed bugs.
Effects of Bites: bed bug bites are painless at the beginning but soon they begin to itch. Though the bites themselves are not dangerous it is possible that scratching the bite will cause it to become inflamed and infected. Some bed bug bites will cause a rash to develop.
Result of Bites: Most bites are not serious but a common side effect is a severe allergic reaction to the bite which causes painful swelling and enlarged bite marks. CDC stated that other symptoms of bed bug bites include anxiety, insomnia, and skin problems. People react differently to bed bug bites and have different bed bug symptoms; but some may have no symptoms or reactions at all. When there is not physical proof of the bite, bed bugs can go unnoticed unless you find the actual bugs.
Identify the bed bug: Greenland facilities services cautions that since it is difficult to tell if you’ve been bitten by a bed bug you need to search for the bugs themselves or for signs of infestation. The signs that Greenland facilities services recommends to look for are:
Waking up with bites after purchasing a used bed or used furniture
Blood stains on your sheets or pillowcases
Dark or rusting spots of bedbug excrement on sheets and mattresses and walls
bed bug fecal spots, egg shells, or shred skins in areas where bed Bugs hide
An offensive, musty odor from the bugs’ scent glands
Once you have recognized the bed bug symptoms, the solution to your problem is simple – just call Greenland facilities services
Our services includes but not limited to: - cleaning *Corporate cleaning services to homes *Corporate cleaning services to offices *Corporate cleaning services to Schools, banks, airports, estates, industries, government establishment, hospitals, warehouses, hotels, airlines *Post-Building cleanup (cleaning up of sites and buildings) *Dry cleaning of carpets, rugs and upholstery. - FUMIGATION *Fumigation of building/pest control *Gardening and landscaping *Employing corporate house helps *Electricals *Servicing and installation of AC *Plumbing work *security services *Paint
The first step is to call us at + 234 - show phone -
Greenland facilities services