1 Studia Ceranea 1, 2011, p Sławomir Bralewski (Łódź) The Porphyry Column in Constantinople and Тhe Relics of the True Cross The Porphyry Column standing in Constantinople has been given many names over the past centuries. It was called the Great Column, the Column of Constantine, at the end of the Byzantine Empire The Column of the Cross. In today s Turkey, however, it is called the Burnt Column 1 or the Hooped Column. The multiplicity of the names itself indicates its long history. Erected during the reign of Constantine the Great in , it occupied a unique place in the history of Constantinople. It became a symbol of the city, featured in many legends. When the Tabula Peutingeriana was made, the original of which dates at the turn of the fourth and fifth century 3, it showed the personification of Constantinople 4 seated on a throne with an outline of a column on the right side, identified with the porphyry column of Constantine the Great 5. The monument was an important landmark where imperial victories were celebrated. Triumphal procession would arrive at the Forum of Constantine to march around the Column chanting the canticle of Moses 6. It was at the foot of the Column citizens would find salvation when their world, destroyed by enemies pillaging the city after breaking the defensive lines, would be turned into ruin. Later, it was believed that when the Turks would be storming the city, an angel with a sword will descend from the top of the Column and hand it to an unknown passer-by at the foot of the column, who will then lead the citizens of Constantinople and defeat the enemies 7. This raises the question of the origins 1 It was destroyed by fire on several occasions; the greatest one took place in Chronicon Paschale (ed. L. Dindorf, Bonnae 1832 [cetera: Chronicon Paschale], p. 528 [= CSHB]) and Theophanes (Chronographia, AM 5821, rec. C. de Boor, Lipsiae 1883, p. 28 [cetera: Theophanes]) date the erection of the statue on the Column in 328. This date is uncertain, however, see C. Mango, Le développement urbain de Constantinople (IV e VII e siècles), Paris 1985, p. 25, an. 14; S. Bassett, The Urban Image of Late Antique Constantinople, Cambridge 2004, p G. Dagron, Naissance d une capitale. Constantinople et ses institutions de 330 à 451, Paris 1974, p K. Miller, Itineraria Romana, römische Reisewege an der Hand der Tabula Peutingeriana, Stuttgart 1916, passim; J.M.C. Toynbee, Roma and Constantinopolis in late-antique art from 312 to 365, JRS 37, 1947, p , pl. IX, 1 2; E. Weber, Tabula Peutingeriana, Poznań 1998, p. 14, G. Dagron, op. cit., p R. Janin, Constantinople byzantine. Développement urbain et répertoire topographique, Paris 1950, p S. Andreae Sali vita auctore Nicephoro, sancti directore et confessario, 224, [in:] PG, vol. CXI, col. 868; Doukas, Historia Byzantina, ed. I. Bekker, Bonnae 1834, p [= CSHB].
2 88 Sławomir Bralewski The Porphyry Column in Constantinople 89 of legends associated with the Porphyry Column. It seems that its foundations were laid as early as in the Early Byzantine period. In this article, I am attempting to explain what that tradition entailed and how the awareness of the Column s special significance for Constantinople and its citizens was established in the Early Byzantium. It should be emphasized that the Porphyry Column was inextricably linked with Constantinople, the city founded by emperor Constantine the Great on the foundations of the existing Byzantium upon the Bosphorus River. Sources indicate that the ruler had originally intended to establish his seat elsewhere. The list of probable locations includes Troy, Chalcedon, Sardica and Thessalonica 8. Choosing Troy would mean a symbolic return to the roots, since the ancestors of Rome were believed to have originated from there. Constantinople, according to Sozomenus 9 and Philostorgius 10, was founded with divine inspiration, as the law contained in the Code of Theodosius 11 confirmed. According to the tradition associated with Eusebius of Caesarea, and thus dating back to the fourth century, the city of Constantine was dedicated to the God of martyrs 12, in the opinion of Sozomenus, who was writing about a hundred years later, to Christ himself 13. In later tradition, on the other hand, it was associated with the Mother of God (Θεοτόκος) who was believed to have the city under her protection the notion which was universally expressed in the eleventh century 14. By making Byzantium his seat and by naming it after himself, Constantine greatly expanded the urban area and conducted a series of construction works. He built city walls, the imperial loge at the hippodrome, the imperial palace and great alleys surrounded by porticos 15. The urban plans completed at that time and quoted in sources included also 8 G. Dagron, op. cit., p Sozomène, Histoire ecclésiastique, II, 3, 3 4, ed. J. Bidez, Paris 1983 (cetera: Sozomenus), p. 238 [= SC, 306]: ταῦτα δὲ αὐτῷ πονοῦντι νύκτωρ ἐπιφανεὶς ὁ θεὸς ἔχρησεν ἕτερον ἐπιζητεῖν τόπον. καὶ κινήσας αὐτὸν εἰς τὸ Βυζάντιον τῆς Θρᾴκης πέραν Χαλκηδόνος τῆς Βιθυνῶν, ταύτην αὐτῷ οἰκίζειν ἀπέφηνε πόλιν καὶ τῆς Κωνσταντίνου ἐπωνυμίας ἀξιοῦν. ὁ δὲ τοῖς τοῦ θεοῦ λόγοις πεισθεὶς τὴν πρὶν Βυζάντιον προσαγορευομένην εἰς εὐρυχωρίαν ἐκτείνας μεγίστοις τείχεσι περιέβαλεν. 10 Philostorgius, Kirchengeschichte. Mit dem Leben des Lucian on Antiochien und den Fragmenten eines arianischen Historiographen, II, 9, ed. J. Bidez, F. Winkelmann, Berlin 1981 (cetera: Philostorgius), p [= GCS, 21]: Ὅτι Κωνσταντῖνόν φησιν ὀκτὼ καὶ εἰκοστῷ ἔτει τῆς βασιλείας αὐτοῦ τὸ Βυζάντιον εἰς Κωνσταντινούπολιν μετασκευάσαι, καὶ τὸν περίβολον ὁριζόμενον βάδην τε περιιέναι, τὸ δόρυ τῇ χειρὶ φέροντα ἐπεὶ δὲ τοῖς ἑπομένοις ἐδόκει μεῖζον ἢ προσῆκε τὸ μέτρον ἐκτείνειν, προσελθεῖν τε αὐτῷ τινα καὶ διαπυνθάνεσθαι «ἕως ποῦ, δέσποτα»; τὸν δὲ ἀποκρινάμενον διαρρήδην φάναι «ἕως ἂν ὁ ἔμπροσθέν μου στῇ», ἐπίδηλον ποιοῦντα ὡς δύναμις αὐτοῦ τις οὐρανία προηγοῖτο, τοῦ πραττομένου διδάσκαλος. 11 Codex Theodosianus, XII, 5, 7, ed. P. Krueger, Berolini 1923: urbis quam aeterno nomine Deo iubente donavimus. 12 Eusebius, Vita Constantini, III, 48, ed. F. Winkelmann, Berlin 1992 (cetera: Eusebius), p. 98 [= GCS, 7]: καὶ τὴν αὐτοῦ πόλιν τῷ τῶν μαρτύρων καθιέρου θεῷ. 13 Sozomenus, II, 3, 7, p. 240: ταύτην μὲν οὖν ὡσεί τινα νεοπαγῆ Χριστοῦ πόλιν. 14 G. Dagron, op. cit., p. 42. According to this author Constantinople was dedicated to Constantine himself. Cf. M. Hurbanič, História a mýtus. Avarský útok na Konštantinopol roku 626 v legendach, Prešov 2010, p [= Byzantinoslovaca/monografiae, 2]. 15 Chronicon Paschale, p the Forum of Constantine with the Porphyry Column. According to the account of Anna Comnena ( 1153), it was clearly visible from all sides 16. Raymond Janin thought that it was 50 meters high above the ground, and the core of the Column originally consisted of 9 cylindrical porphyry block joined together by a hoop imitating a laurel crown, which was meant to hide the actual joining point. According to Cyril Mango, on the other hand, the Column in the past was of a similar height as it is today, namely 37 meters. Today, it is a little lower, only meters due to the difference in the levels of the ancient forum and the today s street 17. He is also convinced that Raymond Janin was also mistaken as to the number of cylindrical blocks because he believes that there were seven at most six visible today, and one walled up by the Turks, attempting to reinforce the construction of the Column after the fire which took place in According to the testimony of Anna Comnena, the Column was surmounted with a bronze statue facing the east 19. Historiographers from earlier centuries, such as Philostorgius the author of Church History from fifth century 20, Hesychius Illustrious 21 a historian and a biographer from the mid-sixth century, John Malalas a chronicler from the same century 22, or the author of the Chronicon Paschale from the mid-seventh century 23 they all associate the depiction with emperor Constantine. Later sources identify the aforementioned statue as Apollo 24. It seems that it could be perceived differently; some people probably saw it as the emperor, others as the god 25. Philostorgius indicated that enemy of God accuses the Christians of worshiping with sacrifices the image of Constantine set up upon the porphyry column, of paying homage to it with lamp-lighting and incense or praying to it as to a god, and of offering it supplica- 16 Anne Comnéne, Alexiade, XII, 4, 5, ed. B. Leib, Paris 1968 (cetera: Anna Comnena): Περὶ τὰ μέσα τοῦ Κωνσταντίνου φόρου, χαλκοῦς τις ἀνδριὰς ἵστατο καὶ πρὸς ἀνατολὰς ἀπέστραπτο ἐπὶ πορφυροῦ κίονος περιόπτου. 17 C. Mango, Constantinopolitana, JDAI 80, 1965, p Ibidem, p ; idem, Constantine s Porphyry Column and the Chapel of St. Constantine, [in:] idem, Studies on Constantinople, Aldershot 1993, art. IV, p. 104; Raymond Janin (op. cit., p. 84) dated the aforementioned works to Anna Comnena, XII, 4, Philostorgius, HE, II, 9a; II, 17, app. 7, 7a. 21 Hesychius Illustrius, Patria Constantinopoleos, 41, [in:] Scriptores originum Constantinopolitanarum, ed. T. Preger, vol. I, Lipsiae 1901 (cetera: Hesychius), p. 17: ἀνέστησαν δὲ καὶ αἱ δύο ἀψίδες πρὸς τῷ καλουμένῳ φόρῳ καὶ ὁ πορφυροῦς καὶ περίβλεπτος κίων, ἐφ οὗπερ ἱδρῦσθαι Κωνσταντῖνον ὁρῶμεν δίκην ἡλίου προλάμποντα τοῖς πολίταις. 22 Ioannis Malalae Chronographia, XIII, 7, rec. I. Thurn, Berolini Novi Eboraci 2000 (cetera: Malalas): καὶ φόρον μέγαν καὶ εὐπρεπῆ πάνυ, καὶ στήσας ἐν τῷ μέσῳ κίονα ὁλοπόρφυρον ἄξιον θαύματος, καὶ ἐπάνω τοῦ αὐτοῦ κίονος ἑαυτῷ ἔστησεν ἀνδριάντα, ἔχοντα ἐν τῇ κεφαλῇ αὐτοῦ ἀκτῖνας ἑπτά. 23 Chronicon Paschale, p. 528: καὶ ἔστησεν ἐν μέσῳ κίονα πορφυροῦν μέγαν λίθου Θηβαίου ἀξιοθαύμαστον, καὶ ὑπεράνω τοῦ αὐτοῦ κίονος ἔστησεν ἑαυτοῦ ἀνδριάντα μέγαν, ἔχοντα ἐν τῇ κεφαλῇ αὐτοῦ ἀκτῖνας, ὅπερ χαλκούργημα ἤγαγεν ἀπὸ τῆς Φρυγίας. 24 Since Pseudo-Codinus (Patria Constantinopoleos, 45, [in:] Scriptores originum..., vol. II, Lipsiae 1907 [cetera: Pseudo-Codinus], p. 174, 8). 25 G. Fowden, Constantine s Porphyry Column: the earliest literary allusion, JRS 81, 1991, p. 130; C. Mango, Constantine s Column, [in:] idem, Studies on Constantinople..., art. III, p. 6.
3 90 Sławomir Bralewski The Porphyry Column in Constantinople 91 tions to avert calamities 26. Similar differences of opinion can be seen among scholars. According to Gilbert Dagron, it was the representation of Apollo that was placed on the Column 27. Raymond Janin argued that it was a statue of Constantine Helios bearing the features of Apollo 28. Adam Ziółkowski saw it as a statue of Christ, and Cyril Mango a statue of Constantine, which the ruler commissioned for his Forum in Constantinople or for some other place outside the capital, where it was ultimately brought 29. Sources are also not consistent as to the origin of the statue 30. John Malalas derived it from Troy 31 but he mistakenly placed the latter in Phrygia because he was convinced that the city was founded by Tros, the king of Phrygia 32. Troy was quoted as the place of the statue s origin by (after John Malalas) George the Monk 33 and John Zonaras 34, and Phrygia itself was quoted by the author of Chronicon Paschale 35 ; Michael Glykas maintained the same, indicating moreover a specific place in Phrygia Heliopolis 36. Cedrenus, on the other hand, presented an original idea, arguing that a statue came from Athens and was made by Phidias 37. As can be expected, associating this particular statue with Troy, the statue which along with the column on which it was placed became a symbol of Constantinople, was not accidental. Thus, a reference was made to the tradition linking the protoplasts of Rome with Troy. It is possible that the statue was actually made there. It seems very likely, considering the account by Sozomenus on Constantine s original choice of Troy as the capital. Sozomenus even mentioned the commencement of construction work there. The statue could be made at that very time and, after the decision as to the location of the seat of the ruler changed, it was moved to a new place in Constantinople Philostorgius, HE, II, 17 (trans. Ph.R. Amidon, ed. 2007, p. 35). 27 G. Dagron, оp. cit., p R. Janin, оp. cit., p According to Adam Ziółkowski (Sokrates Scholastyk, Historia Kościoła, I, 17, trans. S. Kazikowski, intr. E. Wipszycka, comm. A. Ziółkowski, Warszawa 1986, p. 111, an. 97) This giant statue was in fact a statue of Christ as the Sun of the Faith, which explains why the relics were placed in it. Cf. C. Mango, Constantine s Column..., p G. Dagron, op. cit., p Malalas, XIII, 7: ὅπερ χαλκούργημα ἤγαγεν εἰς τὸ Ἴλιον ἑστηκός, πόλιν τῆς Φρυγίας. 32 Malalas, IV, 10: ἐν οἷς χρόνοις ἐβασίλευσε τῆς Φρυγίας ὁ Τρῶος, ὃς ἐγένετο πατὴρ Ἰλίου καὶ Γανυμήδους. Oὗτος ἔκτισε πόλεις δύο, τὴν Τροίαν εἰς ὄνομα ἴδιον...; cf. C. Mango, Constantine s Column..., p Georgius Monachus, Chronicon, ed. C. de Boor, Lipsiae 1904 (cetera: Georgius Monachus), p. 500 [= BSGR]. 34 Ioannis Zonarae Epitome historiarum libri XIII XVIII, XIII, 3, 25 26, vol. III, ed. Th. Büttner- Wobst, Bonnae 1897 (cetera: Zonaras), p Chronicon Paschale, p. 528; cf. above an Michael Glykas, Annales, ed. I. Bekker, Bonnae 1836 (cetera: Glykas), p. 464 [= CSHB]. 37 Georgius Cedrenus, Historiarum compendium, ed. I. Bekker, Bonnae 1838, vol. I (cetera: Cedrenus), p. 518 [= CSHB]. 38 C. Mango, Constantine s Column..., p. 4. Gilbert Dagron believes (op. cit., p. 38) the origins of the statue to be an issue of significance. The combination of the dynasty s Apollonistic tradition with Troy as the original place of worship of the statue could indicate to Constantine s willingness of the unification of the Hellenistic with the Roman. The statue probably resembled the image of Sol Invictus which appears on coins. If it was indeed a depiction of the emperor Constantine, he was probably portrayed in military attire 39. The figure on top of the Column had a crown on its head adorned with seven sun rays, which were later interpreted as the nails of Christ s Passion 40. In addition, in its left hand, it held a bronze globe 41, surmounted by a winged Victoria, and, according to Nicephorus Callistus with a cross, which apparently contained a relic of the Holy Cross 42. As it seems, however, Callistus could be describing one of the subsequent globes. As a result of earthquakes, the first two came apart in the years and In the right hand, the figure was holding a spear (λόγχη), as attested by John Malalas 45, Theophanes 46 and Cedrenus 47 or a scepter (σκῆπτρον), as Anna Comnena 48 maintained. In the iconography, the statue crowning the Column usually is holding a spear. This is consistent with the account given by Philostorgius, according to whom Constantine used a spear to mark the borders of the city (τὸ δόρυ τῆ χειρὶ φέροντα) 49. The attribute in question was to fall off from the statue during the earthquake of 541, as Theophanes argues 50, or 554, according to the accounts by Cedrenus and Malalas 51. In the account by Anna Comnena, the citizens of Constantinople called the statue Anthelios or Anelios and all efforts to replace this name with the name of the emperor Constantine failed 52. Michael Glykas informs of the destruction brought by a lightning which struck in 1079, when three iron hoops were torn 53, probably 39 According to Sarah Bassett (op. cit., p. 68), Constantine depicted on the statue was nude. 40 John Malalas (XIII, 7) was the one to write of the seven rays, and after him George the Monk (Georgius Monachus, p. 500), while the rays as the nails used at the crucifixion of Christ are mentioned by Pseudo-Codinus (45, p. 174) and Zonaras (XIII, 3); cf. C. Mango, Constantine s Column..., p. 3; idem, Constantine s Porphyry Column..., p Anna Comnena, XII, 4, Nicephorus Callistus Xanthopoulos, Historia ecclesiastica, VII, 49 (cetera: Nicephorus Callistus), [in:] PG, vol. CXLV, col CD. 43 Theophanes, AM 5970, p. 126: ἔπεσε δὲ καὶ ἡ σφαῖρα τοῦ ἀνδριάντος τοῦ Φόρου. 44 Leo Grammaticus, Chronographia, ed. I. Bekker, Bonnae 1842 (cetera: Leo Grammaticus), p Malalas, XVIII, 118: ἐν αὐτῷ δὲ τῷ φόβῳ ἔπεσεν ἡ λόγχη, ἣν ἐκράτει τὸ ἄγαλμα τὸ ἐν τῷ φόρῳ Κωνσταντίνου. 46 Theophanes, AM 6034, p. 222: ἔπεσε δὲ καὶ ἡ λόγχη, ἣν ἐκράτει ὁ ἀνδριὰς ὁ ἑστὼς εἰς τὸν φόρον τοῦ ἁγίου Κωνσταντίνου. 47 Cedrenus, p Anna Comnena, XII, 4, 5: σκῆπτρον μὲν κατέχων τῇ δεξιᾷ, τῇ δὲ λαιᾷ σφαῖραν ἀπὸ χαλκοῦ κατασκευασθεῖσαν. However, when Anna Comnena was writing her work, the statue had been absent from the Column for over forty years. 49 Philostorgius, II, 9, p. 21; cf. G. Dagron, op. cit., p. 38, an Theophanes, AM 6034, p Malalas, XVIII, 118; Cedrenus, p Anna Comnena, XII, 4, 5: Ἐλέγετο δ οὖν εἶναι οὗτος Ἀπόλλωνος ἀνδριάς Ἀνθήλιον δέ, οἶμαι, οἱ τῆς Κωνσταντίνου οἰκήτορες αὐτὸν προσηγόρευον. Ὃν ὁ μέγας ἐν βασιλεῦσι Κωνσταντῖνος ἐκεῖνος καὶ τῆς πόλεως καὶ πατὴρ καὶ δεσπότης εἰς τὸ ἑαυτοῦ μετέθηκεν ὄνομα, Κωνσταντίνου αὐτοκράτορος ἀνδριάντα αὐτὸν προσειπών. Ἐπεκράτησε δὲ ἡ ἀρχῆθεν τεθεῖσα προσηγορία τῷ ἀνδριάντι καὶ ἤτοι Ἀνήλιος ἢ Ἀνθήλιος ὑπὸ πάντων ἐλέγετο; cf. Pseudo-Codinus, p Glykas, p. 617.
4 92 Sławomir Bralewski The Porphyry Column in Constantinople 93 those which were mounted in order to reinforce the Column during the reign of Theodosius II in On April 5 th, 1106, a violent southern wind knocked the statue to the ground 55, causing casualties 56, which was treated as a bad sign by opponents of the ruling emperor, Alexius I Comnenus, an ill omen of the imminent death of the ruler. Emperor Manuel I Comnenus ( ) had the monument repaired. On top of it ten rows of stones were laid, fused with concrete, and a marble block was placed there, probably giving it the shape of the Corinthian capitol. However, from that moment, the Column was topped with a cross instead of the statue 57. The emperor also had a commemorative inscription placed under the column, reading: Manuel, the pious ruler, restored this God s work destroyed by time 58. The column was bound with metal hoops, in the eighteenth century due to the threat of earthquakes. The Column was placed on a high pedestal, which was in turn embedded on a broad a square platform with each side 8.35 meter wide 59. A drawing by Melchior Lorck, dating to 1561, suggests that the Column base was decorated with bas-relief known as aurum coronarium. However, no other source has been found to confirm it 60. According to Nicephorus Callistus, there were arches adjacent to the plinth of the Column on each side, which opened to the Forum of Constantine 61. Raymond Janin was convinced that under one of these arches a small oratory was located the Chapel of St. Constantine 62, where each year official processions came 63. Earlier, it was believed that this oratorio was located at the base of the Column; however, research has shown that it was a solid structure 64. According to Cyril Mango, the chapel, probably built in the period of iconoclasm, was adjacent to the Column plinth on the north side. The aforementioned arches were added only during the renovation of the Column after the crash in 1106, when the wind from the south knocked the statue, causing much destruction and probably also damaging the chapel, which was never rebuilt. After the tenth century, the Chapel of Constantine is no longer mentioned in the sources. This is probably because at that time the emperor Constantine ceased to be regarded as the patron of the city and the empire, as that role 54 Chronicon Paschale, p Anna Comnena, XII, 4, 5. In the opinion of Raymond Janin (op. cit., p. 83) three cylinders were knocked off along with the statue, the notion, however, is rejected by Cyril Mango (Constantinopolitana..., p. 310), arguing that there is no source information to confirm it people are said to have died on that occasion, cf. C. Mango, Constantine s Porphyry Column..., p C. Mango, Constantinopolitana..., p R. Janin, op. cit., p. 83: Τὸ ϑεῖον ἔργον ἐνϑάδε φϑαρὲν ξρόνῳ καινε Μανουὴλ εὐσεβὴς αὐτοκράτωρ. 59 C. Mango, Constantine s Porhyry Column..., p Idem, Constantinopolitana..., p Nicephorus Callistus, VII, Constantini Porphyrogeniti imperatoris De cerimoniis aulae Byzantinae, I, 1, 24, ed. J. Reiske, Bonnae 1829, vol. I (cetera: De cerimoniis), p [= CSHB]. 63 De cerimoniis, I, 10, R. Janin, op. cit., p. 81. was reserved for the Mother of God (Θεοτόκος) 65. It is also thought that originally an altar was placed by the plinth of the Column situated in the ancient fashion over the Mundus (the image of the entrance to the underworld), where sacrifices were usually made to the underground gods. According to tradition, under the base of the column an archaic statue of Pallas was to be buried, called Palladium 66, secretly brought out of Rome by Constantine 67. It probably originated from the belief that the ruler wished to ensure good fortune for Constantinople. Thus, both cities during their prosperity were to be under the care of the same goddess. Perhaps the collapse of the Old Rome, which occurred in the fifth century, inspired the contemporary thought of losing the favor of Pallas to Constantinople the New Rome. It also emphasized the continuity of the existence of Rome in its new form, as the city of Constantine was considered, as well as referred to the choice of the location for the new capital, which initially was supposed to be Troy 68. It was said also that in the plinth, in the statue or atop of the Column various magic items and relics were concealed. John Diacrinomenus mentioned gold coins with the likeness of Constantine imprinted on them, which were a symbol of prosperity 69. Later Christian tradition late added the information of holy relics: a portion of the True Cross (Vera Crux), baskets from the multiplication of bread, a vase of holy oil (the chrism), Noah s axe handle, the rock from which water sprang at the command of Moses, nails from the Passion of Christ, relics of saints, wood from the crosses of the two thieves and pots of perfume 70. In this way, the Column became sacred in itself in the social consciousness. Tradition has retained three dedications of late origin, which were to be placed 65 C. Mango, Constantine s Porhyry Column..., p Procopius Caesariensis, De bello Gothico, I, 15, 14, [in:] Procopii Caesariensis opera omnia, ed. G. Wirth, J. Haury, Leipzig 1963, vol. II, p. 82: Κωνσταντῖνον βασιλέα ἐν τῇ ἀγορᾷ, ἣ αὐτοῦ ἐπώνυμός ἐστι, κατορύξαντα θέσθαι; Malalas, XIII, 7: ὁ δὲ αὐτὸς Κωνσταντῖνος ἀφελόμενος ἀπὸ Ῥώμης κρύφα τὸ λεγόμενον Παλλάδιον ξόανον, ἔθηκεν αὐτὸ εἰς τὸν ὑπ αὐτοῦ κτισθέντα φόρον ὑποκάτω τοῦ κίονος τῆς στήλης αὐτοῦ, ὥς τινες λέγουσι τῶν Βυζαντίων ὅτι ἐκεῖ κεῖται; Chronicon Paschale, p. 528: ὁ δὲ αὐτὸς βασιλεὺς Κωνσταντῖνος ἀφελὼν κρυπτῶς ἀπὸ Ῥώμης τὸ λεγόμενον Παλλάδιον; Hesychius, 41, p (addition from the eleventh century); Pseudo-Codinus, 45, p. 174; G. Dagron, op. cit., p. 30; C. Diehl, De quelques croyances byzantines sur la fin de Constantinople, BZ 30, 1929/1930, p ; A. Alföldi, On the foundation of Constantinople, a few notes, JRS 37, 1947, p G. Dagron, op. cit., p. 39; S. Bassett, op. cit., p Sozomenus, II, Parastaseis syntomoi chronikai, 56 (cetera: Parastaseis), [in:] Scriptores originum..., vol. I, p : Πολλὰ οὖν ὁ Διακρινόμενος ἄνωθεν τοῦ κίονος φάσκει πράγματα τεθῆναι, ἔνθα ἡ στήλη ἵσταται, ἐν οἷς καὶ χαραγὴ βασιλικὴ Κωνσταντίνου ἡ λεγομένη σωτηρίκιος, χίλια κεντηνάρια. 70 Socrates, Kirchengeschichte, I, 17, ed. G.C. Hansen, Berlin 1995 (cetera: Socrates) [= GCS, 1]; Georgius Monachus, p. 500; Andreae Sali vita, 224, [in:] PG, vol. CXI, col. 868; Hesychius, 41, p. 17; M. Guidi, Un Bios di Constantino, Rome 1908, p. 37, 15 22; A. Frolow, La dédicace de Constantinople dans la tradition byzantine, RHR 127, 1944, p. 77, an. 1 2; A. Kazhdan, Constantin imaginaire : Byzantine Legends of the ninth century about Constantine the Great, B 57, 1987, p. 233.
5 94 Sławomir Bralewski The Porphyry Column in Constantinople 95 at the base of the Column. The first one, pagan, To Constantine, who shines like the Sun (Helios) 71 ; the second, inspired by Vita Constantini by Eusebius 72 and the text by Sozomenus 73 : To you, Christ, God, I entrust the city 74 ; third one, the most literary: To thee, Christ, who art the creator and ruler of the world, to thee I entrust this city which is thine, like the scepter and the power of Rome. Save it and deliver it from all calamity. 75 Thus, the statue was perceived by the authors of source texts both as a Christian and pagan monument. The representation of Christ as the god of sun and these dedications addressed to him became the basis for the suggestion that the Column was surmounted with a statue of Christ himself 76. It is possible that Christians began to see the Column as a sacred monument because of a widespread belief that it housed sacred relics. The Porphyry Column played an important role in the ceremony of the foundation of Constantinople, which was divided into two stages 77. Celebrations began with an official procession, going from Philadelphion or Magnaura to the Forum of Constantine, to place the statue and holy relics on the Column 78. The festive procession was composed of Christians, led by priests, chanting hymns and entrusting Constantinople to God s care with the words of a prayer: Keep it (the city) in prosperity until the end of time, our Lord, and reciting the Kyrie eleison 79. The second phase of the foundation ceremony, called pompa circensis, which took place on 11 May 330 AD, was, on the command of emperor Constantine himself, repeated annually on the day when the anniversary of the founding of the city was celebrated on the hippodrome 80. A wooden statue covered with gold, probably 71 Leo Grammaticus, p. 87: Κωνστανίτνῳ λάμποντι Ηλίου δίκην; Cedrenus, p Eusebius, III, 48, p Sozomenus, II, 3, 7, p Nicephorus Callistus, VII, 49, 19 20, col. 1325: Σοὶ, Χριστέ ὁ ϑεὸς παρατίϑημι τὴν πόλιᾳ ταύτην. 75 Cedrenus, p. 565: Σύ, Χριστέ, κόσμου κοίρανος καὶ δεσπότης, Σοὶ νῦν προσηῦξα τήνδε τὴν δούλην πόλιν, Καὶ σκῆπτρα τάδε καὶ τὸ τῆς Ρώμης κράτος. Φύλαττε ταύτην, σῶζέ τ ἐκ πάσης βλάβης. 76 More on the subject of the association of the worship of Christ with the solar cult, see H. Chadwick, Kościół w epoce wczesnego chrześcijaństwa, trans. A. Wypustek, Warszawa 2004, p Suggestions associating the statue with Christ are rejected by Cyril Mango (Constantine s Column..., p. 6). 77 Glykas, p. 617; Zonaras, XIII, 3, 26 27; G. Dagron, op. cit., p. 37; R. Janin, op. cit., p Parastaseis, 56, p. 56: Ἡ στήλη ἡ ἐν τῷ Φόρῳ πολλὰς ὑμνῳδίας ἐδέξατο. Ἐν αὐτῇ τὸ πολίτευμα καὶ Ὀλβιανὸς ἔπαρχος καὶ οἱ σπαθάριοι, οἱ κουβικουλάριοι καὶ μόνον καὶ σιλεντιάριοι μετὰ κηρῶν λευκῶν ὀψικεύσαντες, λευκὰς στολὰς ἀμφότεροι περιβεβλημένοι, ἀπὸ τὸ καλούμενον ἀρτίως Φιλαδέλφιν, τότε δὲ Προτείχισμα καλούμενον (ἐν οἷς καὶ πόρτα ἦν τὸ πρότερον ὑπὸ Κάρου κατασκευασθεῖσα) ἀνήνεγκαν ἐποχουμένην εἰς καρούχαν ὡς δὲ ὁ Διακρινόμενός φησιν, ὅτι ἐκ τῆς καλουμένης Μαγναύρας. Ἐν οἷς ἐν τῷ Φόρῳ τεθεῖσα καὶ πολλάς, ὡς προείρηται, ὑμνῳδίας δεξαμένη εἰς Τύχην τῆς πόλεως προσεκυνήθη παρὰ πάντων, ἐν οἷς καὶ τὰ ἐξέρκετα ἔσχατον πάντων τότε ὑψοῦτο ἐν τῷ κίονι, τοῦ ἱερέως μετὰ τῆς λιτῆς παρεστηκότος καὶ τὸ Κύριε ἐλέησον πάντων βοώντων ἐν ρ μέτροις; cf. G. Dagron, op. cit., p Parastaseis, 56, p. 57: εἰς ἀπείρους αἰῶνας εὐόδωσον ταύτην, Κύριε. The procession was attended by prefect Olbianus. 80 Chronicon Paschale, p. 529: καὶ ἐποίησεν ἑορτὴν μεγάλην, κελεύσας διὰ θείου αὐτοῦ τύπου τῇ αὐτῇ ἡμέρᾳ a replica of the statue on the Porphyry Column, was solemnly brought in a chariot into the hippodrome 81. The depicted figure had a crown of rays and in its right hand was, also gilded, the Tyche of the city. Most likely, it was a globe surmounted by Victoria rather than a figural personification of Constantinople. The statue was accompanied by a squad of soldiers (dressed in chlamys and campagi boots), each of whom was holding in his hand a white candle. When the chariot on which the statue was placed circled the hippodrome, it stopped in front of the imperial box, and the currently reigning emperor rose and gave a deep bow before the statue and the representation of Tyche of the city. At the end of the ceremony, the people chanted hymns and worshiped at these depictions by adoration 82. Thus, in the pompa circensis ceremony, the chariot carrying the statue had its triumphant run, setting off from carceres, circling the spina and coming to a stop in front of the imperial tribune. The author of the Chronicon Paschale identified the chariot as ὄχημα 83, and the Parastaseis syntomoi chronikai pointed to its solar character, calling it a ἡλίου ἄρμα 84. A similar term was used by Pseudo-Codinus 85, in whose opinion the statue crowning the column at the Forum of Constantine depicted Apollo 86. According to Gilbert Dagron, in the hippodrome, Constantine-Helios from the Porphyry Column became a coachman driving his solar chariot 87. This ceremony, according to some sources, was to continue until the reign of Julian ( ), when the emperor was to recommend the gilded statue to be buried because of the cross adorning it 88. Pseudo-Codinus, on the other hand, at one point associates the ceremony abolition with Julian 89, and another time with Theodosius the Great 90, while John Malalas ( 578) asserted that this ceremony took place even in his day 91. It seems likely that the real reason for the abolition of the adoration ceremony could be that it was ἐπιτελεῖσθαι τὸ γενέθλιον τῆς πόλεως αὐτοῦ. 81 Chronicon Paschale, p. 530: ποιήσας ἑαυτῷ ἄλλην στήλην ἀπὸ ξοάνου κεχρυσωμένην βαστάζουσαν ἐν τῇ δεξιᾷ χειρὶ τύχην τῆς αὐτῆς πόλεως, καὶ αὐτὴν κεχρυσωμένην, κελεύσας κατὰ τὴν αὐτὴν ἡμέραν τοῦ γενεθλιακοῦ ἱππικοῦ εἰσιέναι τὴν αὐτὴν τοῦ ξοάνου στήλην διριγευομένην ὑπὸ τῶν στρατευμάτων μετὰ χλανιδίων καὶ καμπαγίων, πάντων κατεχόντων κηροὺς λευκούς, καὶ περιέρχεσθαι τὸ ὄχημα τὸν ἄνω καμπτόν, καὶ ἔρχεσθαι εἰς τὸ σκάμμα κατέναντι τοῦ βασιλικοῦ καθίσματος, καὶ ἐπεγείρεσθαι τὸν κατὰ καιρὸν βασιλέα καὶ προσκυνεῖν τὴν στήλην τοῦ αὐτοῦ βασιλέως Κωνσταντίνου καὶ αὐτῆς τῆς τύχης τῆς πόλεως; cf. Malalas, XIII, 8; Parastaseis, 38, 56, p. 42, 56; Pseudo-Codinus, 42, 49, 87, p , , Parastaseis, 56, p ; Pseudo-Codinus, 49, p Chronicon Paschale, p Parastaseis, 38, p Pseudo-Codinus, 42, p Pseudo-Codinus, 45, p G. Dagron, op. cit., p. 307: Le Constantin-Helios de la colonne de porphyre devient à l Hippodrome le conducteur du char du Soleil. 88 Parastaseis, 38, p Pseudo-Codinus, 42, p Pseudo-Codinus, 87, p Malalas, XIII, 8.
6 96 Sławomir Bralewski The Porphyry Column in Constantinople 97 deemed too pagan 92. Presumably, it survived only in the form of festivities and food distribution, which is confirmed to be happening as late as in the tenth century 93. Thus, the Porphyry Column with the statue, and since the reign of Manuel I Comnenus ( ) with the cross which replaced the latter, remained throughout the history of the Byzantine Empire a symbol of Constantinople and its foundation, as well as the divine protection over the city. In addition, in early Byzantium, it presumably united the ideas of paganism and Christianity, becoming sacred to pagans and Christians alike. It must seem extremely interesting, therefore, how it was presented by Constantinople church historians in the mid-fifth century Socrates and his successor, Hermias Sozomenus. Socrates in his Ecclesiastical History refers to the Porphyry Columns twice. The first time he describes the circumstances under which the relics of the Holy Cross were found by Helena, the mother of Constantine the Great 94 ; the second time when he presents the circumstances of the death of heresiarch Arius 95. In the first case, he refers to the Column as the place where the relics of the Holy Cross Tree were deposited 96. The emperor, having received them from his mother, convinced that the city where such holy items are kept would never perish, was to order them to be hidden in the Porphyry Column 97. In the second case, according to the account by Socrates, Arius, having deceived the emperor Constantine as to his faith, boasting about his triumph, left the imperial palace following the route along which rulers usually celebrated their victories 98. When he arrived at the 92 G. Dagron, op. cit., p De ceremoniis, I, Socrates, I, 17. The relics of the Holy Cross were found probably in the twenties of the fourth century, but the tradition of linking their discovery to Helena is a few decades older, see J.W. Drijvers, Helena Augusta. The mother of Constantine the Great and the legend of her finding of the True Cross, Leiden New York København Köln 1992, p. 89, 93 and also S. Borgehammar, How the Holy Cross was found. From the event to medieval legend, Stockholm 1991, p ; B. Baert, A Heritage of Holy Wood. The Legend of the True Cross in Text and Image, Leiden 2004; H.A. Klein, Byzanz, der Westen und das wahre Kreuz. Die Geschichte einer Reliquie und ihrer künstlerischen Fassung in Byzanz und im Abendland, Wiesbaden More on the subject of Eusebius silence on the aforementioned relics, see J.W. Drijvers, op. cit., p ; H.A. Drake, Eusebius on the True Cross, JEH 36, 1985, p. 1 22; S. Borgehammar, op. cit., p Socrates, I, The relics of the Holy Cross were distributed to various places in the Imperium Romanum (Cf. J.W. Drijvers, op. cit., p ), according to Cyril of Jerusalem (Catechesis, X, 19, [in:] PG, vol. XXXIII, col. 685 B), they were located all over the world. 97 Socrates, I, 17, p. 180: Ὅπερ δεξάμενος καὶ πιστεύσας τελείως σωθήσεσθαι τὴν πόλιν, ἔνθα ἂν ἐκεῖνο φυλάττηται, τῷ ἑαυτοῦ ἀνδριάντι κατέκρυψεν, ὃς ἐν τῇ Κωνσταντινουπόλει ἐν τῇ ἐπιλεγομένῃ ἀγορᾷ Κωνσταντίνου ἐπὶ τοῦ πορφυροῦ καὶ μεγάλου κίονος ἵδρυται. The relics of the Holy Cross were found in the twenties of the fourth century, and thus at the time when the Porphyry Column was erected. Placing these relics in there was therefore possible from a chronological point of view. However, apart from Socrates, only George the Monk mentions it (Georgius Monachus, p. 500). 98 In the opposite direction, however, than the rulers did. Forum of Constantine, where the column of porphyry stands 99, as Socrates points out, he came down with terrible stomach pains, which led to his death by his entrails falling out; Arius was to meet his end in the latrine at the back of the Forum. The historian s account on the Column is, therefore, on the one hand, very laconic, on the other, very eloquent. Because of the relics of the Holy Cross, the Column became sacred, as the heresiarch learned himself. He deceived the ruler but was not able to deceive God and was exposed at the moment when in his pride he approached the sacred item which the Column had already become by then. Interestingly, in the work of Socrates, the monument appears only in stories of legendary character. Thus, Socrates referred to the legend already at that time associated with the sanctity of the Column. He must have been aware of this issue. Writing about the hidden relic in the Holy Cross, he added that he included that detail on the basis of a verbal account, and nearly all the citizens of Constantinople contend that it is consistent with the truth 100. It is possible that the relics in question was attributed the same role as the pagan Tyche of the city played, since in the opinion of Constantine, according to Socrates, it was meant to ensure the continuance of Constantinople and it was to be so for the eternity. The City in which the said relic was kept was not to be destroyed. The Porphyry Column has the same significance in the eyes of pagans and Christians for other reasons, however. In the opinion of the former, it was to be guaranteed by the Palladium and the representation of Tyche, crowning a sphere held by the statue, while the latter believed that it was ensured by the relics of the Holy Cross. How was this legend addressed by Sozomenus, who, according to many researchers improved and reinterpreted the Ecclesiastical History by Socrates? 101 In fact, Sozomenus did not mention the Porphyry Column at all, not even once. Neither did he refer to it when he informed of the discovery of the relic of the Holy Cross of Christ, 102 nor when he 99 Socrates, I, 38, p. 180: ἐπεὶ δ ἐγένοντο πλησίον τῆς ἐπιλεγομένης ἀγορᾶς Κωνσταντίνου, ἔνθα ὁ πορφυροῦς ἵδρυται κίων. 100 Socrates, I, 17: Τοῦτο μὲν οὖν ἀκοῇ γράψας ἔχω πάντες δὲ σχεδὸν οἱ τὴν Κωνσταντινούπολιν οἰκοῦντες ἀληθὲς εἶναί φασιν. 101 It was pointed out on numerous occasions, see G.F. Chesnut, The first Christian Histories: Eusebius, Socrates, Sozomenus, Theodoret, and Evagrius, Paris 1977, p. 205; G. Sabbah, Introduction, [in:] Sozomenus, vol. II, p. 59 [= SC, 477]; F. Young, From Nicaea to Chalcedon, London 1983, p. 32; T.D. Barnes, Athanasius and Constantius, Cambridge 1993, p. 206; T. Urbainczyk, Observations on the differences between the Church Histories of Socrates and Sozomenus, Hi 46, 1997, p P. Janiszewski believes (Żywioły w służbie propagandy, czyli po czyjej stronie stoi Bóg. Studium klęsk i rzadkich fenomenów przyrodniczych u historyków Kościoła w IV i V wieku, [in:] Chrześcijaństwo u schyłku starożytności, vol. III, ed. E. Wipszycka, Kraków 2000, p. 153) that Sozomenus wanted to create a work that would compete with Socrates and be closer to the canons of classic literature and the taste of the classically inclined intellectual circles of Constantinople. More on the subject of differences between the works by Socrates and Sozomenus cf. P. van Nuffelen, Un héritage de Paix et de Piété. Étude sur les histoires ecclésiastiques de Socrate et de Sozomène, Leuven Paris Dudley 2004, passim. 102 Sozomenus, II, 1.
7 98 Sławomir Bralewski The Porphyry Column in Constantinople 99 wrote about the death of Arius 103. In the first case, his account is consistent with the story by Socrates. The discovery of the tree of the Holy Cross was made possible through God s help, shortly after the Council of Nicaea, when the mother of the emperor, Helena, was staying in Jerusalem 104. In a miraculous way, with the participation of Macarius, the bishop of Jerusalem, the Cross of Christ was distinguished from the crosses of the two thieves, thanks to the healing of a dying woman. Both of them, Socrates and Sozomenus, also stressed that a part of the relic is kept in Jerusalem in a silver box and Helena sent another part to Constantine, like the nails from the Passion of Christ. The two accounts are different in some of the details. In the account of Socrates, the mother of the emperor went to Jerusalem as a result of prophetic visions she received in her dreams, while in the text by Sozomenus she came there at the time when her son decided to erect a temple in Jerusalem near Golgotha, and the purpose of her pilgrimage was her religious passion the desire to pray and explore holy places. Finding the tree of the Holy Cross was only her great desire. Thus, in the work of Socrates, Helena plays an active role in the search for relics, ordering the relevant work to be performed, while in Sozomenus account she is only a witness of their discovery during the works undertaken at the command of the ruler. According to Socrates, the woman healed by touching the Cross was a resident of Constantinople, while in the opinion of Sozomenus she belonged to the elite of Jerusalem. Helena assisted at her healing, which Socrates does not mention explicitly. The issue of the healed women appears to be a seemingly minor detail. In Jerusalem, however, there were probably a number of seriously ill people. The fact that in the account by Socrates it is a woman that is healed a resident of Constantinople, bears some significance. As can be expected, in this way Socrates wanted to express the belief in the importance of the relics of the Cross for the future of the capital, since the discovery of the true Cross of Christ saved the resident of the city. In addition, it also seems that her gender is not without importance either. Personifications of cities were in fact female. Perhaps, therefore, Socrates saw in that healed woman a symbol of the city itself? Sozomenus did not share the views of his predecessor on this issue. Most likely, it was his approach to the Porphyry Column that distinguished him from Socrates, because he also held the relics of the Cross in great esteem. The historians agree as to the actual nature of the facts they are quoting, they only differ as regards the details, including the most important ones concerning the role of the emperor s mother, and placing the relics in the Porphyry Column. It is interesting that Sozomenus, like Socrates, felt it necessary to validate his account on the subject, quoting sources of the information provided. He indicated then that he acquired it from people who were knowledgeable, who told the story from generation 103 Sozomenus, II, To Sozomenus, it was more probable that God gave direct guidance on this issue, although the historian does not rule out that the relevant information was delivered by a Hebrew man. The legend of Inventio Crucis, whose origin dates back to identified him as Judah-Cyriacus; see S. Borgehammar, op. cit., p to generation as well as from written accounts, which he had at his disposal. Significantly, too, that Socrates gave a similar confession about the origin of the facts which he was describing; he did that elsewhere, however, unlike Sozomenus, his successor. Socrates introduced the relevant passage immediately following the information about placing the relics of the Holy Cross in Porphyry Column while Sozomenus, ignoring or rejecting this fact, concluded the account on the finding of the Cross of Christ in this way, as though he wanted to use his words to counterbalance the testimony of Socrates and on the subject of the Column. Thus, it can be asserted that the omission of information about the deposit of relics in the Column of Constantine was not accidental. As for the description of the death of Arius, also this time the two accounts are consistent in their nature. The heresiarch met his end in a similar manner 105. But while Socrates clearly points to the Forum of Constantine as the place where his agony began only to finally end at the back of the square, Sozomenus does not specify the location of the latrine where Arius was to die. In an attempt to lend credibility to his account, he quoted a lengthy passage from Athanasius, bishop of Alexandria, in which the place of the heresiarch s death was given in detail 106. One can assume that it was the issue of that location that led the historian to quote a rather lengthy citation from the work by Athanasius, who was held in great esteem at that time, although generally Sozomenus rarely referred the citations in his History 107. Sozomenus complete silence on the subject of the Column must seem perplexing, all the more so if we agree with the thesis that this historian wrote his History with the work by Socrates in his hand. It is also mystifying since it was Sozomenus, unlike Socrates, who drew attention to the religious aspect of the foundation of Constantinople. It was him who wrote of Constantinople as the city of Christ, with no pagan cults 108. It is in his account that Constantine acted on the instructions of God himself, who chose Byzantium as his new capital. The emperor, obeying his orders, expanded the area of the city, surrounded it with walls, developed it, populated with the people he had brought from the Old Rome and gave it the name New Rome Constantinople. The ruler s efforts 105 Sozomenus (II, 29) points to different interpretations of Arius death. 106 Sozomenus, II, 30, p ; the account by Socrates and Sozomenus on the death of Arius depends on the Athanasian sources: Epistula ad episcopos Aegypti et Libyae 18 19, and his Epistula ad Serapionem de morte Arii. 107 S. Bralewski, Obraz papiestwa w historiografii kościelnej wczesnego Bizancjum, Łódź 2006, p. 272 [= BL, 10]. 108 Sozomenus, II, 3. This is inconsistent with the first ceremony of the foundation of the city of a decidedly pagan character held in the year 324 (more on the subject, see: G. Dagron, op. cit., p , 373) as well as other sources: Zosimus, Historia nova, II, 31, 2 3, ed. L. Mendelssohn, Lipsiae 1887; Hesychius, 41, p M. Salamon (Rozwój idei Rzymu Konstantynopola od IV do pierwszej połowy VI wieku, Katowice 1975, p. 78 [= PNUŚ, 80]) pointed out that the belief in the lack of pagan tradition in the Eastern capitol was the consequence of its having been founded by a Christian ruler, and the idea itself contributed over the subsequent centuries to an increase of tension between the two capitol dioceses.
8 100 Sławomir Bralewski make his new capital an equal of the Italian Rome 109 were successful also by the grace of God, because through it, the city grew to such an extent that the number of inhabitants and its wealth exceeded those of the former one. God gave support to the enthusiasm of the emperor and, through his revelations, confirmed the sanctity of churches the ruler built. Thus, in Sozomenus version, the new capital was equated with the old; it became a participant of its precedence, equal to the first in terms of honour 110. As can be suspected, therefore, Sozomenus silence on the subject of the Porphyry Column was not accidental, all the more so that we know from elsewhere that in other matters he was given to omitting facts inconvenient for his ideas 111. Most probably, then, he did not mention the Porphyry Column because of its dual character, which made it possible for Christians and pagans to see it as their sacred monument. It seems that Eusebius of Caesarea never wrote about it in his biography of emperor Constantine for the same reason 112. Perhaps Sozomenus rejected the account on the relics of the Holy Cross placed in the Column standing at the Forum of Constantine. This would also indicate that not everyone in the mid-fifth century saw it as an object of Christian worship and therefore some part of the inhabitants of Constantinople did not share the belief in the relics of the Cross of Christ hidden there. Abstract. The complicated fates of the Porphyry Column of emperor Constantine resemble the reach and difficult history of Constantinople, the New Rome and capital of the eastern Empire from its very beginnings. Perceived by the Constantinopolitans as both Christian and pagan monument, adorned with legends repeated and enriched by generations, it was always a landmark of the city. The article summarizes, compares and analyzes the accounts of Byzantine historians, showing continuity of tradition and the lasting role of the unique object in the very heart of political centre of the imperial capital. Translated by Katarzyna Gucio Sławomir Bralewski Katedra Historii Bizancjum Uniwersytet Łódzki ul. A. Kamińskiego 27a Łódź, Polska 109 Sozomenus, II, 3, 6, p. 240: ἐν πᾶσι δεῖξαι σπουδάσας ἐφάμιλλον τῇ παρὰ Ιταλοῖς Ρώμῃ τὴν ὁμώνυμον αὐτῷ πόλιν οὐ διήμαρτεν. 110 Sozomenus, II, 3, 1 2, p. 236: ἣν ἴσα Ρώμῃ κρατεῖν καὶ κοινωνεῖν αὐτῇ τῆς ἀρχῆς κατεστήσατο. According to F. Dvornik (Bizancjum a prymat Rzymu, trans. M. Radożycka, Warszawa 1985, p ) moving the imperial seat to the East was a stimulus for the development of Peter s idea in Rome. 111 As was the case with the papacy, cf. S. Bralewski, op. cit., passim. 112 C. Mango, Constantine s Column..., p. 6.
ΠΑΝΕΠΙΣΤΗΜΙΟ ΠΕΙΡΑΙΑ ΤΜΗΜΑ ΝΑΥΤΙΛΙΑΚΩΝ ΣΠΟΥΔΩΝ ΠΡΟΓΡΑΜΜΑ ΜΕΤΑΠΤΥΧΙΑΚΩΝ ΣΠΟΥΔΩΝ ΣΤΗΝ ΝΑΥΤΙΛΙΑ ΝΟΜΙΚΟ ΚΑΙ ΘΕΣΜΙΚΟ ΦΟΡΟΛΟΓΙΚΟ ΠΛΑΙΣΙΟ ΚΤΗΣΗΣ ΚΑΙ ΕΚΜΕΤΑΛΛΕΥΣΗΣ ΠΛΟΙΟΥ ΔΙΠΛΩΜΑΤΙΚΗ ΕΡΓΑΣΙΑ που υποβλήθηκε στο
Arkansas Tech University MATH 4033: Elementary Modern Algebra Dr. Marcel B. Finan Composition. Invertible Mappings In this section we discuss two procedures for creating new mappings from old ones, namely,
EE512: Error Control Coding Solution for Assignment on Finite Fields February 16, 2007 1. (a) Addition and Multiplication tables for GF (5) and GF (7) are shown in Tables 1 and 2. + 0 1 2 3 4 0 0 1 2 3
She selects the option. Jenny starts with the al listing. This has employees listed within She drills down through the employee. The inferred ER sttricture relates this to the redcords in the databasee
ΑΡΙΣΤΟΤΕΛΕΙΟ ΠΑΝΕΠΙΣΤΗΜΙΟ ΘΕΣΣΑΛΟΝΙΚΗΣ Μελέτη των υλικών των προετοιμασιών σε υφασμάτινο υπόστρωμα, φορητών έργων τέχνης (17ος-20ος αιώνας). Διερεύνηση της χρήσης της τεχνικής της Ηλεκτρονικής Μικροσκοπίας
Οι αδελφοί Montgolfier: Ψηφιακή αφήγηση The Montgolfier Βrothers Digital Story (προτείνεται να διδαχθεί στο Unit 4, Lesson 3, Αγγλικά Στ Δημοτικού) Προσδοκώμενα αποτελέσματα Περιεχόμενο Ενδεικτικές δραστηριότητες
2 Συντακτικές λειτουργίες (Syntactic functions) A. Πτώσεις και συντακτικές λειτουργίες (Cases and syntactic functions) The subject can be identified by asking ποιος (who) or τι (what) the sentence is about.
Οδηγίες: Να απαντηθούν όλες οι ερωτήσεις. Ολοι οι αριθμοί που αναφέρονται σε όλα τα ερωτήματα είναι μικρότεροι το 1000 εκτός αν ορίζεται διαφορετικά στη διατύπωση του προβλήματος. Διάρκεια: 3,5 ώρες Καλή
STUDENT NUMBER CENTRE NUMBER HIGHER SCHOOL CERTIFICATE EXAMINATION 1999 MODERN GREEK 2 UNIT Z (55 Marks) Time allowed Two hours (Plus 5 minutes reading time) DIRECTIONS TO CANDIDATES Write your Student
ΑΛΕΞΑΝΔΡΕΙΟ ΤΕΧΝΟΛΟΓΙΚΟ ΕΚΠΑΙΔΕΥΤΙΚΟ ΙΔΡΥΜΑ ΣΧΟΛΗ ΤΕΧΝΟΛΟΓΙΑΣ ΤΡΟΦΙΜΩΝ ΚΑΙ ΔΙΑΤΡΟΦΗΣ ΤΜΗΜΑ ΔΙΑΤΡΟΦΗΣ ΚΑΙ ΔΙΑΙΤΟΛΟΓΙΑΣ Πτυχιακή Εργασία Παραδοσιακά Προϊόντα Διατροφική Αξία και η Πιστοποίηση τους Εκπόνηση:
Centre No. Candidate No. Paper Reference(s) 1776/04 Edexcel GCSE Modern Greek Paper 4 Writing Thursday 21 May 2009 Afternoon Time: 1 hour 15 minutes Materials required for examination Nil Paper Reference
Section 1: Listening and responding Presenter: Niki Farfara MGTAV VCE Seminar 7 August 2016 Section 1: Listening and responding Section 1: Listening and Responding/ Aκουστική εξέταση Στο πρώτο μέρος της
Math 6 SL Probability Distributions Practice Test Mark Scheme. (a) Note: Award A for vertical line to right of mean, A for shading to right of their vertical line. AA N (b) evidence of recognizing symmetry
ΠΑΝΕΠΙΣΤΗΜΙΟ ΑΙΓΑΙΟΥ ΣΧΟΛΗ ΑΝΘΡΩΠΙΣΤΙΚΩΝ ΕΠΙΣΤΗΜΩΝ ΤΜΗΜΑ ΕΠΙΣΤΗΜΩΝ ΤΗΣ ΠΡΟΣΧΟΛΙΚΗΣ ΑΓΩΓΗΣ ΚΑΙ ΤΟΥ ΕΚΠΑΙ ΕΥΤΙΚΟΥ ΣΧΕ ΙΑΣΜΟΥ «ΠΑΙ ΙΚΟ ΒΙΒΛΙΟ ΚΑΙ ΠΑΙ ΑΓΩΓΙΚΟ ΥΛΙΚΟ» ΙΠΛΩΜΑΤΙΚΗ ΕΡΓΑΣΙΑ που εκπονήθηκε για τη
Write your name here Surname Other names Edexcel GE entre Number andidate Number Greek dvanced Subsidiary Unit 1: Understanding and Written Response Thursday 16 May 2013 Morning Time: 2 hours 45 minutes
Τμήμα Πολιτικών και Δομικών Έργων Πτυχιακή Εργασία: Τοπογραφικό διάγραμμα σε ηλεκτρονική μορφή κεντρικού λιμένα Κέρκυρας και κτιρίου νέου επιβατικού σταθμού σε τρισδιάστατη μορφή και σχεδίαση με AutoCAD
84 CHAPTER 4. STATIONARY TS MODELS 4.6 Autoregressive Moving Average Model ARMA(,) This section is an introduction to a wide class of models ARMA(p,q) which we will consider in more detail later in this
,**1 The Japanese Society for AIDS Research The Journal of AIDS Research +,, +,, +,, + -. / 0 1 +, -. / 0 1 : :,**- +,**. 1..+ - : +** 22 HIV AIDS HIV HIV AIDS : HIV AIDS HIV :HIV AIDS 3 :.1 /-,**1 HIV
2007 Classical Greek Intermediate 2 Translation Finalised Marking Instructions Scottish Qualifications Authority 2007 The information in this publication may be reproduced to support SQA qualifications
ΤΕΧΝΟΛΟΓΙΚΟ ΠΑΝΕΠΙΣΤΗΜΙΟ ΚΥΠΡΟΥ ΣΧΟΛΗ ΕΠΙΣΤΗΜΩΝ ΥΓΕΙΑΣ Πτυχιακή Εργασία ΔΙΕΡΕΥΝΗΣΗ ΤΗΣ ΣΕΞΟΥΑΛΙΚΗΣ ΔΡΑΣΤΗΡΙΟΤΗΤΑΣ ΤΩΝ ΓΥΝΑΙΚΩΝ ΚΑΤΑ ΤΗ ΔΙΑΡΚΕΙΑ ΤΗΣ ΕΓΚΥΜΟΣΥΝΗΣ ΑΝΔΡΕΟΥ ΣΤΕΦΑΝΙΑ Λεμεσός 2012 i ii ΤΕΧΝΟΛΟΓΙΚΟ
180 Section 9. Polar Equations and Graphs In this section, we will be graphing polar equations on a polar grid. In the first few examples, we will write the polar equation in rectangular form to help identify
BULETINUL ACADEMIEI DE ŞTIINŢE A REPUBLICII MOLDOVA. MATEMATICA Numbers 2(72) 3(73), 2013, Pages 80 89 ISSN 1024 7696 On a four-dimensional hyperbolic manifold with finite volume I.S.Gutsul Abstract. In
Α.Τ.Ε.Ι. ΙΟΝΙΩΝ ΝΗΣΩΝ ΠΑΡΑΡΤΗΜΑ ΑΡΓΟΣΤΟΛΙΟΥ ΤΜΗΜΑ ΔΗΜΟΣΙΩΝ ΣΧΕΣΕΩΝ ΚΑΙ ΕΠΙΚΟΙΝΩΝΙΑΣ ΠΤΥΧΙΑΚΗ ΕΡΓΑΣΙΑ «Η διαμόρφωση επικοινωνιακής στρατηγικής (και των τακτικών ενεργειών) για την ενδυνάμωση της εταιρικής
Topic 1: Describe yourself Write your name, your nationality, your hobby, your pet. Write where you live. Χρησιμοποίησε το and. WRITE your paragraph in 40-60 words... 1 Topic 2: Describe your room Χρησιμοποίησε
ΦΥΛΛΟ ΕΡΓΑΣΙΑΣ Α 2 ειδήσεις από ελληνικές εφημερίδες: 1. Τα Νέα, 13-4-2010, Σε ανθρώπινο λάθος αποδίδουν τη συντριβή του αεροσκάφους, http://www.tanea.gr/default.asp?pid=2&artid=4569526&ct=2 2. Τα Νέα,
Παρακίνηση εργαζοµένων: Ο ρόλος του ηγέτη στην παρακίνηση των εργαζοµένων. ΙΑΤΜΗΜΑΤΙΚΟ ΠΡΟΓΡΑΜΜΑ ΜΕΤΑΠΤΥΧΙΑΚΩΝ ΣΠΟΥ ΩΝ ΣΤΗ ΙΟΙΚΗΣΗ ΕΠΙΧΕΙΡΗΣΕΩΝ ιπλωµατική Εργασία της ΘΕΟ ΟΣΟΠΟΥΛΟΥ ΕΛΕΝΗΣ ΜΣ:5411 ΠΑΡΑΚΙΝΗΣΗ
How to register an account with the Hellenic Community of Sheffield. (1) EN: Go to address GR: Πηγαίνετε στη διεύθυνση: http://www.helleniccommunityofsheffield.com (2) EN: At the bottom of the page, click
Potential Dividers 46 minutes 46 marks Page 1 of 11 Q1. In the circuit shown in the figure below, the battery, of negligible internal resistance, has an emf of 30 V. The pd across the lamp is 6.0 V and
12 Παρελθόν (Past) In Greek there are three different sets of forms (both active and medio-passive), which refer to the past: the past perfective (αόριστος), the past imperfective (παρατατικός) and the
Name: Date: Nuclear Physics 5. A sample of radioactive carbon-4 decays into a stable isotope of nitrogen. As the carbon-4 decays, the rate at which the amount of nitrogen is produced A. decreases linearly
Ανοικτά Ακαδημαϊκά Μαθήματα στο ΤΕΙ Ιονίων Νήσων ΕΠΙΧΕΙΡΗΣΙΑΚΗ ΑΛΛΗΛΟΓΡΑΦΙΑ ΚΑΙ ΕΠΙΚΟΙΝΩΝΙΑ ΣΤΗΝ ΑΓΓΛΙΚΗ ΓΛΩΣΣΑ Ενότητα 11: The Unreal Past Το περιεχόμενο του μαθήματος διατίθεται με άδεια Creative Commons
Your source for quality GNSS Networking Solutions and Design Services! Page 1 of 5 Calculating the propagation delay of coaxial cable The delay of a cable or velocity factor is determined by the dielectric
Write your name here Surname Other names Edexcel GCE Centre Number Candidate Number Greek Advanced Unit 2: Understanding, Written Response and Research Tuesday 18 June 2013 Afternoon Time: 3 hours Paper
Chapter 2 * * * * * * * Introduction to Verbs * * * * * * * In the first chapter, we practiced the skill of reading Greek words. Now we want to try to understand some parts of what we read. There are a
ΟΜΗΡΟΥ ΙΛΙΑΔΑ ΑΛΕΞΑΝΔΡΟΣ ΠΑΛΛΗΣ SCHOOLTIME E-BOOKS www.scooltime.gr [- 2 -] The Project Gutenberg EBook of Iliad, by Homer This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost no restrictions
LESSON 6 (ΜΑΘΗΜΑ ΕΞΙ) REF : 201/045/26-ADV 10 December 2013 I get up/i stand up I wash myself I shave myself I comb myself I dress myself Once (one time) Twice (two times) Three times Salary/wage/pay Alone/only
LESSON 28 (ΜΑΘΗΜΑ ΕΙΚΟΣΙ ΟΚΤΩ) REF : 201/033/28 2 December 2014 Place/Seat Right (noun) I am right I am not right It matters It does not matter The same (singular) The same (Plural) Η θέση Το δίκιο Έχω
Neapolis University HEPHAESTUS Repository School of Health Sciences http://hephaestus.nup.ac.cy Master Degree Thesis 2015 þÿ»±íº Â»¹ ÁÃ Â : É º±¹ Ä þÿ Á³ Ä Å : ¼¹± ºÁ¹Ä¹º ±À Ä ¼ þÿ Ä Æ Á Â, Á ÃÄ Â þÿ ÁÌ³Á±¼¼±
CRASH COURSE IN PRECALCULUS Shiah-Sen Wang The graphs are prepared by Chien-Lun Lai Based on : Precalculus: Mathematics for Calculus by J. Stuwart, L. Redin & S. Watson, 6th edition, 01, Brooks/Cole Chapter
1 Verklarte Nacht, Op.4 (Εξαϋλωμένη Νύχτα, Έργο 4) Arnold Schoenberg (1874-1951) Αναγνώσματα από το βιβλίο Η Απόλαυση της Μουσικής (Machlis, Forney), για τους μαθητές που θα μελετήσουν το έργο: «Ο Σαίνμπεργκ
ΤΕΧΝΟΛΟΓΙΚΟ ΠΑΝΕΠΙΣΤΗΜΙΟ ΚΥΠΡΟΥ ΣΧΟΛΗ ΓΕΩΤΕΧΝΙΚΩΝ ΕΠΙΣΤΗΜΩΝ ΚΑΙ ΔΙΑΧΕΙΡΙΣΗΣ ΠΕΡΙΒΑΛΛΟΝΤΟΣ Πτυχιακή εργασία ΑΝΑΛΥΣΗ ΚΟΣΤΟΥΣ-ΟΦΕΛΟΥΣ ΓΙΑ ΤΗ ΔΙΕΙΣΔΥΣΗ ΤΩΝ ΑΝΑΝΕΩΣΙΜΩΝ ΠΗΓΩΝ ΕΝΕΡΓΕΙΑΣ ΣΤΗΝ ΚΥΠΡΟ ΜΕΧΡΙ ΤΟ 2030
CMPSCI 69GG Applied Information Theory Fall 006 Problem Set 3: Solutions. [Cover and Thomas 7.] a Define the following notation, C I p xx; Y max X; Y C I p xx; Ỹ max I X; Ỹ We would like to show that C
ΠΑΓΚΥΠΡΙΟΣ ΜΑΘΗΤΙΚΟΣ ΔΙΑΓΩΝΙΣΜΟΣ ΠΛΗΡΟΦΟΡΙΚΗΣ 11/3/26 Οδηγίες: Να απαντηθούν όλες οι ερωτήσεις. Ολοι οι αριθμοί που αναφέρονται σε όλα τα ερωτήματα μικρότεροι το 1 εκτός αν ορίζεται διαφορετικά στη διατύπωση
Q1. (a) A fluorescent tube is filled with mercury vapour at low pressure. In order to emit electromagnetic radiation the mercury atoms must first be excited. (i) What is meant by an excited atom? (1) (ii)
ΤΕΧΝΟΛΟΓΙΚΟ ΠΑΝΕΠΙΣΤΗΜΙΟ ΚΥΠΡΟΥ ΤΜΗΜΑ ΝΟΣΗΛΕΥΤΙΚΗΣ ΤΟ ΚΑΠΝΙΣΜΑ ΚΑΤΑ ΤΗΝ ΕΓΚΥΜΟΣΥΝΗ ΚΑΙ Η ΒΛΑΠΤΙΚΗ ΕΠΙΔΡΑ ΑΣΗ ΤΟΥ ΣΤΗΝ ΑΝΑΠΤΥΞΗ ΤΟΥ ΝΕΟΓΝΟΥ ΠΤΥΧΙΑΚΗ ΕΡΓΑΣΙΑ Ονοματεπώνυμο Αγγελική Παπαπαύλου Αριθμός Φοιτητικής
1 Περίληψη (Executive Summary) Η παρούσα διπλωματική εργασία έχει ως αντικείμενο την "Αγοραστική/ καταναλωτική συμπεριφορά. Η περίπτωση των Σπετσών" Κύριος σκοπός της διπλωματικής εργασίας είναι η διερεύνηση