WASHINGTON — Acting on CIA warnings that Iraq has developed biological weapons, the Pentagon is planning to begin vaccinating American military personnel in the Persian Gulf, military officials said Thursday.
A Defense Department spokesman refused to comment on the plans Thursday, but senior administration officials said the Pentagon had recommended proceeding with the inoculation program.
The Pentagon plan is part of a broad effort to improve defenses against biological weapons, including the use of masks and protective garments.
Iraq has used chemical weapons against rebellious Kurds and against Iran during the Iran-Iraq war. But President Saddam Hussein has denied repeatedly that his country had biological weapons.
In September, William H. Webster, the director of central intelligence, said that ``Iraq has a sizable stockpile of chemical and biological weapons.`` Government officials said Webster was reacting to intelligence reports that Iraq will be able to deliver significant quantities of biological agents on the battlefield by early next year.
Administration officials describe the vaccination plan as a precaution in light of these intelligence findings and deny that they are trying to stir new alarm about Iraq`s military capabilities.
Administration officials have been worried that the vaccination effort could disturb the Saudis, other members of the anti-Iraq coalition, and some American troops.
This is because the United States does not now have enough vaccine to inoculate all American personnel, let alone all friendly troops and Saudi citizens.
It is unclear how many personnel actually will be vaccinated under the program, but officials said the Pentagon plans to inoculate first those Americans who are most likely to be threatened by biological weapons.
Biological weapons, unlike chemical weapons, are based on living agents like viruses and bacteria. They can be used to spread diseases like typhoid, cholera and anthrax.
Vaccines for the biological agents considered most likely to be employed by Iraq would be produced in much the same way as the smallpox vaccines administered worldwide, using weakened or dead bacteria to stimulate the production of antibodies by human immune systems.
An administration official said that the Pentagon plans to begin the inoculations ``in a matter of weeks`` and that an effort is being made to expand the production of vaccines rapidly so that more Americans can be inoculated.
Even though supplies of vaccines are limited, administration officials defended the Pentagon plan, saying it is better to vaccinate some personnel than not to vaccinate any. And they said that those who are not vaccinated can be given some protection by masks and special protective clothing.