Here's this week's tips for slowing changing your habits.
What's on tap, save $100
Instead of paying for high-end bottled still or sparkling water, order tap water with your meal. You could save $100 or more per year compared to a habit of paying for two bottles of water per month. In addition, you’ll conserve the resources used to make bottles as well as the waste from disposal. While municipal water is regulated and tested frequently, bottled water is not. A word of caution: This tip applies within U.S. borders only. When visiting other countries, you should drink bottled water unless you can be sure the municipal water supply is safe to drink.
Contain yourself, save $15
Never microwave food in plastic containers — even if they claim to be microwave-safe. Instead, use microwave-safe glass or ceramic dishes. You'll not only save up to $15 or more per year on plastic container replacements, but you'll conserve the resources — mainly petroleum — used to make the plastic as well as the waste produced when it's disposed of. Research continues to show that plastics are prone to leaching potentially harmful chemicals into food. The main culprit, BPA, has been found to leach from all types of plastics, and is associated with reproductive and developmental disorders.
Can those cans
Buy frozen vegetables instead of canned. Pound for pound, canned and frozen vegetables may be comparable in price, but the canning process consumes up to eight times more energy than it takes to freeze, package and store frozen vegetables. And although most frozen vegetables come in non-recyclable plastic packages, these are less bulky and heavy than steel cans, which take more energy to produce and transport. Frozen vegetables tend to have a more natural flavor than canned vegetables, which are often preserved in a salt solution. Because canned vegetables are usually pre-cooked, they may also have lower levels of nutrients than frozen vegetables, which are usually only blanched before being packaged.
This article comes courtesy of ShiftyourHabit.com and was reprinted here with permission.