Cell phones have become more than just a luxury; they are a necessity of everyday life. Modern cell phones have many functions such as an organiser, stores phone numbers of your loved ones, an MP3 player, a digital camera and it can even browse the Internet. It is so useful that losing your cell phone can be a frustrating and stressful experience especially if the battery has gone dead. Finding it can be challenging but certainly not impossible.
Relax and try to visualise the last time you remember using your cell phone. Visualise where you were, what clothes you were wearing and what were you doing at the time you last used your cell phone.
Retrace back your steps to where you last remember using your phone. Look around tables and drawers where you might have placed your phone as you retrace back your steps. Check in between seats and places where your cell phone might have fallen off.
Check the clothes you were wearing the last time you remember using your phone. Make sure you search all the pockets on your clothes and also check around the area where you found your clothes.
Search in areas where you usually place your things when you get to work and when you get home.
Organise a thorough search with your family and friends. Family and friends will be more than willing to help especially if you offer them a price to whoever can find your cell phone first. Start from the room you last remember using your cell phone. Move from one room to another making sure every nook and cranny have been checked.
Once you find the cell phone and you need to use it for an emergency for example, but the phone is still dead. Activate the reserve battery in the phone by pressing the keys *3370# and the phones battery will raise to 50 per cent charged.
Tips and warnings
- Once you find the cell phone and you need to use it for an emergency for example, but the phone is still dead. Activate the reserve battery in the phone by pressing the keys *3370# and the phones battery will raise to 50 per cent charged.