Just released -- the Spanish
Version of our new National Register of Historic Places
The National Register of Historic Places is pleased to help foster
the general public's awareness, understanding, and appreciation
for Hispanic culture during National Hispanic Heritage Month.
As part of the celebration, this site highlights various
listed in the National Register, and National
Parks that deal directly with the ingenuity, creativity, cultural,
and political experiences of Hispanic Americans. Join the National
Register of Historic Places in recognizing and exploring the achievements
of a people that have contributed so much to American culture.
One of the sites featured in the Santa
Clara, California Travel Itinerary is the Luis Maria Peralta
Adobe, home to Manuel Gonzalez one of the founders of San
Jose in the late 18th century
Photograph by Judith Silva, courtesy of the City of Santa
Just released!! We
are excited to announce the online publication of the Spanish
Version of our new brochure--a comprehensive look at
all of the National Register's activities from the effects of
listing to our educational outreach programs. Its the National
Register from A to Z--en Español! Soon to be available
National Register Travel Itineraries
Travel to historic places that convey the rich cultural heritage
of our American Indian population with inspiring stories of their
perseverance across America.
- Santa Clara, California
Learn more about Spanish and Mexican-American heritage by traveling
virtually to the Santa Clara Valley--the latest in our series
of on-line itineraries.
Register Printed Itineraries
These itineraries are self-guided tours to National Parks and
other historic places in the American Southwest, California
Coast, South/West Texas, Puerto Rico/Virgin Islands, and Along
the Georgia-Florida Coast. All five itineraries contain
Hispanic American resources, and each includes detailed maps,
tourist information, location information, and color photographs.
with Historic Places
This program offers a series of lesson plans that use places listed
in the National Register to examine subjects that are part of
history and social studies curricula. Included among the many
lessons now available on-line are eight that focus on Hispanic
Cine El Rey
Cine El Rey, McAllen, Texas
Photograph courtesy of the Texas Historical Commission
Discover South Texas's most luxurious "Mexican Theatre"
Learn more about the inspiration for the setting of the novel Ramona
One of the most significant examples of Spanish/Mexican vernacular
architecture in the United States
De Soto National Memorial, this year's featured National
National Park Service photo
Cultural Resources Management
"CRM" is the flagship publication of the NPS Cultural Resources Programs and contains articles on the full range of cultural resources management and preservation topics. The following issues deal directly with questions regarding Hispanic cultural resources. Search the CRM Issue Archives, then search by specific title:
- Hispanic History in the National Register of Historic Places
- Exploring Hispanic History and Culture--A Dynamic Field
Diversity in the National
A highlight of the National Park Service's on-going efforts to
reflect the diversity of American culture.
This Tuscon-based website contains a wide variety of information
for English-speaking Hispanic-Americans.
of Congress: Built in America (HABS/HAER)
The Historic American Buildings Survey (HABS) and the Historic
American Engineering Record (HAER) collections document achievements
in architecture, engineering, and design in the United States
through a comprehensive range of building types and engineering
technologies, including sites related to Hispanic history and
culture. Searches on keywords like "Spanish," "missions," or "Spanish
forts" will provide information on an array of associated sites.
Most of the site records have publication-quality drawings, photographs
and historical data.
Register Information System
Since its inception in 1966, more than 76,000 properties have
been listed in the National Register. Together these files hold
information on more than one million individual resources--buildings,
sites, districts, structures, and objects--and therefore provide
a link to the country's heritage at the national, State, and local
levels. Search by name, location, agency, or theme to locate National
Register properties associated with Hispanic history.
Past Hispanic Heritage Month Features
For more information about other Hispanic properties listed in
the National Register, please visit our past features from 2001
As a way of recognizing our Spanish colonial past in the United
States and in commemoration of the Columbus Quincentennial in
1992, the National Park Service established the Spanish Colonial
Research Center in partnership with the University of New Mexico.
The center's primary purpose is serving research needs by providing
a computerized data base from Spanish colonial documents. More
than 85,000 pages of microfilmed Spanish colonial documents and
approximately 4,500 maps, architectural plans, and sketches of
North America have been accumulated.
Cine El Rey | Rancho
Camulos | Trevino-Uribe Rancho
De Soto National Memorial | Hispanic
Heritage Home | NR HOME