The domino effect is a chain reaction that occurs when a small change causes a similar change nearby, which then causes another similar change, and so on in linear sequence. The term is best known as a mechanical effect, and is used as an analogy to a falling row of dominoes. It typically refers to a linked sequence of events where the time between successive events is relatively small. It can be used literally (an observed series of actual collisions) or metaphorically (causal linkages within systems such as global finance or politics).
As we can see by recent events in the news, another domino effect is happening. Guns are a hot topic these days. They have been for quite some time. However, suddenly it is the forefront of conversations around the USA. As the Newtown publicity has captured the hearts and minds of millions, other stories are rising regarding shootings. At malls, in parking lots, kids carrying in backpacks for protection. It is awfully interesting to see how much of the news is focused on this. My question is, how much of what we are exposed to is legitimate?
To the parents, I ask you this. How many guns were confiscated from your child’s school? Does your child go through metal detectors upon entering the school? Is your child being scanned (AKA radiated) with metal detectors individually as TSA does in airports? Are backpacks allowed in school? If your child has high security measures implemented in their school, did anything in particular happen within its walls to have such security? For I am aware of inner city schools, in our area, that chose security measures due to kids bringing in knives and other dangerous items to hurt other students. Due to much fighting and threats from angry students inner city violence has ventured outwards to the suburbs due to school choice in our area. Certain districts felt security measures must be tight, considering some of the lifestyles many children were raised in.
Disregarding the previous paragraph on grounds of legitimacy, my main question is…did the security systems come into play at many schools due to true violence within their schools, or were they put into play due to something the media ravishingly published for all to focus on?
I ask this because my children are blessed enough not to go through that at this time. Yet in saying this, their school district is rethinking their security measures due to something that happened a few states away. Yes…the domino effect has begun here. Logically, prevention is better than aftermath. Nip it in the butt before it becomes an issue. However, the deeper issue at hand is who is profiting from all this? Who is making the major buckaroos installing security measures? And are these publicized school shootings drills in disguise to give some major company millions of dollars? For if we become objective rather than emotional and truly look deeply, we realize what we see can not be as they say. Not to say all school shootings are a hoax. However, we know the media lies. We understand who controls the media and can grasp that all media sources aid in steering public opinion.
Next, let’s talk about the guns! Let’s talk about the right to defend oneself when given the opportunity to do so because of the average Joe Schmoe criminal. With Walmart and Dick’s as two major companies discussing changes regarding gun sales and removing guns from their stores, we need to question who is this helping? For we all understand that criminals will get guns no matter what the laws are. And they can get any gun they want! The black market will skyrocket and the average citizen will be targeted at a greater rate. Heck, take away a citizen’s right to carry and it’s a free for all!
So, yet again, we can discuss the above and go round and round the merry go round. My husband and I were discussing earlier the greater agenda. Who are they trying to wean out? Which company is under fire that must be squashed? For their world is not ours, yet boy do they ever influence ours! It is looking at the entire picture of what is being shown to us. For a magician has many tricks up his sleeve and can easily distract the audience, creating an illusion for all to view. Yes, there will be those scarce few who see the trick for what it is but they are few and far between. And that is what they depend upon!
Considering the time we live in. A time of great deceptions upon the earth, families will suffer greatly due to the amount of domino effects brought forth. We can discuss the economy, we can discuss the government, health care, RFID chips etc etc. We can discuss all of it. Each item when brought into the lime light creates its own entity of dominoes. I would love to know how much brought forth are truly legitimate. I’d love to know what the world would be like without media influencing our minds and our decision making. For with each major story, comes a consequence the citizens must pay. For underneath the surface always lies the wolf in Grandmother’s nightie. And while we give up our freedoms for the sake of safety, we can honestly say…each domino effect throughout history has taken away our freedom beyond imagination.
Red: My oh my Grandmother!
What big eyes you have!
Wolf: The better to see you, my dear.
Red: Oh Grandmother!
What big teeth you have!
We all know what the wolf says!
For your hands are defiled with blood,
and your fingers with iniquity;
your lips have spoken lies,
your tongue hath muttered perverseness.
None calleth for justice,
nor any pleadeth for truth:
they trust in vanity,
and speak lies;
they conceive mischief,
and bring forth iniquity.
How many more dominoes will fall before the Storm Begins?
Only YHWH knows!
Verily I say unto you,
This generation shall not pass,
till all these things be fulfilled.
Heaven and earth shall pass away,
but my words shall not pass away.
But of that day and hour knoweth no man,
no, not the angels of heaven,
but my Father only.