An acceptance that a statement is true or that something exists
his belief in the value of hard work
a belief that solitude nourishes creativity
Something one accepts as true or real; a firmly held opinion or conviction
contrary to popular belief, Aramaic is a living language
we're prepared to fight for our beliefs
A religious conviction
I'm afraid to say belief has gone
local beliefs and customs
Trust, faith, or confidence in someone or something
a belief in democratic politics
I've still got belief in myself
any cognitive content held as true
impression: a vague idea in which some confidence is placed; "his impression of her was favorable"; "what are your feelings about the crisis?"; "it strengthened my belief in his sincerity"; "I had a feeling that she was lying"
(believing) the cognitive process that leads to convictions; "seeing is believing"
Belief is the psychological state in which an individual holds a proposition or premise to be true.
Belief is the second album of the British EBM group Nitzer Ebb. It was the first album recorded with drummer Julian Beeston (who took over from David Gooday), and Flood took over as producer from Phil Harding. It was released by Mute Records on .
Dramaturgy is a sociological perspective stemming from symbolic interactionism. The term was first adapted into sociology from the theatre by Erving Goffman, who developed most of the related terminology and ideas in his 1959 book, The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life. ...
"Belief" was the second single from John Mayer's 2006 album Continuum. The song features Ben Harper on guitar.
Mental acceptance of a claim as truth regardless of supporting or contrary empirical evidence; Something believed; The quality or state of believing; Religious faith; One's religious or moral convictions
(beliefs) (p. 67) specific statements that people hold to be true
(beliefs) Subjective ideas about what is true and not true for ourselves, other people, and the world.
(Beliefs) The rules, attitudes, and assumptions we hold about ourselves, others, and the world around us. The thoughts that express these beliefs.
(Beliefs) The generalizations we have made about causality, meaning, self, others, behaviors, identity, etc. Our beliefs are what we take as being "true" at any moment. Beliefs guide us guide us in perceiving and interpreting reality. Beliefs relate closely to values. ...
(Beliefs) Generalisations we make about the world and our opinions about it. They form the rules and our permissions about what we can and/or cannot do.
(Beliefs) In NLP terms a belief is a strong assumption that affects your perception of the world.
(Beliefs) Judaism has no dogma, no formal set of beliefs that one must hold to be a Jew. In Judaism, actions are far more important than beliefs, although there is certainly a place for belief within Judaism. See What Do Jews Believe? ...
(Beliefs) Long-held assumptions about the way needs are met (e.g., "people can change things through the system," or "politics drive decisions"). See mythtruths.
(Beliefs) Statements we think are true but cannot (or have not bothered to) check. See 'Logical Levels'.
(Beliefs) That which we accept as truth, and which we then incorporate into our lives as if it were truth. Usually linked to programs, and can be carried over from lifetime to lifetime.
(Beliefs) World-views may discourage one person from listening to another.
(Beliefs) explores the primary religions practiced in the country, how those religions are transmitted to and practiced by adolescents, and whether the culture of the country as a whole tends toward individualism or collectivism, and how this shapes the development of the adolescent.
(Beliefs) mental acceptance of the validity of certain ideas about inanimate objects, animate objects and persons. Belief systems are ideas that help one define what is felt to be the real world and dynamics that influence reality.
(Beliefs) something held to be a truth without the support of evidence that allows positive knowledge. Although this word is often used in tandem with ‘values’, beliefs are not the same as values. Our values underlie our beliefs. We sometimes use symbols to openly demonstrate our beliefs.
(Beliefs) the notions or values of people in a community or society which have a high degree of persistence. See Core Beliefs; Secondary Beliefs; Values.
(Beliefs) the word comes from Old English and means "that which is beloved". A belief is whatever is loved or is valued highly by an individual. We all have beliefs that guide our interpretation of reality. We all have beliefs that interpret our life-situation in selected ways.