Human papilloma virus (HPV) is a group of 150 related viruses, 75% of which are responsible for warts on arms, chest, feet, hands and 25% of HPV types called high risk HPV cause cancer of genital. Human papillomavirus testing is done for the screening of a several cancers including cervical cancer, vaginal cancer, vulvar cancer etc. Population based studies by Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) show that 66% of cervical cancers, 79% of anal cancers, 55% of vaginal cancers and 62% of oropharangeal cancers in the U.S. are associated with HPV infection in women. FDA approved human papillomavirus test as a preliminary screening test for cervical cancer. Even though the test has been approved by FDA, it can only be used in conjunction with the Pap smear test – a gold standard test for cervical cancer screening. Conventional human papillomavirus testing uses molecular biology techniques such as nucleic acid probes labelled with radioactive isotopes. Insufficiency of these tests to detect all oncogenic and non-oncogenic HPV types is the biggest restraint for the HPV testing market. Introduction of new techniques for HPV screening such as DNA hybridization signal amplification system has opened up lucrative opportunities for the manufacturers of human papillomavirus testing kits. New techniques for HPV testing use Southern blotting, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) etc. for detection of HPV, species identification (genotyping) and detection of viral load. HPV test is recommended for the women aged above 30 years and is not used in adolescents.
Growing burden of HPV incidence in women aged more than 30 years and prevalence of sexually transmitted diseases are major factors driving growth of global human papillomavirus testing market. According to World Health Organization (WHO) statistics, HPV related cervical cancer is the second most common cancer in women accounting for 13% of cancer deaths in the U.S. Moreover, as per Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report by CDC, currently 79 Mn people in U.S. are infected with HPV with the addition of 14 Mn new HPV infections each year. Lack of clear guidelines for HPV testing and less adoption of new HPV testing methods by health practitioners are the factors limiting the growth of global human papillomavirus testing market.
The global market for human papillomavirus testing market is segmented on basis of technology, disease indication, end user and geography:
Introduction of next generation HPV testing techniques for identification of type 16 and 18 HPV in samples is expected to boost the growth of human papillomavirus testing market over the forecast period. Based on technology, human papillomavirus tests are classified as DNA probe technology, and RNA probe technology. DNA probe technology segment is foreseen to lead the market owing to more number of approved products for HPV testing using DNA probes. The segment is expected to grow rapidly over the forecast period due to increasing adoption of the technique for cervical cancer screening by healthcare professionals.
Based on disease indication, cervical cancer segment is expected to contribute largest share in global human papillomavirus testing market due to availability of clear guidelines for the use of HPV test in cervical cancer screening. Based on end users, the global human papillomavirus testing market has been segmented into hospitals, clinics, Diagnostic Centers and Research Centers. Hospital end user segment is expected to contribute the maximum share among end users.
On the basis of regional presence, global human papillomavirus testing market is segmented into five key regions viz. North America, Latin America, Europe, Asia Pacific, and Middle East & Africa. North America is expected to lead the global human papillomavirus testing market for due to high prevalence HPV related diseases. According to WHO statistics, prevalence of HPV is high in developed countries such as U.S. and U.K.
Some of the major players in global human papillomavirus testing market are Digene Corporation, Roche Molecular Systems, Inc, Hologic, Inc., Abbott Laboratories, Qiagen NV etc.
The report covers exhaustive analysis on:
Regional analysis includes