The Abacot Ranger was originally produced in the UK, was even described in Feathered World's 'Ducks' (1926) - and then disappeared from the UK record. Fortunately for this attractive breed, the Germans developed the 'silver wild-colour' to perfection and maintained the Abacot Ranger or Streicher as a popular breed on the continent until its import and re-discovery in the UK in the 1970s and 80s.
Abacot Ranger ducks
The ducks are particularly attractive. They have a 'hood' of fawn-buff feathers (hence the name 'hooded' ranger') and a creamy white body beautifully streaked and marked with colour. Like their relatives - the Campbells and Harlequins - they are very good layers.
Khaki Campbells (drakes have darker heads)
One of the first and certainly the most successful, of the utility breeds designed in the 20th century from the Indian Runner, the khaki Campbell largely took over as the top egg laying duck. The khaki Campbell proved to be very agile, very fertile and extremely prolific. It to has spawned many variants: the white Campbell, the dark Campbell, the Welsh Harlequin (a simple mutation of the original Khaki), the Abacot Ranger (a cross back to a Runner) and the Whaylesbury hybrid (Harlequin and Aylesbury).
The Campbell is the top egg laying duck with some utility strains producing as many as 300 eggs a year from one duck. The Campbell is an active light breed with the drakes weighing 2.3-2.5kg (5-5.5lb) and the ducks 2.0-2.3kg(4.5-5lb)
William Cook, who also bred the Orpington chicken, developed the Orpington duck in the late nineteenth century. The Orpington duck is a true dual-purpose breed with the duck laying an average of 150 eggs per year.
A group of Orpingtons
The Orpington duck should be a rich even shade of buff all over, free from blue, brown or white feathers and any pencilling. With the drake having a seal brown head with no sign of beetle green. The seal brown terminates in a sharply defined line all the way round the neck. The drake's body should be the same buff shade as the duck, the only other coloured area on the drake is his rump, which should be the same shade as his head. The Orpington duck is a very active forager and will tame down with a little time and patience.
The drakes weigh 2.2-3.4kg(5-7.5 lb), and the ducks 2.2-3.2kg (5-7 lb).