Sunday, January 18, 2009
Cultural and Literature Reflecting Fairy Beliefs 1
For many centuries the belief in fairies has persisted.It was not the Brothers Grimm who introduced Fairies although they are well known today.
Some cultures believe fairies are angels cast out of Heaven. Some fell into the sea and some onto the land where they do no harm if left alone.
The Irish believe that the fairies are a previously conquered society, the Tuatha De Danaan (People of the Goddess Dana), who were driven into hiding when the Celts invaded Ireland. The Pagan gods of the Tuatha, skilled in building and magic, went underground to live in the tombs and mounds they had built. Hidden from sight, they grew smaller in the popular imagination until they turned into fairies.
Other cultures believe that fairies are the souls of the dead, people not good enough to enter Heaven yet not bad enough for Hell. They wander the Netherland in between and are occasionally seen by humans. Along a similar theme, fairies are also believed to be angels that had been cast out of Heaven. Some fell into the sea and some onto the land, where they would do no harm if left alone
In Wales, fairies are thought to be a race of invisible spiritual beings living in a world of their own. Some people also believe that fairies were originally local gods or nature spirits that dwindled in majesty and size over time.
"...What fairies are like
A fairy is a tiny being with wings (such as butterfly wings, dragonfly wings, etc.), that looks like a person. They are said to have magical powers, such as the ability to change the seasons, weather, or other aspects of nature.
Fairies move swiftly and can become invisible blending into the woods. They wear green clothes and tend to live on hills, in woody dells, underwater or the Otherworld where they frequently war with insects and reptiles. Fairies eat fruit and are capable of producing things like shoes and bows. They enjoy music and dancing and love to play tricks and brawl with each other. Capable of taking human lovers, fairies have been known to enchant humans and trap them in the fairy realm. More frequently, they just steal household items.
How to See Fairies
Fairies are rarely seen by humans. There are a few tricks one can use in order to see them:
* Legend says that if you pick a four leaf clover and lie quietly in a field, you will soon be surrounded with dancing fairies.
* You can also look for a stone that has a hole naturally bored into it by running water. Just look through the hole and you will see fairies.
Fairies are said to appear most frequently on the high days of the Celtic calendar. Beltane (May Eve), when they fight; Midsummer Eve, when they celebrate; and Samhain (November Eve) when they dance with ghosts and lament the coming of winter.
Protection from Fairy Spells
Fairies have a reputation for stealing infant babies and replacing them with changelings. Parents can protect against kidnapping by lying the father's trousers over the cradle or by hanging an open pair of scissors above it.
*note: This information is based on myths and popular fairy culture. We can't guarantee fairy sightings, nor can we ensure protection against them!"
Next post will include some personal beliefs and an experience.