Calisthenics & Circuit Training
Calisthenics and circuit training are an effective combination for improving sports performance or burning calories because of the ease of moving from exercise to exercise. Circuit training requires you to change exercises frequently during a workout -- calisthenics let you do this while enabling you to focus on specific muscles to create full-body workouts.
Calisthenics are exercises you perform with little or no equipment, using your body’s weight to provide all or most of the resistance. If you perform them slower and with more muscular effort, you will build more muscle and improve muscular endurance. If you perform them quickly, you will decrease muscle fatigue so you can create cardio workouts. Common calisthenics include pushups, situps, crunches, pullups, chinups, dips, burpees, mountain climbers, jumping jacks, jumping rope, squats, lunges and heel raises.
Circuit training is a system of exercise that creates workouts comprised of short bouts of activity, repeated over and over. A circuit might consist of a timed exercise, such as 30 or 60 seconds of situps, or a specific number of repetitions, such as 10 or 15 pushups or pullups. After you perform an exercise, you take a short break of 15 to 30 seconds, then start the next exercise. The amount of muscular effort you use to perform an exercise will determine whether you emphasize muscle building, muscular endurance or calorie burning.
To use calisthenics to create a weight-loss circuit-training workout, perform the exercises at an intensity that won’t create muscle fatigue that causes you to take frequent breaks. For example, when you do pushups, put your hands closer together to emphasize your larger biceps and chest muscles and perform your reps quickly. When doing pullups or chinups, let yourself drop down after your raise yourself, then “bounce” back up to start your next lift. Alternate lower-body, core and upper-body exercises to give those muscles a chance to recover after each exercise. Exercise at a pace that has you breathing hard and sweating for the entire workout, but lets you talk while exercising.
If you want to build muscle or improve your muscular endurance for sports, perform your exercises slowly and use hand placements that make them more difficult. For example, perform chinups instead of pullups, which emphasize your triceps and back muscles, or place your hands farther apart during pushups and pullups. Raise and lower yourself slowly, using muscular effort to slow you as you lower yourself, rather than letting gravity help you drop. Pause between each uplift and downlift to create isometric muscle contractions and to avoid letting momentum, or a bounce, help you back up. Aim for an intensity level that will fatigue you to failure within 90 seconds for maximum muscle-building benefit, recommends American Council on Exercise spokesperson Jessica Matthews.
- Jupiterimages/Photos.com/Getty Images