Writing A Top-Quality Critical Response Essay: Techniques To Use
Do you need to write a critical response essay? If so, you will surely want it to be as top-quality as possible. Here are some great techniques to help you on your way:
What is it?
A critical response essay, as you may expect, is an essay where you are giving a critical response to a piece of writing –this could be another essay or a work of literature, for example. Whatever the subject of the critical response may be, its purpose is to summarize the source’s main idea and to respond to it critically.
Know your subject.
In order for you to accomplish the task of giving your own thoughts on the topic at hand, you must first make sure that you have an excellent grasp of the topic. You also need to make your critical response essay engaging, analytic and well-informed.
So before you even begin writing, make sure that you know what you’re writing about! Make plenty of notes and jot down ideas. Also read other critical responses to the work at hand. You should be able to find these at your campus or public libraries, as well as on the web. It’s important that you express your own point of view with this type of essay, but it needs to be an informed point of view, so make sure you know how it compares to critiques written by others.
Make a plan.
Once you have performed your research, it’s time to make a rough plan for your essay. Make a list of the key points you want to include. Work out which things you want to place together. Then you can come up with titles for rough chapters and decide on how many you’ll need.
A critical response essay begins with the introduction. Here you should introduce the source material you are writing a response on, and outline the specific topics of interest that you are exploring in your essay. Also mention what conclusions you may reach.
The main body.
After the introduction comes the body text. Here you will divide your critical response into relevant chapters, where you will explore the ideas and responses you put forward in depth.
Lastly comes the conclusion. You should briefly restate what your aims and objectives for the essay were, how you have explored these and summarize your conclusions, before ending on a main conclusive point.
If you need more help in formulating your critical response essay, this site should be of invaluable assistance: