Description - Road Ecology by Richard T. T. Forman
A central goal of transportation is the delivery of safe and efficient services with minimal environmental impact. In practice, though, human mobility has flourished while nature has suffered. Awarness of the environmental impacts of roads is increasing, yet information remains scarce for those interested in studying, understanding, or minimizing the ecological effects of roads and vehicles. Road Ecology addresses that shortcoming by elevating previously localized and fragmented knowledge into a broad and inclusive framework for understanding and developing solutions. The book brings together fourteen leading ecologists and transportation experts to articulate state-of-the-science road ecology principles and presents specific examples that demonstrate the application of those principles.
Buy Road Ecology by Richard T. T. Forman from Australia's Online Independent Bookstore, Boomerang Books.
(229mm x 152mm x 38mm)
Publisher: Island Press
Country of Publication:
Other Editions - Road Ecology by Richard T. T. Forman
Book Reviews - Road Ecology by Richard T. T. Forman
Author Biography - Richard T. T. Forman
Richard T. T. Forman is the PAES Professor of Landscape Ecology at the Harvard University Graduate School of Design. Daniel Sperling is professor of civil engineering and environmental science and policy at the University of California, Davis. The twelve co-authors are: John A. Bissonette (Utah State University); Anthony P. Clevenger (Banff National Park); Carol D. Cutshall (Wisconsin Department of Transportation); Virginia H. Dale (Oak Ridge National Laboratory); Lenore Fahrig (Carleton University); Robert France (Harvard University); Charles R. Goldman (University of California, Davis); Kevin Heanue (formerly U. S. Federal Highway Administration); Julia A. Jones (Oregon State University); Frederick J. Swanson (USDA Forest Service); Thomas Turrentine (University of California, Davis); and Thomas C. Winter (U. S. Geological Survey).