Methods | Statistics | Clinical | Educational | Industrial | Professional items | World psychology |
The Protector Guardian is one of the 16 role variants the Keirsey Temperament Sorter is based on. David Keirsey originally described the Protector role variant; however, the personality descriptions of Isabel Myers contributed to its development. Protectors correlate with the ISFJ Myers-Briggs type.
Protectors are observant, cooperative, informative, and attentive. They are greatly concerned with the security of others and they often find assisting the downtrodden or people with disabilities to be satisfying. Protectors also find personal fulfillment in insuring the safety of others and may be attracted to jobs that enable them to do this as medical practitioners or insurance agents. Protectors are also quite skilled at executing routines and this enables them to be skillful in jobs that require conservation skills such as curators or police officers. Protectors are thorough, frugal and they abhor the squandering of material resources.
Protectors are comfortable working alone and they are often uncomfortable being in positions of authority. When they are in positions of authority, they often try to do everything themselves. Protectors have a very strong puritan work ethic and this can lead them to be overworked. The least hedonistic of the role variants, Protectors are willing to complete jobs other role variants manage to avoid, especially if it enables them to help those in need.
Protectors often talk about daily life and every day concerns however they are not as sociable as other role variants. They tend to be talkative to only to a close circle of friends. Protectors shyness with strangers can make them seam to be cold even though they are often warm and sympathetic. Protectors are often undervalued as their commitment to security and their economies are often taken for granted.
Protectors value traditional ways of doing things and are not interested in experimentation or speculation. They deeply value family history, heirlooms and property as well as cultural norms and traditions. Protectors firmly believe in the stability offered by credentials, titles, offices, birth and other forms of traditional authority. Protectors dislike situations where the rules are constantly changing.
The following individuals are identified as Protectors.
- Keirsey Temperament and Character The Web Site for the Keirsey Temperament Sorter and Keirsey Temperament Theory.
|This page uses Creative Commons Licensed content from Wikipedia (view authors).|