Getting, S. & Swainey,K. (2012). First graders with ipads?. Learning and leading with technology , 40(1), 24-27. Retrieved from http://www.iste.org/Store/Product.aspx?ID=2515
Two first grade teachers in Minnesota documented the use of iPads to increase students’ reading. The students were grouped based on RtI testing. The teachers found apps to target several areas of reading including sight words, fluency, comprehension, vocabulary, and literacy. The teachers found that by using iPads, they were able to address technology standards while targeting reading intervention.
Overall, the teachers noted elevated average gains and higher end-of-year scores for students who used iPads. In addition to recording data on achievement, the teachers also documented students’ time on task (TOT). They found that one group increased its TOT by 20%, while another group increased by 15%.
The teachers also discussed how it was essential for them to collaborate with each other. They met twice a week in order to plan and reflect on their project. They even provided training for other staff members at their school in order to encourage the use of iPads in other classrooms. The teachers overcame obstacles of funding and availability of apps for specific reading skills. Since some of the apps were too noisy, they received funding from the PTA to purchase headphones in order to reduce the noisy disruption. The teachers enjoyed using the iPads with their students, and found that they made a positive difference in sight word recognition, fluency, comprehension, and vocabulary recognition and meaning.
Q1: Why did students’ time on task increase as a result of using the iPads?
A1: Students nowadays are used to being entertained by technology, such as television, video games, and computers. Teachers constantly need to search for ways to engage and stimulate their students. By using new and exciting interactive apps on iPads, students are more likely to stay on task during a lesson.
Q2: How might I go about acquiring the funds to purchase iPads for my classroom?
A2: I can search and apply for grants and scholarships. I can also connect with the teachers who wrote the article through Twitter or email, as they included their contact information. I also can create fundraisers throughout the community.