Women in the World of 3D Printing
Every year on March 8, people from all over the world come together to celebrate International Women’s Day. The Day of Women is a time to reflect on progress, to demand change and to celebrate the exhibition courage and determination of ordinary women who have played an extraordinary role in the history of their countries and communities. In honor of the International Women’s Day, we have compiled a list of some women that have truly help us in the 3D printing industry, scientists, company founders, decision-makers and engineers, designers. Despite the fact that the 3D printing industry is a male dominated field we highlight some truly amazing 3D printing projects, and companies enabled by women not only to recognize their achievements, but to inspire other women and young girls to start 3D printing.
Women in 3D printing => 1: Yvonne Cagle
Where: United States
Industry: Astronaut | flight surgeon
Influence: 3D printing has finally entered the “final boundary” and astronaut, Yvonne Cagle believes that the next 3D print object in space should be a buckle. Cagle created a buckle that is used with a compression band to prevent muscle atrophy and to protect the heart in a zero gravity environment. Why is 3D printing important to this endeavor? Because the buckle is light and prone to damage during a launch, so 3D printing it in space will be an essential part of the success of the buckle. We can not wait to see what happens next when space and 3D printing collide.
Thanks in part to women’s role models like this, Anielle plans to continue her work with 3D printing. “I’ve seen a lot of social inequalities, as well as abundance and possibilities, the only thing missing is the technique to make the bridge,” says Anielle. Yes, a trip like Anielle is proof that an inspired idea and a real-life model have the potential to change our future – a thought, an idea and a 3D printer at a time.
Women in 3D print => 2: Neri Oxman
Industry: Architecture | design
Influence: Neri Oxman proves “technology can live in harmony with nature.” An Israeli designer best known for her work in environmental design and digital morphology is assistant to media art and sciences at MIT Media Lab. She founded and led the Mediate Matter Design Research Group. Through art and design, Oxman and her colleagues develop new design processes and principles that improve the quality of 3D printing. In 2009, Oxman was named by Fast Company as one of the “100 most creative people” and made ICON’s list of the top 20 most influential architects to shape the future.
Women in 3D print => 3: Alice Taylor
Industry: 3D toys | Educational games
Impact: As the founder and CEO of MakieLab, Alice Taylor is a trailblazer who designs an innovative kind of toy that inspires toys. From this simple idea, her startup, Mackielab was born. “Makies” is the first product of MakieLab, a user-customizable doll 3D printed doll, each one unique to its owner. In 2012 the company secured a $ 1.4m seed investment and in March, MakieLab won the prestigious SXSW Accelerator Award in Entertainment & Gaming. Today, the Makies are the world’s first 3D printed doll, which is now dispatched around the world. Prior to 2011, Alice was induction editor for education at Channel 4, where she was tasked with teaching and apps to visit teenagers and older children, including the BAFTA winners Bow Street, Runner and Private.
Women in 3D print => 4: Marleen Vogelaar
Where: Netherlands | USA
Industry: Manufacturing sale
Impact: Change Agent, Marleen Vogelaar is the co-founder of Shapeways, the leading 3D printing service and marketplace. In 2008, she and her co-founders started the company to create a 3D print market where users can design and upload 3D printable files. As COO / CFO of the enterprise, Vogelaar supervised the production in both New York City and the Netherlands. In October 2014, she resigned from the company to pursue other interests.
Women in 3D print => 5: Jennifer Lewis
Where: United States
Influence: Jennifer Lewis expresses the limitations of 3D printing. A material scientist at Harvard University, Dr. Lewis’ research, further extends 3D printing. With her Lewis Lab, she has designed novel inks from a variety of materials, as well as high-precision 3D printing platforms with small nozzles. These innovative breakthroughs enable them to produce tailor-made structures with precise electronic, optical, mechanical and chemical properties. Dr. Lewis has received numerous awards, including the NSF President’s Faculty Fellow Prize, the American Ceramic Society’s Brunauer Prize, the American Chemical Society’s Langmuir Prize, and the Materials Research Society Medal. She has written 120 papers and holds eight patents. In addition, she has been actively involved in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) for nearly two decades.
Women in 3D print => 6: Ping Fu
Where: China + USA
Industry: Software Development author
Impact: Honored in 2005 by Inc. Magazine as The Entrepreneur of the Year, Ping Fu is a women’s gamer changer that turns the face of technology around the world. Ping Fu is a co-founder of Geomagic, a 3D imaging software company owned by 3D Systems. Since March 2014, she has been a vice-president and Chief Entrepreneur Officer at 3D Systems. Before the establishment of Geomagic, Fu initiated the NCSA Mosaic software, which led to Netscape and Internet Explorer. It serves on the National Advisory Board of the White House for Innovation and Entrepreneurship and the Board of the Long Now Foundation. She is the author of Bend Not Break.
Women in 3D print => 7: Eva Wolf
Industry: Airwolf 3D Printing
Eva Wolf is the estalisher of Airwolf 3D, a well respected California-based 3D printer, software, and 3D printing equipment manufacturer. Eva, who founded the well established company in 2012 with her husband Erick Wolf, has helped the company to expand its reach by reaching out to new investors and partners, as well as by building on Airwolf 3D’s internal infrastructure and external distribution. Notably, Airwolf 3D has taken a particularly inspiring approach towards STEM education, by developing specialized drone building kits for schools, as well as by donating a number of their AXIOM 3D printers to schools (despite a number of them being stolen).
One of the founders and owner of the amazing new “Foodini”
Named by CNN as 1 of only 7 ‘tech superheros’ to watch: I’m co-Founder & CMO of NaturalMachines: we make 3D food printers, using REAL food.
Passionate about healthy eating, technology and marketing. I’m a Co-Founder and CMO of a company that makes 3D food printers, using REAL food to print. Natural Machines are the makers of Foodini, the first smart kitchen appliances speeding up the process of making food with fresh ingredients: encouraging more people to eat healthier and rely much less on processed foods. All via next generation Internet of Things/IoT 3D food printers with Artificial Intelligence/AI.
Photos and bios courtesy of websites / twitter