The Crafty Classroom is a website is filled with crafts, activities and printables you can use in your classroom! Our crafts go alongside themes and literature resources and most of them come straight out of our personal homschool experiences! I firmly believe that children who are actively involved and invested in a project retain and recall information at a higher rate. Our thematic crafts and activities are designed to compliment your classroom curriculum and provide you with additional learning opportunities and discussions. We provide project ideas that are easy to implement, with full photo instructions and materials are specifically chosen based on what you might already have in your art supply closet.
Anatomy Crafts for Kids
We've got some great human anatomy science crafts and activities you can use alongside your lessons. Many of these resources would be great and end of a science unit. and end of a science unit.
Artist Crafts for Kids
Learning Art History can be fun! Teach your children about Famous Artists and then uses these fun projects to explore different textures, mediums, and art process. These turn out wonderful and make fantastic portfolios! Click Here
Arctic Crafts for Kids
A collection of stunning Arctic themed art projects for children. Create patterned polar bears, vibrant Northern Lights, Icy Igloos, and more with these simple yet gallery worthy art tutorials.
Australia Crafts for Kids
Come along with us as we head down under for some Aussie fun! Make boomerangs that work, Turn your classroom into a cave, make music with a didgeridoo, and wrap up your unit with some Aboriginal Face Painting!
Africa Art Projects for Kids
NEW and growing collection of African inspired art projects for children. These projects are perfect for children learning about African culture and go wonderfully alongside unit study activities.
Bird Crafts for Kids
There are so many different kinds of birds that we'll be adding to this category in the years to come! There are lots of fun birds nest crafts, egg crafts and more!
Fall Leaf Art for Kids
A collection of stunning and vivid Fall Leaf Art Project for Kids. These are wonderful for children of all ages and include helpful templates and photo tutorials.
Garden Crafts for Kids
Making crafts that you can use alongside your gardening is such fun! Children love to be in the outdoors working with their hands and these crafts
Geology Crafts for Kids
Geology opens the door for lots of hands on crafty fun! Use these projects to learn about the world around you, from Rocks and Minerals, to Fossils, to the Earths' core! These make great Science Projects as well!!
Geography Crafts for Kids
As we learn all about the world around us we'll be making some fun Geography themed crafts as well! From a paper-mache globe, to a terrain collage this section of our site has some fun ideas!
History Resources for Kids
We are using the Mystery of History in our classroom this year, and this page has all of the crafts, activities and printables that we'll be using alongside this amazing program!
India Crafts for Kids
Learning about the different countries of the world can be lots of fun! Use our country themed crafts and activities to enhance your geography unit studies on India. Children can make their own beautiful oil pastel creations with our step by step tutorials.
Insect Crafts for Kids
We haven't quite done a specific unit on insects future! For now we've got a couple of fun crafts you can do when learning about insect life-cycles!
Japan Crafts for Kids
Because of the many cultural differences, learning about Japan is quite fun for many children, especially all the beautiful artforms in Japanese culture!
Native American Crafts for Kids
We are learning all about Native American tribes! Each year we'll cover different tribes and share the different crafts and activities we do along the way! These projects are perfect for your homeschool classroom or even for larger co-ops and groups.
Ocean Crafts for Kids
God has placed so many beautiful and interesting creatures in our oceans! Make these fun crafts as you learn about all of them! From Sea Urchins to Clown Fish these projects would fit wonderfully with your Ocean Unit Study
Owl Crafts for Kids
We spent an entire unit just learning about owls! Here are some quick and easy owl crafts that help you children learn about all the different and amazing types of owls God created!
Patriotic Crafts for Kids
These Patriotic crafts are perfect for learning about landmarks and holidays these are educational, fun and patriotic! A great way to add to your American History projects. Click Here
Pioneer Crafts for Kids
Living in Oregon we've found many opportunities to learn about the Pioneers....and we've made lots of fun crafts alongside our studies, including yarn dolls, covered wagons and quill pens to name a few!
This is a small collection of art projects that focus on teaching children watercolor techniques paired alonside key scriptures. These make wonderful gifts or art to hang around your home.
Space Crafts for Kids
These are some fun crafts and activities you can do with your children as you learn about the beautiful and amazing universe God created. Study the planets, stars, and heavenly bodies and use these projects to show mastery of what you've learned.
We do have some favorite brands and products for stocking your art supply closet. Everything in our Favorite picks is recommended because we believe they are HIGH quality with a LOW price so be sure to check them out.