♦ And Man created the plastic bag and the tin and aluminum can and the cellophane wrapper and the paper plate, and this was good because Man could then take his automobile and buy all his food in one place and He could save that which was good to eat in the refrigerator and throw away that which had no further use. And soon the earth was covered with plastic bags and aluminum cans and paper plates and disposable bottles and there was nowhere to sit down or walk, and Man shook his head and cried: “Look at this Godawful mess.” ~Art Buchwald, 1970 ♦
Lets face it ! Slowly and slowly our mother earth is nearing its death and its no one else but we human beings who are responsible for it. Our ways of living and the pace with which we are using our natural resources for our own good, everything has impacted the environment badly. Adverse climate changes have started to occur which is an another contribution from our side. The damage has already started and if all this continues for long, the death will be inevitable. Therefore its our first and foremost responsibility to save our planet earth.
Now the question comes what should be done and how we can contribute to save our environment ?
These are few things which are not as difficult to follow as we think and if we bring them to practice in our daily lives, certainly it will help increase the life of earth by many folds.
At home –
♦ Lights, bulbs and fans of your room should be switched off while you leave your room. Also don’t keep your electronics like TVs, Ovens, Laptops etc. in stand-by mode as they consume lot of power even when not switched on.
♦ Use CFL’s (compact fluorescent light bulbs) instead of incandescent bulbs for they help in reducing CO2 emissions ,save lot of energy and even your electricity bills.
♦ Turn Vegetarian 🙂
♦ Watch your water usage as this is very important. If there is any sort of leakage, get it fixed immediately.
♦ Regularly clean air filters of air conditioners so that they do not have to work more for cooling or heating your home.
♦ Put biodegradable and non-biodegradable waste in separate bins so that non-biodegradable waste like plastic bottles etc cab be recycled again thus reducing powerful greenhouse gas emissions.
♦ Plant as many trees as possible in and around your locality. Free seedlings for planting trees are easily available.
Try using public transport as much as possible but when travelling by your own car –
♦ Shut the engine off when in a parking lot or when you sit in a carpool lane as it can help in saving lot of gas which is other wise wasted .
♦ Pollution can be decreased if we keep a check on the pressure of the tires as proper inflated tires help in improving the mileage of car .
♦ Also greenhouse gas emissions can be reduced if we change the air filters on time which in turn increase the life of engine improving over all mileage.