The condition is also known as acid reflux, or GORD - gastro oesophageal reflux disease.
The most common sign of heartburn is burning pain just under the breastbone, a nasty taste, or fluid at the back of the throat.
Research by Nexium Control has revealed that over two million people in the UK could feel anxious this bank holiday, due to the fear of heartburn symptoms when eating away from home.
More than a third - 38 per cent - of frequent heartburn sufferers say they find the holidays to be particularly difficult for symptoms.
More than one in eight - 13 per cent - of frequent heartburn sufferers said their symptoms prevented them from enjoying family events, with the same number saying that symptoms made them a moodier person.
Heartburn symptoms: Food can affect the condition
However, even those who put aside their anxious feelings to attend social events, 17 per cent were likely to leave early to avoid experiencing the pain of heartburn, which can include difficulty swallowing, abdominal pains and a burning sensation at the back of the throat.
GP Dr Sarah Jarvis said: “Celebratory Easter feasts are likely to cause discomfort for heartburn sufferers as quite a few of the commonly served dishes are considered to be triggers.
“The cocoa found in chocolate is a well-known heartburn trigger, which causes the oesophageal sphincter to relax, allowing gastric contents to rise.
“This causes a burning sensation in the oesophagus.
“Chocolate also contains theobromine and caffeine, which can often increase symptoms.”
Heartburn: Symptoms can be triggered by food
In the UK there are 8.2 million frequent heartburn sufferers, who experience symptoms twice a week or more.
Heartburn is caused by stomach fluid, which contains strong digestive acids to break down food, leaking out of the stomach and travelling up toward the oesophagus.
When asked which foods were particularly bad for causing heartburn, frequent sufferers revealed that other foods they chose to avoid included crisps - 12 per cent, tomato salad - 18 per cent - barbecued food - 23 per cent - and garlic - 12 per cent.
Cheese and red wine, oranges, peppermint, and nuts can also be problematic for people.
Frequent sufferers can often struggle to stay in control of their symptoms, having to treat an average of more than four times per day to find relief.
Heartburn: Easter could trigger symptoms
The cocoa found in chocolate is a well-known heartburn trigger
More than a third - 39 per cent - said having to repeatedly take medication to treat the symptoms of heartburn is particularly difficult.
Many over-the-counter treatments, such as antacids and alginates, only provide short-term relief, meaning symptoms can come back.
More than half - 52 per cent - of frequent heartburn sufferers find the unpredictability of when their symptoms will occur challenging and therefore difficult to treat.
Three out of four frequent heartburn sufferers report that heartburn interferes with their sleep, negatively impacting mood and daily function.
This is because when people are sitting or standing, gravity helps keep gastric acid in the stomach.
Nexium Control can provide 24 hour protection from the symptoms of heartburn with just one tablet per day for up to 14 consecutive days.