There are many more ways to save money at home, besides just turning off the lights. Here are a few more ways you can reduce your electricity bill.
Turn off the lights when they’re not in use: this is probably one of the easiest and simplest things to do, but sometimes, we forget!
Use task lighting: instead of lighting up large rooms with ceiling fixtures, use smaller lamps to light up only the spaces you need.
Use natural light: There’s no need to turn on the lights when there’s plenty of sunlight right outside of your window. Not only does this save lots of money during the day, but it’s environmentally friendly. Painting the walls with brighter, more reflective paint can help brighten the room.
Use LED lighting: LEDs (Light-Emitting diode) are generally more expensive, but they have a much longer life-span than the regular light bulbs, making them very cost-efficient.
Lower the thermostat temperature when you’re not home or overnight: doing this can help you save 5% to 10% on your electricity bill.
Avoid heating areas that don’t need heating: Such spaces include the garage, crawlspaces, and other storage areas.
Only heat areas that you need: instead of heating up an entire room or house, just use portable heaters to heat up the areas that are being occupied.
Keep windows and doors shut: don’t let the heat escape!
Recommended Heat settings:
Take showers instead of baths: showers use about half the amount of water as baths do.
Keep showers short: limit your shower time as much as possible and turn off the water while lathering.
Only use the dishwasher when you have a FULL LOAD: if you’re hand washing your dishes, don’t leave the tap running and don’t let the tap run on full pressure.
Do not defrost food under cold water: plan ahead and defrost food in the fridge or in a single pot of water.
Wash laundry with cold water when possible: also wash only when there is a full load.
Use smaller appliances: instead of using a full oven, use a smaller toaster oven that will use less energy.
Avoid using appliances to defrost food: plan ahead and use your fridge instead.
Be ready after pre-heating: Make sure you’re ready to put everything in the oven when the temperature is right! You don’t want to leave the oven on while you’re still mixing in ingredients.
Air-dry dishes and clothes when possible: dishes will dry fairly quickly on a rack.
Keep doors closed: make sure you know what you want when you open the fridge and avoid leaving it open for long amounts of time. For your oven, you want the seal on the door to be tight so that heat doesn’t escape.
Keep appliances clean: this will maximize the appliance’s efficiency and keep it running for a longer time.
Match pan sizes to element sizes: if the element is larger than the pot or pan, wasted heat will escape from the sides.
Use timers and thermostats when cooking: Overcooking your food wastes energy and ruins your meal too!
Turn off the oven 15-20mins earlier: the food will continue to cook while reducing the amount of energy used.
Turn off all equipment that is not in use: Leaving on your electronics when you’re not using them can waste a lot of energy. If you MUST leave your computer on, turn off the monitor and speakers. Avoid using standby settings for your electronics because energy is still being used.
Unplug all chargers for laptops and cellphones: Even though your phone isn’t plugged into the charger, small amounts of energy still run through the cord if it is left in the outlet. Larger chargers, such as laptop chargers, take more energy. Also remember that even though your device has been fully charged, the flow of energy hasn’t stopped!
Use rechargeable batteries: Upfront, rechargeable batteries and buying a charger are more expensive, but over time, they save you from constantly buying new batteries. Rechargeable batteries can be reused up to 500 – 1000 times and may cost around $50. Buying that many disposable batteries can cost up to $1000 or more!
Energy Savings Kit (ESK): If you are a low-income household in BC, you can be eligible to receive a free energy saving kit from BC Hydro. The energy saving kit gives simple ways to help people reduce their electricity bill and protect the environment. The kit will contain several compact fluorescent light bulbs, wheatherstripping, fridge and freezer thermometers, and an energy-efficient showerhead. These kits are also available for residents living in apartments.
For more information on the Energy Savings Kit, click here.
Energy Conservation Assistance Program: This program aims to help low-income households make saving energy easier. Free of charge, BC Hydro, Fortis BC, and the Energy Conservation Assistance Program will provide personalized home-energy evaluations, installations of energy-efficient products, and personal energy-saving tips for your home and family.
For more information about the Energy Conservation Assistance Program, click here.
Want To Save More?
For even more tips and details on being power smart, visit the following links: