Arctic Sea Ice Loss Affects Beluga Migration
Global warming and climate change affects not just people, but even animals. Sea creatures are affected by global warming as well. Arctic sea lice loss affects beluga migration as well as its habitat.
While sea ice loss doesn't affect some sea creatures, others have been affected by it. This is the case with beluga, where some beluga species have been affected while others have not. The Arctic Sea is taking longer to freeze because of a rise in ocean temperature. This has been affecting beluga migration, which can disrupt the ecosystem there as well.
Beluga in general can respond to climate change fairly easily. This has been observed by Donna Hauser, lead author of the study and a postdoctoral researcher from the University of Washington. She has said that study of beluga migration could be complicated because not all beluga species respond in the same way towards climate change.
Two types of beluga population are in the Bering Sea in the winter, according to UW Today. These two beluga populations are genetically distinct from one another. These are the Chukchi beluga and the Beaufort beluga.
The Chukchi beluga time their migration based on how much ice is in the sea. Lesser ice would make them delay their migration. The Beaufort beluga though isn't affected by this and would still feed into the Bering Sea regardless of ice condition there, as Science Daily notes.
Studies about the beluga whale are just starting. Not too much information has been known about them, since the beluga lives in some of the harshest places known. Overall though migrations of whales have been changing. Whales are now seeing migration patterns change within a generation. Usually such changes would take many generations before it would be established.
The migration data for beluga whales have been taken from two different time periods. One data was taken in in the 1990s while the other was in the 2000s. The two data has shown researchers when beluga groups would pass by certain key areas in their migration route. Through this, the researchers have been able to note changes in migration behavior in the different beluga groups.
As climate change continues, different animals respond to it in different ways. Arctic Sea ice loss affects beluga migration, which can have consequences on the ecosystem. In another news, the world's oldest killer whale has died.
New Fuel Economy: How Trump’s New Fuel Policies Affect Car Owners and Gas Prices
President Trump's rules and regulations on fuel is set to impact the auto industry and its customers significantly.
Global Warming Wrecks Havoc In Arctic's Wildlife
Global warming causes plants in the low Arctic of Greenland to bloom sooner than usual, while the emergence of others are delayed. Warmer winters cause spring to come sooner, triggering the changes in nature's clock, and wrecking havoc in its wildlife.
Aerosol Emission Reduces Impact Of Global Warming On The Arctic
Recovered Russian climate observations show a greater sea ice expansion before the 1970s when the Clean Air regulation took effect to curb gas emissions. Scientists conclude that humans may have altered Arctic sea ice for longer than we previously thought.
Global Warming: Antartica Weather To Blame For Fastest Melting Glacier
New research says that local Antarctica weather is the driving force behind the fastest melting glacier ever recorded. The reason for the rapid melting of the Pine Island glacier was previously blamed on continental winds.
Is The Great Barrier Reef Dead? Here's What Scientists Say
The Great Barrier is not dead...yet. According to scientists, the reef is hanging by a thread and will most deifintely be wiped out from the face of the Earth if governments continue to promote the use of coal.
MORE IN ITECHPOST
Samsung And Apple's Rival Could Unveil It's First In-screen Fingerprint Sensor Smartphone
Vivo may release a smartphone featuring a fingerprint scanner embedded under the display and might just beat Apple and Samsung in the next-generation fingerprint scanner race.
'Tokyo Ghoul' Season 3 Delayed By Its Live-Action Movie? Ken Kenaki Returns With Another Identity?
"Tokyo Ghoul" season 3's release is delayed and there are countless speculations as to why it is being pushed back. Reports claim that the show is to give way to "One Punch Man" and "My Hero Acdemia" but new rumors say that it's lack of materials and storyline as well as its live-action movie are causing the delay.
Clash Of Clans Latest Update: New Features And Upgrades Coming To Builder Hall Level 6; Night Witch, Roaster Added
Builder Hall Level 6 will be upgraded and will have new features once the Clash of Clans latest update rolls out. Two new units, Night Witch and Roaster are also coming.