Russia Is Pressed on Nuclear Waste Dumping
By DAVID E. PITT,
Published: December 5, 1993
UNITED NATIONS, Nov. 29— Three weeks after 37 countries approved a legally binding ban on dumping low-level radioactive waste at sea, Russia is coming under increasing diplomatic pressure to pledge a permanent end to the practice, especially in the Arctic.
Although Britain, France, China and Belgium joined Russia in abstaining from voting on the ban and may decide to defy it, the effectiveness of the newly strengthened treaty -- known as the London Convention -- will hinge mainly on Russia's actions, diplomats and environmental experts agree.
There is concern that if Russia resumes dumping, as it has warned it may do, much of the material will end up in a disposal zone that the Russian military has been using for decades, off the archipelago of Novaya Zemlya in the Arctic Ocean. Many scientists view the Arctic ecosystem as particularly fragile, and suspect that the movement of pack ice may play a role in spreading radioactivity and other pollution over vast areas.
There is also concern that radioactive waste may be affecting the health of Eskimos and other indigenous people for whom fish and marine mammals like seals and whales are important food sources.
"It's a pretty dismal picture," said Scott Hajost, a former State Department negotiator who is international counsel for the Environmental Defense Fund. "But the clear hope is that the spotlight now being turned on the Russians will have some impact on the dumping question."
Under the rules of the London Convention, any of the 71 signatory countries has 100 days from Nov. 12 -- the day the total ban on dumping radioactive waste was approved -- to file a formal objection to any treaty change, in effect reserving the right to ignore the new prohibition on low-level waste dumping. Unlike most countries with radioactive waste disposal problems, Russia is not already constrained from dumping by a separate regional treaty.
The Arctic is the last major geographic area that lacks a regional environmental-protection agreement, and progress toward one has been slow.
Russia's Environment Minister, Viktor Danilov-Danilyan, said this month that while his Government supports the idea of a total legal prohibition, it lacks the money and technical expertise to build enough land-based storage sites for its low-level wastes and will probably have to resume ocean dumping of those materials by 1995.
Some countries, especially the United States, assert that the Russians could abide by the dumping ban if they chose, but are trying to use concern over the marine environment to pry new assistance, especially hard currency, out of the West.
But other nations expressed willingness to examine Russia's case for new aid, particularly technical help in building storage sites, and called for an effort to try to distinguish what Russia wants from what it really needs.
In line with this, the London Convention signers -- including the United States -- agreed this month to form a team of experts to help Russia assess its waste-storage requirements, and called on Moscow "to provide appropriate access and support."
They also gave Russia until Feb. 1 to provide a description of its existing storage and treatment sites, and a full inventory of its low-level liquid waste -- the vast bulk of it a byproduct of the reactors that power its submarines and icebreakers.
Maps shows the location of Novaya Zemlya.