Intel working on a new system to boost Stephen Hawking’s typing speed by 10x
Share This article
Stephen Hawking has done wonders for every scientific field. Not only has his own research in physics and cosmology been useful for other scientists, but he has inspired countless people to learn more about the scientific method and the fabric of reality. As we are all well aware, Hawking is paralyzed due to a degenerative disease called amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). He uses small muscle twitches in his face to select words on a custom computer system so he can communicate. Sadly, his condition has progressed to the point where he can only manage roughly one word per minute. After meeting with Hawking himself, Intel’s CTO Justin Rattner is spearheading a project to improve Hawking’s computer system, and allow for an increase in words per minute.
Hawking can use other muscles in his face, so Intel is using his cheek twitch, mouth movements, and eyebrow movements to allow more nuanced control of the computer. In combination with an improved text prediction engine, and possibly use of facial recognition (think a high-resolution Kinect), the research team is set on getting Hawking back up to his previous five words per minute. If all goes well, the system might even boost that number upwards of ten.
Keep in mind that this research isn’t just for Hawking. The technology developed here can be used in a broader context of smart gadgetry and assistive tech. Elderly and disabled people will undoubtedly benefit heavily from the software and hardware being developed for a person with such severe physical limitations. By adding more sensors like cameras, accelerometers, and microphones to the system while connecting that data to online services like chat programs and social networks, people who once were extremely isolated from society can maintain close personal connections.
Facial recognition is getting substantially better. Not only are companies like Google using it to interact with your tablets and smartphones, but the government is using it to find people. Increasingly, these sensors are being used for entertainment in video games to personalize the experience. The field of biometrics and assistive tech is already large, and it’s only increasing in complexity and capabilities.
The medical field has a lot to gain from behavioral biometrics as well. Using computers and sensors to sense changes in gait, metabolism, weight, and heart rate will significantly improve doctors’ ability to diagnose illnesses quickly and accurately. Instead of waiting for symptoms to increase to the point where a patient would notice them, small changes can be picked up extremely early, and treated accordingly. Genetic markers for increased risk for diseases like Parkinson’s disease can be tested for, and those patients could be put on a 24/7 symptom watch. It’s only a matter of time before personal systems using specialized sensors start saving countless lives. This type of technology not only improves lives once disaster strikes, but helps avoid disaster in the first place.