For centuries archaeologists have been turning up peculiar skulls and strange artifacts that defy convenient explanation. Many of these artifacts have baffled scientists and challenged modern man’s view of history. Skulls in particular have the greatest potential value of unlocking the secrets of humanity’s past. Every discovery helps to unveil new truths about the way the world once was.
The following are some of the weirdest findings in the history of archaeology:
Alien-Like Skulls Discovered in Mexico
Archaeologists recently unearthed 13 alien-looking human skulls in a cemetery in western Mexico. The skulls date somewhere between 945 to 1308 A.D. Originally the skulls baffled researchers. However, under closer examination the skulls were discovered to be human skulls that formed into alien-like shapes. Why these individual skulls were warped is unknown. Cristina Garcia Moreno, a researcher from Arizona State University, told ABC News, “We don’t know why this population has specifically deformed heads.”
Some archaeologists believe that the skull deformation was a ritual among many indigenous groups in South America. Of the 25 burials in the cemetery, 17 were children between 5 months and 16 years of age. The skulls showed no signs of disease, which makes the cause of death rather mysterious.
The Starchild Skull
The Starchild skull is a mysterious 900 year-old skull found in Mexico that is believed in many circles to be the product of either extraterrestrial origin or genetic manipulation. Paranormal researcher Lloyd Pye, the owner of the skull, claims the specimen was discovered around 1930 in a mine tunnel in Mexico. Pye has conducted many tests on the skull and believes that it’s a hybrid offspring of an extraterrestrial and a human female.
The Starchild skull is vastly different from the shape of a human skull. It’s a lot bigger and rounder, and has abnormally shaped eye sockets. There are also no frontal sinuses. Pye has documented at least 25 major physical differences between the Starchild skull and a normal human skull. Some scientists, however, believe the skull exhibits all of the characteristics of a human child who has died as a result of congenital hydrocephalus.
Alien Skull Found In Bulgaria?
A mysterious skull was discovered in the mountains of Bulgaria in 2001. Primary DNA test results revealed the presence of a material that doesn’t match human bones and the skull is unlike any skeletal remains ever found. Along with the skull discovery, a small, disc-shaped metal fragment was also found. This skull is currently the subject of scientific scrutiny and it is unknown whether it’s a hoax or not. The 38 year-old man who found the skull is said to have only shared it with a narrow circle of scientists and people with a pronounced interest in the paranormal.
The notorious horned skull has been documented over and over, but still no one is sure whether or not it is a hoax. Even if it is real, the specimens are more likely cases of anatomical curiosity than they are proof of demons or aliens. The skull was supposedly found in the 1880s in a large burial mound in Sayre. The archaeological team who made the discovery was supposedly highly regarded in the field.
The following report was made: “The skeletons belonged to anatomically normal men with the exception of bony projections located about two inches above the eyebrows. It appeared that the skulls had horns. The bones were characterized as giant, as they were representative of people over seven feet tall”. Scientists estimated that the bodies had been buried around A.D. 1200. However, these artifacts were stolen and never seen again. There are some photographs, but that hasn’t stopped skeptics from calling bullshit.
The discovery of peculiar artifacts–skulls, artifacts, even crop circles–is naturally met with skepticism. This is not only to be expected, it’s healthy. However, in our haste to apply the scientific method, it’s also equally important to approach new findings with an open mind, remembering that science is only flashlight in the dark.