Common Misconceptions About Dental Health
In an effort to improve public health, many medical professionals are striving to dispel common misconceptions about dental and oral conditions. Even though information is literally at our fingertips through Internet searches, myths and misconceptions still exist. Some folks simply overlook the importance of visiting the dentist and practicing good oral hygiene while others may believe in common falsehoods that can negatively affect oral health and general well-being. Following are three leading dental myths that need to be set straight.
Myth 1: Brushing Your Teeth is Enough
While brushing one’s teeth is very important to controlling the development of plaque and oral bacteria growth, it is not enough. Brushing, when done thoroughly and properly, only cleans about 70% of a person’s mouth. A toothbrush may clean the outer surfaces of teeth quite well but it cannot clean deep between teeth and along the gums as flossing can. Flossing is an essential component of a great oral hygiene regimen. We recommend flossing once a day, preferably at night.
Myth 2: A White Smile is a Healthy Smile
Many people believe that a smile that appears healthy is healthy. Just because teeth are white and straight, does not mean they are healthy. For example, many things can be wrong with a tooth that are not visually detectable. This is why a dentist, for example, uses diagnostic tools like X-rays and intraoral cameras to evaluate the health of all a tooth’s structures.
Myth 3: Cavities are the Primary Cause of Tooth Loss
Cavities are often blamed as the underlying reason for most tooth loss but the truth is that periodontal (gum) disease is actually the leading cause of tooth loss. This is because periodontal disease leads to teeth lacking support and along with tartar accumulation; teeth will eventually loosen and fall out.
Tooth loss is devastating – especially on one’s oral health. If you have lost teeth, we recommend reviewing your tooth replacement options as soon as possible. Our oral surgeon places dental implants, a permanent tooth replacement solution that looks and feels very natural.
Call our practice, Charlottesville Oral Surgery & Dental Implant Center, today to schedule an appointment.