Like all species within the Aipysurus genus, the leaf-scaled sea snake is an entirely aquatic species, never venturing onto land, not even to breed (6). Typically a solitary reptile (1) (2), the leaf-scaled sea snake is nevertheless sometimes found at coral outcrops with other sea snake species (1) (2), and although venomous it is rarely aggressive (3).
As is true of all sea snakes, the leaf-scaled sea snake is an air-breathing reptile, but it is capable of remaining underwater for up to two hours at a time, before surfacing to breathe again. Its single, elongated lung, which extends for almost the entire length of its body, is highly efficient for gas exchange, and sea snakes are also able to absorb oxygen through their skin when underwater. All sea snakes have specialised nostril valves which prevent water from entering the lung when submerged (2).
Living in the marine environment poses several other challenges, and as in other sea snake species, the leaf-scaled sea snake has a specialised gland under its tongue which enables it to excrete excess salt from its body. A sea snake sheds its skin approximately once every two to six weeks, by rubbing its lips against something hard such as coral until the loosened skin is anchored there. The sea snake then crawls forwards, leaving the skin turned inside out behind it. By shedding its skin so frequently, a sea snake can get rid of the many marine species, such as algae and barnacles, which become attached to it (2).
Like most species of sea snake, the leaf-scaled sea snake is viviparous, meaning that it gives birth to live young rather than laying eggs (2) (3). Mating in sea snakes is a lengthy affair, and the males are unable to disengage from the female until copulation is complete. The gestation period of the leaf-scaled sea snake is thought to be between six and seven months, after which time a small brood is born. Generally, sea snakes are long-lived and slow-growing (2), and the leaf-scaled sea snake is thought to have a lifespan of approximately eight to ten years and to reach maturity at two years old (1).
The leaf-scaled sea snake feeds on small coral reef fish (1) (2) (3), including wrasse (Halichoeres species), gudgeons (Eleotridae species) and eels (Anguilliformes) (2). It hunts its prey by poking its head into hollows and crevices within the reef (1) (2), before immobilising its quarry with a quick strike (1).