Response from LDA to the draft Australian Curriculum
Response from LDA to the Draft Australian Curriculum, with Specific Reference to the Sections of theEnglish Curriculum Relating to the Teaching of Beginning ReadingSubmitted to the Australian Curriculum and Reporting Authority30 May 2010Learning Difficulties Australia is an association of teachers and other professionals dedicated toimproving the performance of underachieving students through effective teaching practices basedon scientific research. Our particular concern is with students who have learning difficulties, andparticularly students with reading difficulties, who comprise approximately 80 per cent of studentswho are identified as having a learning difficulty. Research evidence indicates that effective teachingof reading in the early years of schooling is of critical importance in the development of literacy andin the prevention of reading difficulties. Our comments on the Draft Australian Curriculum thereforerelate specifically to those sections of the Curriculum that are relevant to the teaching of earlyreading, and the extent to which the curriculum is consistent with what is known about how childrenlearn to read, and what strategies are most effective in teaching them to read.Background to the Teaching of Reading in AustraliaSince the late 70s and early 80s the dominant approach to the teaching of reading in Australia wasthe whole language approach. This approach assumed that children learned to read in the sameway that they learned to speak, that is, by exposure to books and reading in their environment.Under this approach there was no specific teaching of phonics. Over the last ten years, and inresponse to the increasing evidence of the importance of phonics in learning to read, the wholelanguage approach was modified to include a limited amount of phonics instruction, usually in theform of implicit or embedded phonics, where children are taught letter-sound relationships duringthe reading of connected text. This so-called balanced or multi-cueing approach often does notinclude systematic or explicit instruction in letter sound correspondences, which research evidencehas identified as the most effective way of teaching reading. Following concerns expressed byleading reading researchers regarding the discrepancy between the teaching practices adoptedunder the whole language or balanced and multi-cueing approaches and the scientific evidence withregard how children learn to read, a National Inquiry into the Teaching of Literacy (NITL) wasestablished to investigate the teaching of literacy in Australia. One of the major recommendationsof this Inquiry, which reported in December 2005, was that:teachers provide systematic, direct and explicit phonics instruction so that children master theessential alphabetic code-breaking skills required for foundational reading proficiencyAnd that this should be included as part of:an integrated approach to reading that supports the development of oral language, vocabulary,grammar, reading fluency, comprehension and the literacies of new technologies (NITL, 2005,Recommendation 2).
These recommendations were consistent with the recommendations of similar inquiries in theUnited States (National Reading Panel, 2000) and in the UK (Rose, 2006). However, while thereports in the US and the UK led to changes in approaches to the teaching of reading in thesecountries, supported by legislation, there was relatively little response to the NITL report inAustralia, and little evidence of changes either in teaching practices or in the training of teachers.The only exception to this is the recent development by the NSW Department of Education of guidesfor the teaching of phonemic awareness and phonics, which teachers in NSW are able to downloadfrom the Department’s website.Teaching of Reading and the Australian CurriculumIn the light of this background, it is both significant and welcome that the draft AustralianCurriculum for English recognises the role of phonics in the teaching of initial reading, and specifieswhat children need to know in order to read, including the development of phonological andphonemic awareness, knowledge of letter/sound correspondences, blending and segmentation ofsounds in words, and the application of this knowledge in sounding out and decoding.At the same time, we see a number of weaknesses in the draft Australian Curriculum, which maylimit the extent to which the intentions of the Curriculum in relation to the teaching of initialreading, including the systematic teaching of phonics, may be achieved.1 There is a failure to distinguish between the two processes involved in reading, ie. decodingand reading comprehension, as described in the simple model of reading. This leads to a confusingmix of methods, and a continuing reliance on the three cueing system, which is associated with thewhole language approach and makes the assumption that meaning of text is derived by thesynthesis of semantic, syntactic, and graphophonic cues. It is now recognized that this assumption isseriously flawed, and that pictures, guessing and use of context play no part in word recognition.Word recognition depends on recognition of grapheme phonemic correspondences, either throughdecoding or sight word recognition, while comprehension depends on general languagecomprehension, which is common to both listening comprehension and reading comprehension.Semantic and syntactic cues play no part in word recognition, and graphophonic cues play no part inreading comprehension. Failure to recognize this distinction could lead to the encouragement ofinappropriate strategies in teaching children to read.2 The structure of the document makes it difficult to follow the logical sequence of steps in thesystematic teaching of phonics. The curriculum is divided into three strands, Language, Literatureand Literacy, with most of the content relating to the teaching of phonics placed in the Languagestrand. However, content relating to reading strategies is placed in the Literacy strand, which coversboth reading and reading comprehension, and includes references to the use of phonic knowledgeto read text. For example, under Reading Strategies at the Kindergarten level, students are expectedto ‘use emerging grammatical and phonic knowledge, and meaning and context to read and viewprint and digital texts’, while at Year 4, they are expected to use ‘word identification strategies suchas predicting using context and knowledge of phonics, grammar, sentence structure and textorganisation’. The achievement standards, on the other hand, are presented separately forlistening, reading and writing. This makes it difficult to relate the achievement standards to thecontent statements, and to follow the progression of skills relating to the achievement of reading.This organization of the curriculum differs markedly from that followed in other comparable
curriculum documents. For example, in the 1997 California English Language Arts ContentStandards, developed after the report of the US National Reading Panel and in consultation withleading reading experts, the English curriculum is divided into four major areas (Reading, Writing,Listening and Speaking, and Written and Oral English Language Conventions), with each of thesemain areas divided into sections. The sections under Reading include Word Analysis, Fluency andSystematic Vocabulary Development, Reading Comprehension, and Literary Response and Analysis,with the Word Analysis, Fluency and Systematic Vocabulary Development section further sub-divided under the headings Concepts About Print, Phonemic Awareness, Decoding and WordRecognition, and Vocabulary and Concept Development. These categories are consistent fromKindergarten to Grade 10, although obviously the nature and complexity of the content changesfrom year to year. This allows for tracking of development in specific skill areas from one level to thenext. The recently released US Draft Common Core State Standards for English Arts and Literacy alsoincludes a very useful two page summary of Foundational Reading Skills covering Kindergarten toGrade 3, under the headings Print Concepts, Phonological Awareness, Phonics and WordRecognition, and Fluency. These summaries provide a very useful framework for getting anoverview of the areas to be covered in the teaching of early reading skills, and an indication of thecontent to be covered at each year level. It is suggested that ACARA develop a similar summary forthe Australian curriculum to provide an overview of the content statements as well as the moredetailed elaborations that relate specifically to the teaching of beginning reading.3 In the case of the draft Australian Curriculum the descriptor headings used to coverphonological and phonemic awareness and phonics are not consistent with the terms generally usedto cover these areas, and could lead to confusion. Skills relating to phonological and phonemicawareness are listed under the heading Sounds letters and words, while skills relating to phonics(letter sound correspondences) come under the descriptor heading Phonic and Word Knowledge. Itis suggested that to avoid confusion between the different skills relating to phonological andphonemic awareness and phonics, the descriptor heading Phonological and phonemic awareness beused to cover skills relating to phonological and phonemic awareness, and the descriptor headingPhonics and Word Identification Skills be used to cover the skills relating to the recognition of lettersound correspondences and the identification of words through decoding or sight word recognition.In this case, sight word recognition would come under the latter heading, instead of the separateheading Sight Word Knowledge as in the Year 1 descriptor headings. (It should be noted that in thecurrent document sight word recognition at the Kindergarten level is placed under the descriptorheading Phonic and Word Knowledge, which is inconsistent with the placement of sight wordknowledge at the Year 1 level. This inconsistency needs to be resolved.)4 In the United States and particularly in the UK, a distinction is made between teachingapproaches based on analytic phonics and teaching approaches based on synthetic phonics. Thedraft Australian Curriculum makes no reference to the differences between these two approaches tothe teaching of phonics. While recognizing that the Australian Curriculum does not presume to tellteachers how to teach but only what to teach, it is suggested that some understanding of thedifferences between these two approaches would be useful to teachers, since the approach adoptedhas implications for the pace of teaching and the order in which different skills or strategies aretaught. In the case of analytic phonics whole words are introduced and pronounced by the teacher,and the children’s attention is only subsequently drawn to letter sound correspondences. Soundingout and blending is introduced only after children have learned to read words by sight, often only
toward the end of the first year at school. Analytic phonics programs usually take up to three yearsto complete. In synthetic phonics programs sounding out and blending are taught from thebeginning of the first year at school, before books are introduced, and the basic program can becompleted in two to four months. Sight words are not introduced until children are familiar withletters and sounds, and have at least started to read words by blending and sounding out (Johnstonand Watson, 2005).5 Successful implementation of the curriculum, particularly as it relates to the teaching ofbeginning reading, will depend to a large extent on teacher training and professional development.Given the fact that relatively few teachers have been trained to teach phonics, and that thereremains among many teachers a negative attitude toward the teaching of phonics, this may wellprove to be a major barrier to improvement of reading instruction based on an effective phonics-based teaching program, as outlined in the curriculum.ConclusionLDA welcomes the emphasis on the teaching of phonics in the Australian Curriculum, and believesthat successful implementation of the curriculum as proposed could contribute to more effectiveteaching of initial reading, leading to improved reading standards and a reduction in the number ofchildren experiencing reading difficulties. At the same time, we note some weaknesses in theCurriculum, particularly in relation to the clarity of the document and the level of guidance providedto teachers in implementing the curriculum. We would strongly recommend that implementation ofthe curriculum be accompanied by an extensive program of teacher professional development toensure that the teachers responsible for teaching beginning reading are adequately trained, andhave a good understanding of how children learn to read, and the strategies that have proved to bemost effective in teaching beginning reading, and also that they are familiar with the theoretical andresearch literature relating to the effective teaching of reading. We would also recommend that inimplementingthe curriculum, provision be made for the identification of students who are failing to progress, sothat appropriate intervention can be applied at an early stage, with subsequent more intensiveprograms for students who fail to respond to initial intervention. Such a model could be based onthe Response to Intervention model (RTI), which has now been widely adopted in the United States,or the three wave model as recommended by Sir Jim Rose in his recent report on Identifying andTeaching Children and Young People with Dyslexia and Literacy Difficulties.Lyndsey NickelsPresident, Learning Difficulties AustraliaProfessor & NHMRC Senior Research Fellow,Macquarie Centre for Cognitive Science (MACCS),Institute of Human Cognition and Brain Sciences,Macquarie University, Sydney
ReferencesCalifornia English-Language Arts Content Standards K to 4 (1997). http://www.cde.ca.gov/be/st/ss/Common Core State Standards for English Language Arts and Literacy in History/Social Studies &Science (United States). (2010). http://www.corestandards.org/Standards/K12/Johnston, R. and Watson, J. (2005) Evidence to the UK Parliament Select Committee on Educationand Skills (UK Parliament Select Committee on Education and Skills Eighth Reporthttp://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm200405/cmselect/cmeduski/121/12106.htmNational Inquiry into the Teaching of Literacy (NITL). (2005). Teaching Reading: Report andRecommendations. Canberra: Commonwealth of Australia.National Reading Panel (2000). Teaching Children to Read: An Evidence-Based Assessment of theScientific Research Literature and its Implications for Reading Instruction.http://www.nationalreadingpanel.org/default.htmRose, J. (2006). Independent review of the teaching of early reading. Bristol: Department forEducation and Skills. Retrieved April 12, 2006, fromwww.standards.dfes.gov.uk/rosereview/report.pdfRose, J. (2009). Identifying and Teaching Children and Young People with Dyslexia and LiteracyDifficulties. http://publications.dcsf.gov.uk/eOrderingDownload/00659-2009DOM-EN.pdf