In 1889, he emigrated to the United States. Arriving with only money borrowed from his travelling companion and friend, Oscar Asmussen. Initially Steinmetz was rejected for entry and placed in a pen for deportation. His twisted body and over-sized head were red flags that he was not fit to enter. In addition he had severely decayed teeth that had become infected on his trans-Atlantic voyage, and combined with a massive…
Monthly Archives: January 2014
This photograph depicts Steinmetz (far right, back row) along with fellow socialist students posing around the bust of German socialist hero Ferdinand Lasalle. The photo would lead authorities to them, and their illegal socialist newspapers Steinmetz left Germany to avoid arrest.
E.W. Rice, General Manager of General Electric recalls meeting Steinmetz. “I shall never forget our first meeting at Eickemeyers workshop in Yonkers. I was startled and somewhat disappointed by the strange site of a small, frail body surmounted by a large head, with long hair hanging to the shoulders, clothed in an old cardigan jacket, cigar in mouth sitting cross-legged on a laboratory work table. My disappointment was but…
In Schenectady, Steinmetz used his budding reputation as an “electrical genius” to build the G.E. team. “Steinmetz recruited a number of really talented people to the company. And I would say in the long run that was his greatest contribution to General Electric. Names that most people don’t know, but names that some people do, like Alexanderson for example. He was attracted to the idea of working for General Electric…
Steinmetz with former Presidents of the AIEE Steinmetz served as President AIEE, American International Electrical Engineers in 1902. This was an amazing accomplishment for a man not educated as an engineer. Thirteen years earlier in 1889 Steinmetz had been penniless, homeless, and on the run from German authorities seeking his arrest because of Socialist activities.
Steinmetz acted as President of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers (AIEE) from 1901 to 1902.
This groundbreaking article was published detailing Steinmetz’s findings regarding alternating current.
In 1893 Eickemeyer’s company, along with all of its patents and designs, was bought by the newly formed General Electric Company, where he quickly became known as the engineering wizard in GE’s engineering community.
Steinmetz died on October 26, 1923 and was buried in Vale Cemetery, Schenectady.
Karl August Rudolph Steinmetz is born.