In an increasingly globalised world, effective communication has and will continue to grow in importance. It is therefore paramount for good communication specialists to not only be aware of technological advances, but also have the ability to adapt accordingly.
With Artificial Intelligence (AI) taking on an increasingly critical role throughout businesses, we should assess how these developments could impact the communication profession.
Artificial Intelligence understands and applies human intelligence in computer programs.
What exactly is Artificial Intelligence?
It is widely perceived that researchers started investigating Artificial Intelligence after World War II; Alan Turing is among those accredited with one of those advances with his decision to program computers rather than building machines to delve into the matter.
Stanford University has defined Artificial Intelligence as the task of utilising science and engineering to understand and apply human intelligence to computer programs. Intelligence, according to this definition, is the inherently human ability to achieve goals in the world.
Therefore, most AI work involves approaching problem solving and simplification at current. It's presumed that some researchers aim to reach human-level intelligence eventually, something that could see reduced need for humans to work in a variety of fields.
Current developments in the area
Information Age recently reported that some of the world's largest technology companies have created an initiative to delve further into the realm of AI through open research.
Google, Amazon, Facebook, IBM and Microsoft say the purpose is to conduct investigations on transparency, reliability, ethics, trustworthiness, inclusivity and collaboration potential of the technology. While lobbying activities of governments have been denied, the conglomerate will publish proposed best practises for building AI systems.
The initiative clearly highlights how fast technology is changing, calling for professionals to adapt.
What are the possible implications for corporate communications?
National Geographic points to an Oxford University survey that claims nearly half of the world's jobs could be made obsolete by AI in the coming decades – with those professions that aren't grounded in physical work most at risk.
Luckily, the varied roles of communication specialists – especially in the creative department – allows some resilience to AI fully taking over in the near future.
However, despite the fact that communications can benefit from technological advancements in terms of message reach, professionals in the corporate world in particular need to ensure their skill sets adapt and evolve alongside computers.
Perhaps, the future will see a more pronounced emphasis on communication practitioners serving as an organisation's creative and ethical guide opposed to standardised process execution that can be more easily automated.
Essentially, the most logical approach for any long-term oriented professional is to stay alert, aware and critical about developments and continually add to existing skill sets and capabilities.