Mango is cultivated in the tropics. According to the National Mango Board, there are shipments from many countries in South America and the Caribbean countries in the United States, so you can find mangoes at the grocery store throughout the year. Approximately 100 calories for a mango, vitamin C, calcium, vitamin E, vitamin A are included.
Vitamin C is an essential vitamin for humans, according to the Nutrition Supplement Department. It is a water-soluble vitamin, it is not stored in the body, so it must be taken regularly. Vitamin C is necessary for the synthesis of collagen, normal growth and development, and protein found in the skin, tendons and ligaments. Vitamin C is an important antioxidant that protects cells from free radical damage. According to the Office of Dietary Supplements, vitamin C may serve as an antioxidant to prevent cardiovascular diseases and cancer, adult males need 90 mg of vitamin C per day, adult women need 75 mg is required. One cup of mango will provide 45 mg.
Mango also contains folic acid or vitamin B-9. This vitamin plays an important role in helping your body produce proteins and DNA that are components of neonatal cells. Therefore, obtaining sufficient folate is particularly important for pregnant women as it needs to meet the needs of rapidly dividing cells of developing babies. The mango cup provides 71 microgram folic acid. This is 18% of the folic acid required every day.
Vitamin E is a fat-soluble vitamin. It is an important antioxidant, which helps immune function. According to the Dietary Supplement Department, most Americans do not ingest vitamin E enough during meals. An adult needs 15 mg of vitamin E per day. One cup of mango will provide 1.85 mg.
Vitamin A is important for vision, bone growth and regeneration. It also plays a role in cell division and differentiation, according to the Nutraceuticals Department. Vitamin A deficiency is rarely seen in the United States, but if vitamin A intake is low, the ability to fight night blindness and infectious diseases may decrease. Mango is an excellent source of vitamin A, according to the National Mango Board. One cup of mango provides 63 mcg of RAE or retinol active equivalent which occupies biologically active vitamin A as retinol or carotenoid. For adult men, RAE of vitamin A is 900 mcg / day, adult women RAE 700 mcg is necessary.