Rambla Alcala, s/n – Castellón – Spain
Corporate Website – http://www.marmolesserrat.com
INFORMATION AND TERMINOLOGIES
Cookies are small files that websites, online stores, intranets, online or similar platforms, stored in the user’s browser to the visit and are necessary to provide the web browsing countless advantages in providing interactive services.
The following information on the possible types of cookies helps to better understand the functions that make it possible:
Session Cookies: These are temporary cookies that remain in the space of cookies on your computer until you close your browser, so that none is recorded on the user’s disk. Information obtained through these cookies serves to enable operational management with each of the users who are accessing simultaneously to the web.
Persistent Cookies: These cookies remain stored in the space of cookies from your computer after the browser is closed, and will consult this web page the next time you access it to recall information that facilitates navigation (directly access the service without need to make the login process) or the provision of a commercial service (offering products or services related to previous visits).
Cookies exchanged when navigating a web page can be:
Party cookies or own: they Are cookies generated by the websites you are visiting.
Third Party Cookies: they Are cookies that are received when browsing the website, but have been generated by a third service that is hosted on it. An example may be the cookie used by an ad or banner advertising is on the web page visited. Another may be the cookie used by a visitor counter hired by the website we visited.
Cookies can be used to:
technical purposes: They are also called “strictly necessary”. Allow the user to navigate through a website, platform or application and use of different options or services it exist as, for example, control traffic and data communication, identify the session, access parts of restricted access, remember the elements of an order, make the buying process an order, make the request for registration or participation in an event, use security features while browsing store content for broadcast video or sound or share content through social networks.
Customization: They allow each user to configure aspects such as the language in which you want to view the website, display formats, etc.
Analysis or performance: They measure the number of visits and navigation criteria different areas of web, application or platform and allows us to develop profiles of users’ browsing such sites, applications and platforms, in order to make improvements based analysis of data collected how users use the service. Advertising: Allows implement efficiency parameters in advertising offered on websites. Behavioral Advertising: Allows implement efficiency parameters in advertising offered on websites, based on information on user behavior obtained through continued observing their browsing habits, allowing to develop a specific profile to display advertising function thereof.
DETAIL OF COOKIES USED IN THIS SITE
Name: GOOGLE ANALYTICS
Supplier: GOOGLE ANAYTICS
Lingering duration (6 MESES)
Purpose: This cookie stores the origin of the visitor, the path followed to access either direct access from an external link from an e-mail link using certain keywords in a search engine, through a display campaign , or through an AdWords ad. It is used to calculate traffic from search engines, display advertising campaigns and navigation within the same web internal links. It is updated on every visit to the web.
HOW COOKIES BROWSER
Some people prefer not to enable cookies. This is why most browsers give you the ability to manage cookies that are appropriate for you.
In some browsers you can set up rules to manage cookies per site, which offers a more precise control over your privacy. This means you can disable cookies from all sites except those in which you trust, or even erase cookies already stored.
Here’s how to make these settings in different browsers:
For more information about the Google Chrome pulsa aquí
For more information about the Firefox pulsa aquí
For more information about the Opera pulsa aquí
For more information about the Internet Explorer pulsa aquí
For more information about the Safari click here
Enters the Safari > Preferences. En la sección Privacidad, pulsa el botón Detalles. Select the Web site that stores cookies and click Delete, or click Delete All to delete all cookies.