We start an early reading program since nursery school - in a playful and natural way. In elementary school and junior high school, our program focuses on reading fluency and promoting sophisticated vocabulary as well as reading enjoyment.
As part of the musical appreciation program, the students enjoy pieces of a different classical composer every month. We also start semi-private violin classes at the age of three.
We use a school adaptation to the Bits of Intelligence program to offer our students an enriched curriculum with various encyclopedic themes: Greek &Roman mythology, Classification of the Species, visual geography, great personages in history and science, among others. Kids also learn from a different culture every month.
Art is one of the backbones of our pedagogy. Children are introduced to a different artist each month. They also explore different creative expression techniques and develop thinking skills through art, a program inspired by Artful Thinking, developed at Harvard University.
Our schools teach classes in two foreign languages in addition to the mother tongue. Depending on the campus, we teach in Spanish, English, French, Chinese and Portuguese.
The youngest ones benefit from a visual program of quantity recognition, as well as practical activities - even algebra! We favor logical reasoning and practical application starting in elementary school.
science and technology
Our programs favor scientific reasoning, dialog and research.
Our children learn robotics, programming, coding and stop-motion animation. As a Microsoft Innovative Educator Expert and Skype Master Teacher, our founder has established a vast array or online learning experiences for our students to enjoy while connecting with peers and educators form around the world.
Children and teenagers have different opportunities for practical and experiential learning that are focused on their own interests, be it as extracurricular workshops, or as part of our acclaimed cloister program, held every year.