L.E.E.D. - Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design
The CWS C&D and Inert waste recycling facilities are recognized by the United States Green Building Council (USGBC) and its Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design Green Building Rating System (L.E.E.D.).
CONSTRUCTION WASTE MANAGEMENT & THE L.E.E.D. RATING SYSTEM
The L.E.E.D. Green Building Rating System is a voluntary, consensus-based national standard for developing high-performance, sustainable buildings. It is a self-assessing measurement tool, based on a point system, which focuses on a number of design and construction strategies aimed at reducing a building's environmental footprint. The rating system is divided into five environmental categories with opportunities for innovation credits as well. The accumulation of credits or points, awarded for compliance with requirements defined by the rating system, determines the level of certification of that building - certified, silver, gold, or platinum. For more information about the USGBC and to access the complete L.E.E.D. rating system and updates, please visit www.usgbc.org.
The intent of the Construction Waste Management Credit is to divert construction trash, demolition, packaging and land clearing debris from disposal in landfills or incinerators; to redirect recyclable recovered resources back to the manufacturing process; and to redirect reusable materials to appropriate sites.*
Materials & Resources Credit 2.1:
50 percent Diverted from Disposal1 Point
Requirement: Recycle and/or salvage at least 50 percent of non-hazardous construction and demolition debris. Develop and implement a construction waste management plan that, at a minimum, identifies the materials to be diverted from disposal and whether the materials will be sorted on-site or comingled. Excavated soil and land-clearing debris do not contribute to this credit. Calculations can be done by weight or volume, but must be consistent throughout.
Requirement: Develop and implement a construction waste management plan, quantifying material diversion goals. Recycle and/or salvage at least 50 percent of construction, demolition and packaging debris. Calculation may be done by weight or by volume, but must be consistent throughout.
Materials & Resources Credit 2.2:
75 percent Diverted from Disposal1 Point
Requirement: Recycle and/or salvage an additional 25 percent beyond MR Credit 2.1 (75 percent total) of nonhazardous construction and demolition debris. Excavated soil and land-clearing debris do not contribute to this credit. Calculations can be done by weight or volume, but must be consistent throughout.
Requirement: Develop and implement a waste management plan, quantifying material diversion by weight or volume, but consistently throughout. Recycle and/or salvage at least 75 percent total of construction debris , demolition and packaging waste.
Our current and former General Contractor clients include:
- Clark Construction
- Swinerton Builders
- C.W. Driver
- Matt Construction
- Balfour Beatty
- W.E. O'Neil
The CWS project Recycling Report is recognized by the USGBC as proof of L.E.E.D. compliance. The Recycling Report is produced and delivered free of charge. This complimentary service is available monthly, quarterly, or at the completion of your project. Download our report for further details about how you can maximize your recycling efforts.
By using CWS to haul and recycle your project's waste stream, you are assured of compliance with your L.E.E.D. recycling goals.