Food allergies and sensitivities can be the underlying causes of many childhood illnesses and symptoms without parents even being aware. However, taking certain steps can minimize, and in some cases even prevent, the onset of an allergic response.
An allergic response occurs when the body, for various reasons, identifies an otherwise harmless food as a dangerous invader. When this happens, the body creates an outpouring of antibodies to eliminate the invader. Allergic reactions fall into two categories: immediate and delayed reactions.
Immediate reactions can occur within minutes of eating the questionable food and often involve symptoms such as wheezing, skin rashes and excess mucous production. In rare situations, immediate reactions can be life-threatening due to the constriction of airways. This type of allergic response is called anaphylactic. An example of an anaphylactic allergic response is when a child’s throat begins to close following consumption of a peanut. Parents of children who suffer from anaphylactic reactions should always carry an EpiPen (a shot of epinephrine to inject into the skin) in case of emergency situations. Only three per cent of all children have anaphylactic reactions.
The second type of reaction is known as a delayed response. Most food sensitivities and intolerances fall into this category. Due to the delayed appearance of symptoms (anywhere from one hour to several days), these food allergies are more difficult to detect. For example, a child who is allergic to wheat may react one or two days later with dry skin or constipation. When food sensitivities go undetected, it is not uncommon for other ailments to begin “popping up” elsewhere in the body.
The odds of your baby developing an allergic response to specific foods are higher if:
Research has identified a variety of ways to delay the onset of, and even prevent, allergic responses from occurring in your little one. They are:
If you have any questions or concerns regarding your child’s diet, talk to your pediatrician or nutritionist.
Dr. Joey Shulman, DC, is head nutritionist for Sweetpea Baby Food - a line of top quality, frozen organic baby food. She is also founder and CEO of Shulman Weight Loss Clinic – a facility dedicated to long term and healthy weight loss results and is the author of Winning the Food Fight - Every Parent's Guide to Raising a Healthy, Happy Child (Wiley, 2003) and the national best sellers, The Natural Makeover Diet - 4 steps to Inner Health and Outer Beauty (Wiley, 2006) and The Last 15 - A Weight Loss Breakthrough (Wiley, 2008). Her most recent release, Healthy Sin Foods – Decadence without the Guilt (Penguin, 2009) offers delicious and decadent tasting food – guilt free! To learn more, visit http://www.sweetpeababyfood.com/ and http://www.drjoey.com/.