In this post you will find FREE winter / snow / rain colouring pages, puzzles, crafts and creative ideas for kids… send your sponsored child a snowball fight… enjoy!
WINTER / SNOW / RAIN ~ BIBLE VERSES
Job 37:6 He directs the snow to fall on the earth and tells the rain to pour down.
Job 38:22 Have you visited the storehouses of the snow or seen the storehouses of hail?
Psalm 51:7 Purify me from my sins, and I will be clean; wash me, and I will be whiter than snow.
(Isn’t that a wonderful promise?! All we have to do is hand them up handful by dismal handful!)
Psalm 147:16 He sends the snow like white wool; he scatters frost upon the ground like ashes.
Psalm 148:7-8 Praise the LORD from the earth, you creatures of the ocean depths, fire and hail, snow and clouds, wind and weather that obey him…
Proverbs 25:13 Trustworthy messengers refresh like snow in summer. They revive the spirit of their employer.
Isaiah 1:18 Come now, let’s settle this,” says the LORD. “Though your sins are like scarlet, I will make them as white as snow. Though they are red like crimson, I will make them as white as wool.
(Thank YOU Lord! I’ve always loved this Bible verse. It has always fascinated me, even as a little girl.)
Isaiah 55:10 The rain and snow come down from the heavens and stay on the ground to water the earth. They cause the grain to grow, producing seed for the farmer and bread for the hungry.
Daniel 7:9 I watched as thrones were put in place and the Ancient One sat down to judge. His clothing was as white as snow, his hair like purest wool. He sat on a fiery throne with wheels of blazing fire.
Matthew 28:3 His face shone like lightning, and his clothing was as white as snow.
Revelation 1:14 His head and his hair were white like wool, as white as snow. And his eyes were like flames of fire.
WINTER / SNOW / RAIN ~ FUN FACTS FOR KIDS
FREE Snowflake article for kids ~ putting God at the centre of our packages ~ in English and French and designed exclusively by Paper Gifts for Estefany for our Compassion children. But homeschoolers might like it too. There are two versions… one with photos and a blank one so you can add your own (photo suggestions and how-to instructions included).
Made in the image of God What does it mean to be created in the image of God? A simple lesson using a snowman. Genesis 1:27 memory verse card, devotional, puzzles and writing practice; free printable
What causes seasons? Information from a Biblical perspective
Find out about Angus, the world’s tallest snowman (1999) who was later ousted by Olympia Snowe, the world’s tallest snow-woman (2008). She stood 122 feet 1 inch (37.21 metres) high and wow… check out those eyelashes made from skis!
Snowflakes – God’s Exquisite Jewellery Examine this single, beautiful snowflake in incredible detail, send the photo and tell your sponsored child about it.
WINTER / SNOW / RAIN ~ COLOURING FOR KIDS ~ FREE PRINTABLE
Winter colouring (ministry-to-children) a couple of kids reading a book in front of a fire; chilly freezy winter days a perfect chance to give God praise; and God made the seasons – lesson (or letter) ideas about changing seasons and an unchanging God; free printable
Snowflake colouring with Bible verse from 2 Thessalonians 3:13 – Never be tired of doing right; free printable
A snowman juggling snowflakes – colouring free printable
Winter colouring pages snowmen; kids having fun; free printable
Snowflakes and cute singing birds with beanies – colouring free printable
Snow village – 5 colouring pages (Dover sample)
Snowman with dotted top hat – colouring in a fun doodle style; free printable
Snowman alphabet – to colour join the letters together to make your child’s name; cute; free printable
Kids playing in snow colouring pages (Google) free printable
Kids playing in snow colouring pages (Honking Donkey) free printable
12 Individual snowflakes to colour free printable
Snowflake – stained glass colouring book to purchase from Dover
Some ducks with umbrellas playing in the wind and rain complete with a Hebrew prayer asking God to take care of the weather; free printable
Playing in rain puddles – colouring An oriental-looking child holding an umbrella over a duck playing in the puddles
Rain colouring pages (Goodsearch)
Jazz up your colouring pages combine or shrink colouring pages to make a new scene, add a border, a title, a Bible verse and some clip art to make your colouring pages more interesting with this easy tutorial
WINTER / SNOW / RAIN ~ PUZZLES FOR KIDS ~ FREE PRINTABLE
Isaiah 1:18 – Bible fun memory verse Whiter than snow memory verse card, devotional, puzzle, writing practice; free printable
Snowmen – find the difference (Activity Village) between these two pictures then colour them in; free printable
Winter printables for younger children kids, animals and snowmen colouring pages; winter writing prompts, puzzles, copy work, activity placements; free printable
Winter / snow – colouring pages / puzzles / learn to draw free printable
Winter fun – lots of free snow and ice printables for kids Spelling, numbers, counting; free printable
Snow fun ~ hidden picture puzzle free printable
Winter / snow free printable puzzles for kids (Goodsearch)
Design your own puzzle specifically tailored for your child
WINTER / SNOW / RAIN ~ CRAFTS FOR KIDS ~ FREE PRINTABLE
Hand print snowflakes Trace hand prints onto white paper and cut to make a unique and beautiful snowflake design, just as God has made each of us unique, special and beautiful. Your children / grandchildren / students might like to be involved with this one
Snowflakes to make and hang; pretty; colourful; free printable
Snowflake ballerinas to make elegant ballerinas with beautiful snowflake skirts; free printable
Snowflake origami free printable
Snowflake Scrapbook paper (Activity Village) free printable
Make a paper snowflake; make a snowman collage using different shapes of paper; Snowman – build your own; snowmen (in colour or to colour) to use in crafts; glitter snowflakes to make; snowflake window clings; free printable
Winter house paper scene (madebyjoel.com) winter theme paper city set; free printable
Snowman – Candy Box to make (Dover sample)
Snowflake – make your own easy and fun
Snowflake crafts make a snowflake; snowflake wreath; snowflake mobile; snowflake banner; and other ideas to kick start your creativity; free printable
Snowflake Memory Game with cute little smiley faces on them; free printable
Snowflake – game free printable
Win a snowman – game a trading game that will help your students with place value and building numbers in sets of ten; free printable
Snow ornament (pdf) from The Toymaker; free printable
Snowflake Paper Lantern – craft deer in forest snow; free printable (members only)
Jazz up your envelopes if you are including any special little snow treats like stickers, etc.
WINTER / SNOW / RAIN ~ LEARN TO DRAW ~ FREE PRINTABLE
Snowman – learn to draw (Activity Village)
Snowflake – learn to draw (Activity Village)
WINTER / SNOW / RAIN ~ PAPER GIFTS FOR KIDS ~ FREE PRINTABLE
Psalm 91:10 – Bible poster with snowy blue-grey background; No evil shall befall you, nor shall any plague come near your dwelling. For he shall give his angels charge over you, to keep you in all your ways; this Scripture Picture is provided courtesy of Amazing Facts; free printable
Psalm 28:7 – Bible poster with a hint of a white bokeh background; The LORD is my strength and my shield; my heart trusted in him, and I am helped: therefore my heart greatly rejoices; and with my song will I praise him; this Scripture Picture is provided courtesy of Amazing Facts; free printable
Psalm 51:7 Bible poster lovely blue background with snowflakes graphic in opposite corners with the words from one of my favourite Bible verses, ‘Wash me and I will be white than snow’; free printable
Snowflake bookmarks on blue, red, yellow and green backgrounds; Snowman bookmarks smiling snowmen with scarves and hats on a snowy winter background; winter bookmarks tree shadows and white snowflakes on backgrounds in various colours; add a favourite Bible verse; free printable
Cute snowman (and penguin) bookmarks free printable
Mitten shaped bookmarks with hearts on them; free printable
Snowflake – gift box looks gorgeous; but remember: paper only and post flat to your sponsored child; free printable
Snowflake ~ pillow box to make free printable
Snowman notepaper (scroll down) free printable
Snowman lunch box joke cards (Happy Home Fairy) free printable
Snowman place cards cute idea and easy to adapt to paper only for your sponsored child; free printable
Snowflake Gift Tags free printable
Snowflake ~ party sets 15 designs; each set includes a placemat (Idea: add some photos and laminate it to make a gift your child will treasure), coaster, place card (perfect for a Bible verse) and gift box; free printable
Snowflake – sparkly stickers for purchase from Dover
*These pics of Kermit playing in the snow make me smile… I had to find another one for you… just to brighten your day! :)
WINTER / SNOW / RAIN ~ IMAGES
Snowflakes and how they are photographed with links at the bottom to beautiful snowflake photos that you can print and more links to other snowflake photographers
Examine a snowflake ~ incredible detail and design zoom in and out with a flick of your mouse; it’s like looking at the most exquisite jewellery! Absolutely breathtaking.
Another exquisite snowflake shape in sparkly soft blue, white and grey colours
Make your own snowflakes to save (free) to your computer, then print and send. You can even turn your snowflake into a card or a poster if you wish (to purchase).
Snow landscapes (Goodsearch)
Children playing in snow (Goodsearch)
Children playing in snow (Google)
Kermit playing in snow (Google)
Frost wallpaper in darker tones ~ add a Bible verse to make your own poster for older children
cutecolors.com Snow colouring pages, kids with snow; teddy bears with snow; snow stationery, snow scrapbooking tags, snow clip arts (to make your own verse cards, stickers, etc) – click on ‘free cliparts’ – very cute for younger children
MORE CREATIVE IDEAS
Add a Bible verse to your favourite winter / snow / rain image and make your own:
WINTER / SNOW / RAIN ~ STATIONERY AND LETTER IDEAS FOR KIDS ~ FREE PRINTABLE
Colourful umbrellas – border on white background; free version is fine
Winter Stationery by Graphic Garden (scroll down to Seasonal) – Snowflake border; Winter Log Cabin Scene; free printable (also check the free printable index on the left hand side for related note papers, greeting cards, envelopes, to-do lists, bookmarks, scrapbook tags)
Snowflake ~ borders snowflake, snowman, snow and winter themes; free printable
Princess in the snow – lined stationery (scroll down to bottom of page) in a bright red dress; free printable
Snow stationery for kids from Activity Village; free printable
Snow stationery 4 pages of winter theme designs; free printable
Snowflake ~ stationery 6 designs – red, blue, mauve, green; lined or unlined; and snowflake note cards with envelopes 6 plain backgrounds with white snowflakes; add your family photo or your child’s photo; free printable
Snowflake stationery and envelope for older kids; lined or unlined; free printable
Snowflake envelope liner (by Canon) in 3 colours – dark blue and silver; cream and beige; country brown and beige, free printable
Snowman with scarf – green envelope (by Canon) plain green background with white snow dots; free printable
Snowman and village – envelope (by Canon) in 3 colours; a tiny cottage, a snowman and a few trees; free printable
Snow – letter ideas from Michelle, another Compassion sponsor
Christmas Snow / Tree / Village ~ FREE colouring pages, puzzles, crafts and creative ideas for kids
If you like my work, please tell others; leave a comment and ‘like’ this page. Your kind comments make my day!
Come and say Hi to Paper Gifts for Estefany on…
Collect your FREE BONUS GIFTS when you sign up to follow me. What will they be? Click here to find out. And collect your additional FREE BONUS GIFTS when you follow me on Facebook (click on ‘Secret Treasure’ in the apps section).