The Liberal Arts Historical Marker
The College's liberal arts tradition may be traced to President Howard Malcom who served as President from 1840-1849. Though he left the College due to his anti-slavery viewers, which caused conflict among the then-pro-slavery community, Malcom's imprint on the College was long-lasting as an important leader in Baptist history, his work as a missionary and pastor, his community leadership through encouragement of the establishment of the Female Academy. On campus, he organized of the first literary societies and established and championed the new curriculum which included classics and electives. Established in 1840, this curriculum sought to help to provide the students with "moral and intellectual elevation which are the proper objects of ambition." As with any institution of higher learning, Georgetown College's curriculum has seen changes over the following 170 years. For instance, early twentieth-century revisions in the curriculum broadened the required courses to include myriad areas such as the fine arts, literature, foreign languages, natural sciences, physical education, social sciences, and history.
Today's curriculum may be traced to a general education revision that was ushered in a few years ago (in 2010) and focused on breadth and depth. Students have special learning opportunities such as the Honors Program, Immersión en Español, Service Learning, and Study Abroad. Students may also specialize their learning through the creation of an area major across two or more disciplines or enrollment in pre-professional/dual degree programs.
No structure on campus captures the essence of liberal arts more than the Anna Ashcraft Ensor Learning Resource Center. While situated on land far from Malcolm's original library (in Giddings Hall), a portion of the books used to help further President Malcom's vision years ago are still in existence. They are preserved in the College's Archives in the LRC. Their location is fitting: for of the many buildings on Georgetown's campus, the neo-classical LRC stands as a symbol of higher learning, dedication, and focus for both students and faculty alike. In addition to the Malcom holdings, the Archives houses a collection of objects, documents, photographs, videos and art work dating back to the institution of the school. Beyond the library holdings and those of the Archives, the LRC is home to the Dr. Donald L. and Dorothy Jacobs Gallery and Gallery 108 (where the community can attend art functions, display their own work, and view the college's stunning permanent collection). This site also is the central hub of academia on campus by being home of majority of the academic materials used by students as well as the residents of the city of Georgetown.