Forensic Science Ages: 8 – 16
Division: Experimental Science
MiniAges: 8 – 16 years (II – O’Levels)
Skill Level: Basic & Advanced
Ratio Guarantee: 8 students per instructor
Prerequisite: Age only
This course surveys key topics in forensic science, including the application of the scientific process to forensic analysis, procedures and principles of crime scene investigation, physical and trace evidence, from the perspective of the forensic scientist. Through amazing hands-on lab experiences, and analysis of fictional crime scenarios, students learn about forensic tools, technical resources, forming and testing hypotheses, proper data collection, and responsible conclusions.
What Will Students Take Home?
Each student will go home with their photos of the learning session
Top Skills Gained
Conceptual Skills Development
- Understanding the practical implementation of forensic sciences
- Practical Skills – finger print analysis, pattern recognition, chromatography & Cryptography.
- Detective work, deductive reasoning and critical thinking in solving a case.
- Awareness of careers associated with forensic science.
- Analytical Skills
- Observation Skills
STEM & 21st Century Skills Development
- Logical Skills
- Critical Thinking
Discover what sets our teaching style apart.
8:1 Staff Ratio Guarantee
We guarantee small class sizes, with a maximum of 8 students per instructor. At Robotics Labs, our teaching philosophy is premised on personalization—your path, at your pace. Passionate, adult-only instructors guide you through tailored curriculum with one-on-one teaching. The immersive environment is ideal for fostering creativity and allowing you to reach your potential.
Our entire staff is comprised of adults ages 18 and over. We believe you learn best from adults who have mastered their technology skills. Some of our instructors are tech industry professionals. Others are graduate and undergraduate students majoring in the fields of Engineering, Computer Science, Computer Engineering, App Design, and other related fields. We’re extremely selective when it comes to our summer staff.
Friday Open House for Families
On the last day of camp, instructors present each student with a personalized Robotics Labs certificate and recap students’ key accomplishments. Afterwards, students show their families what they spent the week learning!
Students can expect a common-sense mix of instruction, breaks, social time and other creative, age-appropriate activities.