Every day, millions of people across the United States and beyond tell their friends about the sporting events they watch, the accomplishments of their children and food choices they make. They do this through Facebook, the world's most ubiquitous social networking website.
Two years ago, the social scientists on the staff of Facebook decided to conduct an experiment: to see if user behavior could be altered if the statuses they were shown were skewed more to the positive or to the negative. At no point were the users, who were a tiny fraction of the overall Facebook community, told they were part of an experiment — they had only a phrase deep in the user agreement stating their use of the service could expose them to testing by the company.
The data extracted from the test was pretty meaningless. Indeed, if one fed a diet weighted toward negative status updates, it will very slightly increase the likelihood of a negative status update of the user. The same correlation was found between positive status updates from friends and those by the user.
As Facebook users consider the ramifications of whether they are being used as test subjects, they need to remember what the true business motivation is behind the company's actions. The users are not the paying customers of Facebook. They use the service for free over the Internet, which for some users also is free at the library or other public places. The real customers of Facebook are the advertisers who pay for the audience for their sponsored messages. Because of that business arrangement, the advertisers indeed have a vested interest in knowing the behaviors of those who might see their message.
In coming months and years, it is likely more information will be disclosed regarding Facebook's examinations of its users' posts. Some will be hailed as advances, such as being able to automatically detect potentially self-destructive behavior or post-traumatic stress, but others might be less so.
It will be key for users to know what they've signed up for, however, and to remember that a free service still comes with a cost, perhaps a small one. But it is still a cost nonetheless.