There was a time when dentists had limited options for repairing teeth that were damaged and decayed. Amalgam, gold and other metals served as the most common materials for such repairs. Today, advancements in ceramics give dentists and patients a natural-looking repair options.
Ceramics, namely porcelain, were first used in 1774 to create a complete denture. Porcelain compositions that made metal-ceramic restorations possible were introduced in 1962.
Since 1986, new processes have made it possible to use ceramics in veneers, fillings, dental implants, crowns and even orthodontic brackets.
Crowns and Veneers
The ceramics used in crowns and veneers use varying amounts of crystallized leucite, which affects the thermal expansion and strength of the crown or veneer. The natural teeth are exposed to extreme hot and cold elements and are able to withstand those elements without cracking. Ceramics must do the same.
Ceramic crowns typically are coated with porcelain to allow dentists to match the translucency and color of the patient’s crown to their natural teeth.
As mentioned earlier, cavities used to be repaired with silver, mercury or tin amalgams. The ceramic fillings of today quickly are becoming the preferred option by dentists and patients alike, due to their natural appearance.
Dental implants are an alternative to bridges when a tooth is missing. Ceramic dental implants don’t change the integrity of surrounding teeth and they have the appearance of a natural tooth.
Ceramic dental implants also can prevent more natural teeth from having to be altered, as opposed to dental bridges. A bridge to replace a missing tooth requires grinding down two or three teeth, whereas a dental implant replaces only the missing tooth.
Dental implants are secured to a biocompatible metal post such as titanium, which is anchored into the jaw bone.
Orthodontic brackets represent the most recent use of ceramics in dentistry. Its use in the orthodontic field has been driven solely by the desire of orthodontists and their patients to have an alternative to the traditional “train track” braces. Ceramic brackets provide a more aesthetically pleasing appearance than traditional silver braces.