Category Archives: Module 3B : Teaching Skills
The noise of somebody taking a bath awakened me from my sleep. It’s only 5:30 am but I can easily be disturbed by any noise. Then my mother called out, “Joy! wake up! It’s time to cook breakfast.” My oldest sister stirred a little and then slowly opened her sleepy eyes. A frown appeared in her face because she still wanted to sleep but she had to get up. We used to envy our friends whose concerns were just to study because in our home, we were assigned chores. This was a typical written schedule that can be found near the living room where even visitors could see.
My siblings and I really found it weird and the smirks we saw in our friends’ faces whenever they had a glimpse of that posting on the wall embarrassed us a few times. It’s courtesy of my dear mother who was a high school Biology teacher, thus the conservation of energy reminder. 🙂
Connection and Realization
After going through topics on teaching skills, I finally connected my mother’s weird posting to her application of the classroom management skills to our home. She would always remind us to put everything in its proper place to avoid frustration when a tool or something is needed. She was very strict with household rules in contrast to my my father who was an English literature and World History teacher. My father would employ humor whenever we’d be lazy doing the dishes. I can’t forget his lines : “You may call our town Mayor or our parish priest to wash the dishes for you.” It was his way of motivating us to perform what our mother insisted us to do.
According to the human hierarchy of needs by Maslow (1962), the lower and higher needs have to be satisfied in order for learners to be motivated successfully. Let me enumerate the order :
(One being the lowest need and five the highest.)
1. Physiological needs (sleep, thirst)
2. Safety needs (freedom from danger, anxiety, or psychological threat)
3. Love needs (acceptance from parents, teachers, peers)
4. Esteem needs (mastery experiences, confidence in one’s ability)
5. Needs for self-actualization (creative self-expression, satisfaction of curiosity)
“If love needs are reasonably satisfied, people may begin to seek to satisfy their esteem needs and perhaps ultimately their self-actualization needs.” (Brophy, J. Motivating Students to Learn.(p.6)
Love may come from teachers and peers but the most essential is from the parents. But what if love isn’t experienced by the learner at home? Will it destroy his/her tendency to be motivated to learn? Like for example, a learner has a potential to excel academically but at home her parents don’t value or appreciate her achievements in school. Will her motivation to learn diminish? Not necessarily I believe. Simply because motivation comes from different sources and the lack of appreciation from the parents may create an intrinsically motivated learner – one who learns something for its own sake, for the fun it gives, and for the feeling of accomplishment and not for any rewards. Not being used to rewards but a child being raised to be independent may also have a negative effect to some kids.
* * * *
If I am to score myself, the result will be in the following diagram.
To remedy my low status scores, I am posting this one. 🙂