Send the link below via email or IMCopy
Present to your audienceStart remote presentation
- Invited audience members will follow you as you navigate and present
- People invited to a presentation do not need a Prezi account
- This link expires 10 minutes after you close the presentation
- A maximum of 30 users can follow your presentation
- Learn more about this feature in our knowledge base article
Do you really want to delete this prezi?
Neither you, nor the coeditors you shared it with will be able to recover it again.
Make your likes visible on Facebook?
Connect your Facebook account to Prezi and let your likes appear on your timeline.
You can change this under Settings & Account at any time.
DisneyWorld Cell Analogy
Transcript of DisneyWorld Cell Analogy
By Sarah Sparks and Keisha Ermine
The nucleus is the brain of the cell and controls the functions of the cell. Walt Disney is like the nucleus because he is the brains behind the Disney parks and came up with what went into them.
Ribosomes create proteins which fuels the cell. The characters are like the ribosomes and fuel the park.
Smooth ER is a long network of a tube-like structures that distribute products to specific areas. The trams are like the smooth er and distribute the people to specific attractions.
Rough ER is involved with some protein production and quality control/dispatch. It is "rough" because it is studded with ribosomes. The tunnels that the mascots (ribosomes) walk through is like the RER because it dispatches them to different areas of the park.
The Golgi bodies packages proteins into vesicles before the vesicles go to their destinations. Because the characters are like the ribosomes, the Golgi bodies is like the characters costume closet. The closet stores the costumes until they are worn and sent to their destinations.
Lysosomes is like the digestive system of the cell and gets rid of all the fats, carbs, proteins and nucleic acid. The clean up crew is like the lysosomes and gets rid of all the junk lying around the park.
Vacuoles store food and nutrients that a cell may need to survive. They may even store waste. A food court is like a vacuole because it stores the nutrients, food and waste that the cell needs.
The mitochondria is the powerhouse of the cell, it is a working organelle that keeps the cell full of energy. The rides are like the mitochondria because it creates energy and keeps the cell full of it.
The plasma membrane is what keeps things inside the cell. The ticket booths would act like the plasma membrane because they control who comes in and out of the parks.
The cell wall is what surrounds the cell. It protects it. The gates of Disney act like the cell wall because it surrounds the park and protects it.
The chloroplast is the producer of food. It converts light energy from the sun into sugars that can be used by the cell. The Epcot greenhouse is like the chloroplast. It produces food from the energy of the sun and distributes it throughout the park.
The cytoskeleton is intercellular proteins that help with the cells shape, support, and movement. The parks attractions are like the cytoskeleton because they are the parks support.
The nuclear envelope has small holes called nuclear pores that allow material to move in and out of the nucleus. The imagineers are like the nuclear envelope because they control what type of attractions come in and out of the park.
Cytoplasm is the fluid that fills the cell. The people that visit Disney are like the cytoplasm because the people (cytoplasm) fills the park (cell).
The cilia and the flagella help the cell move around the body. The map at Disney is like the cilia and the flagella because it helps people move around the park.
Cilia and Flagella