After dogs and cats, budgies are the next favourite pet. They are sweet and gentle. As a kid, I always had a couple. I did not want one as I felt it would get lonely. My budgie called Joey was a good speaker.
The budgerigar or budgie is a member of the parakeet family. They live in the driest parts of Australia. Did you know that they are naturally green and yellow, but breeding has given them many colours?
The first budgies were recorded in 1805, but the originial people of Australia (Aborigines) had known about them for many years.
Size and Weight
Wild budgies are around 18 cm (7 in) long and weight 30-40 grams (1.-1.4 oz).
Have You Noticed blue-violet cheek patches and a series of black spots across each side of their throat?
Is it a Male or a Female?
Blue across the top of a beak indicates male
Flaking brown across the top of the beak indicates a female.
If the budgie is six months or older, it is easy to tell its sex. Look at the colours on the top of his beak. If the colour is blue, it is a male. If the colour is brown, it is a female.
When humans go on a date, they dress in nice clothes. Budgies have an ultraviolet spectrum that brightens their feathers. Budgies show that they are in love by chewing seeds and putting this meal in their partner’s mouth. Female birds can lay up to eight eggs. Eggs take about 18–20 days before they start hatching. The hatchlings – blind, naked, unable to lift their head, and totally helpless, and their mother feeds them and keeps them warm constantly. Around 10 days of age, the chicks’ eyes will open, and they will start to develop feathers that are down. Where Do Budgies Live in the Wild?
Budgies are rarely seen in cities. They love wide open space especially where humans are not living. They live in the Australian scrublands,* open woodlands and grasslands. (Scrublands have little grass ). They are nomadic, which means that they don’t necessarily live in just one place. They move on.
Budgies are friendly and love to live in small flocks, but sometimes they will join other flocks and the sky is filled with these beautiful birds. Budgies, like most animals and birds, like to live where there is food and water. If food or water runs out, budgies will come closer to places where people live.
What Do Budgies Eat?
In the wild, Budgies eat the seeds of the spinifex plant, grass seeds and sometimes wheat that is ripe. Budgies that are owned by humans are twice the size of wild budgies.
How Did They Get Their Name?
Some people think the word ‘budgerigar’ came from the aboroginal word “gid-jirr-i-gaa meaning “good.” Other people think it is two aboriginal words “budgery” meaning “good” and “gar” meaning cockatoo.
Keeping a Budgie as a Pet
Water and good should be changed every day. The floor of the cage should also be changed regularly. This will keep the budgie healthy. Budgies love to play and they should have a mirror, play things and lots of attention from people. Keep the music low and don’t speak too loud near them. They have little ears. Speak the same words in a gentle manner. Have two birds as budgies like to live in flocks and need company. Give them cuttlebone as a good mineral and to sharpen their beaks. They will like to play at sharpening their beaks.
How Long Do Budgies Live?
Budgies on average live to be eight years old. However, some live for 12-15 years.
Perhaps, good food, clean water and playthings help a bird to be happy and that might increase his or her life.