There are many useful web resources for Education students and professionals. Check out a few below!
Achieve.org This site includes links to the websites of other organizations interested in education reform, specifically standards-based reform in the four core content areas: English and language arts, math, science, and social studies. There is also a standards database which is searchable by state.
African-American History Month: Resources
Educator's Reference Desk The Educator's Reference Desk brings you the resources you have come to depend on; 2000+ lesson plans, 3,000+ links to online education information, and 200+ question archive responses.
EdWeb A resource for finding out about the uses of the Internet in the classroom. Get information and links to previous projects, learn basic HTML, find out about education reform and more.
Hispanic Heritage Month: Resources History of Education A non-comprehensive site about education during the 20th century, organized by decades. It includes a short description of a variety of 'educational episodes' that took place in that period.
International Reading Association Links to a number of useful resources on literacy. For current information, the site incorporates articles about hot topics in the news concerning literacy and reading. Literacy Links provides access to quality Internet sites on various aspects of literacy including those of other organizations, teacher/parent resources, adult and family literacy resources, and information about research centers
National Center for Education Statistics (NCES) Sponsored by the U.S. Department of Education, this subset of the Ed.gov site contains many useful governmental statistics on many topics in education. NCES is the primary federal organization responsible for collecting and analyzing data that is related to education in the United States and in other nations. Information is included on elementary, secondary, and postsecondary education.
Special Education Resources on the Internet (SERI) This site is "a collection of Internet accessible information resources on interest to those involved in the fields related to special education." Categories include speech impairment, special needs and technology, inclusion resources, law resources, and more.
Thomas B. Fordham Institute The Thomas B. Fordham Institute is the nation's leader in advancing educational excellence for every child through quality research, analysis, and commentary, as well as on-the-ground action and advocacy in Ohio.
Lesson Planning Websites
Early Childhood Education This searchable or browseable site offers craft suggestions that come complete with illustrations, recipes where appropriate, and instructions. There is a collection of seasonal arts and crafts, pedagogical articles, a 'sharing board', and a collection of related links.
EduHound.com An extensive collection of briefly annotated links for teachers, administrators, and parents. The collection is organized into categories and includes specific subjects (animals, science, etc.) and specialized educational resources (home schooling, standards & assessment, etc.).
Idea Box: Early Childhood Education & Activity Resources Find an 'Idea of the Day' and other resources at this site. Activity lists provide things to do with young children, including seasonal activities, crafts, games, and songs.
New York Times Learning Network Created for students and teachers in grades 3 - 12, the Learning Network is a free news service that provides news summaries, quizzes, and daily lesson plans.
PBS Teachers | Resources for the Classroom Links to activities by grade level, includes both on and off line activities guides and resources. Also follow "Teacher Discussions" area to see what teachers around the country are doing in their classrooms.
The Gateway to Educational Materials (GEM) A one-stop resource for K-adult educational materials. At the site, teachers, parents, and students can search for or browse for lessons, instruction units, and other resources by topic and grade level from over 140 websites.
Zero to Three Dedicated to promotion of healthy development of children from birth to age three, this site contains information on a baby's social, emotional, and intellectual development.
Zoom School Zoom School is an online elementary school classroom with lessons in geography, history, language arts, and early childhood activities.
Organizations and Associations
Massachusetts Department of Education News plus information on resources, educational technology and programs
New Hampshire Department of Education Provides access to programs, services, reports, and statistical information. Also includes legislation and policy information and links to other departments.
United States Department of Education The official education site for the U.S. Federal government, this portal contains many useful features. Particularly of interest are the various information centers on general topic areas such as grants and contracts, financial aid, research and statistics, and policy and programs.
Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative Services (OSERS) The United States Department of Education's Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative Services website.
IDEA (The Individual with Disabilities Education Act) IDEA is a federal law enacted in 1990 and reauthorized in 1997. It is designed to protect the rights of students with disabilities by ensuring that everyone receives a free appropriate public education (FAPE), regardless of ability. Furthermore, IDEA strives not only to grant equal access to students with disabilities, but also to provide additional special education services and procedural safeguards.
National Art Education Association Links for lesson planning, advocacy, research & knowlege, as well as careers in the field of Art Education.
National Council of Teachers of English Resources available for elementary, middle, secondary and college levels.
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics The public voice of mathematics education, providing vision, leadership and professional development to support teachers in ensuring mathematics learning of the highest quality for all students.
National Education Association (NEA) The foremost professional body for teachers throughout the United States, the NEA website includes a host of information such as news briefs, on online web locator (OWL), and official stances of the NEA on important topics in education.
National Science Teachers Association NSTA is "the largest organization in the world committed to promoting excellence and innovation in science teaching and learning for all."
| Tutorial | Suggestion Box | Phone: 603.897.8463