BASEBALL is a nine-part series that examines nearly 200 years of American history through the prism of our national pastime. Americans have played baseball in one form or another since the early 19th century—while they conquered a continent, warred with one another and with enemies abroad, and struggled over labor, civil rights and the meaning of freedom. At the game’s heart lie mythic contradictions: it is a pastoral game that was actually born in crowded cities;it is an exhilarating democratic sport that tolerates cheating—and has excluded as many as it has embraced; a profoundly conservative game that has sometimes managed to be years ahead of its time.
The series celebrates the achievements of dozens of memorable Americans who through baseball became national icons—including Babe Ruth, Ted Williams, Sandy Koufax, Satchel Paige, Joe DiMaggio, Christy Mathewson, Willie Mays, Hank Aaron, Hank Greenberg, Shoeless Joe Jackson and Jackie Robinson. It also follows the fortunes of two of the most beloved teams; the Brooklyn Dodgers and the Boston Red Sox. Still, the series is much more than an accounting of games won and lost, teams rising and falling, rookies arriving and veterans saying farewell; it celebrates the extraordinary stars of the Negro Leagues, the pioneers who paved the way for integration of the national pastime and ultimately, America at large. The story of baseball is therefore fundamentally the story of race in America. But it is also the story of the transformation of millions of immigrants from everywhere into new generations of Americans; of the rise and fall of great American cities; of fathers and sons and of mothers and daughters; and of our insatiable need for heroes. It is an integral and compelling manifestation of the American experience itself.
Funding provided by:
General Motors Corporation; National Endowment for the Humanities; The Pew Charitable Trusts; Corporation for Public Broadcasting; The Public Broadcasting Service; and The Arthur Vining Davis Foundations.