This is a guest blog from Guy Mucklow, CEO of Postcode Anywhere.
Can you name a cryptographic hash or explain what a nibble is? No? Well perhaps your kids will be able to help.
For too long now ICT on the school curriculum has been simply learning Microsoft Office and teaching children how to use technology rather than giving them insight into how it’s created. However, in the last few months, it seems like tectonic plates are beginning to shift, with Education Secretary Michael Gove paving the way for a more rigorous computer science approach to the teaching of technology. According to the new curriculum guidelines, children as young as five will be taught the definition of algorithms, how to create and debug a simple computer program, and to recognise common uses of ICT.
By submitting your personal information, you agree that TechTarget and its partners may contact you regarding relevant content, products and special offers.
Look around you. You’ll see kids everywhere glued to their computer devices. They know how to navigate the latest technology better than most. Yet despite their obvious technological proficiency and countless hours playing games or on social networks, how many really understand how they actually work?
It has been argued that young children can’t possibly understand the complexities of computing programming. But when it comes to acquiring a foreign language, there’s no doubt that an early start can help. My friend’s four year old bears a testament to this; he can rattle off a bunch of French phrases he’s picked up without even blinking. This is because in our early development, we aren’t genetically hard-wired to one particular language. This elasticity to learning is exactly the same for learning coding vernacular too.
Many companies in the technology industry are behind the initiative, saying that they are finding it increasingly difficult to recruit computer science graduates and programmers with the appropriate skills.
One company in particular is taking dramatic steps to help shape the future of the software industry. Postcode Anywhere, a Worcester-based technology company has set up its own technology foundation and is working closely with Code Club to help promote computing science in education.
Easy as Pi
Code Club is an extraordinarily successful after-school club which was set up to help children aged between nine and 11 develop programming skills. Children create their own computer games, robots and learn how to use technology creatively. There are now over 1,000 clubs operating in various locations throughout the UK. From Aberdeen to Plymouth in fact. This is expected to grow to over 5,000 clubs by the end of 2015. The organisation’s overall objective is to give every child in the UK the chance to learn code.
As well as technology companies like Postcode Anywhere, the project has also received ringing endorsements from the father of the worldwide web, Sir Tim Berners-Lee and Prince Andrew, the Duke of York.
As an employer in the technology sector, introducing primary children to computing concepts in a creative and enjoyable way is important as it will provide encouragement and inspiration for students to take-up the study of computer science at higher levels.
Primary school children have brains like sponges; they mop up every bit of knowledge and are fearless when it comes to embracing a new skill. It’s exciting to think of the amazing things they will develop in the future if they’re already coding by the time they’re 12.
For children to have a chance at becoming creators, not just consumers, of tomorrow’s innovations, it will be critical to expand computer science education that inspires children from an early age.
Whether your child grows up to be the next Zuckerberg or not, the ability to understand basic programming concepts and think logically will prove invaluable. And it’s not just all about maths, or weird syntax. It teaches pivotal problem-solving, creativity, and communication skills. Not to mention, the fun children have learning it.
For more details on Code Club and locations click on: http://codeclubbrightonmeetup.eventbrite.com/