Note: Importance of Protein Preparation for Proteomics Studies
With the advancement of technologies made in the field of proteomics, it is gradually clear for people that innovations/new discoveries are in need in the session of protein preparation of samples prior to any particular procedure.
Protein purification is either preparative or analytical in that it includes the preparation of commercial products, such as lactase, soyr protein isolate, insulin and others. They can be applied in researches related to analytical purposes, for example, protein identification, quantification, and studies of the protein’s structure, post-translational modifications and function. In some way, we can say that the preparation of protein samples determines the success of analytical methods, including mass spectrometry, 2-D gel electrophoresis, 1-D SDS-PAGE, trypsin digestion, and chromatography.
However, here are some issues which are in front of the innovation way, such as sample clean-up, fractionation, enrichment, and sample condition optimization.
Considerations of this nature can be crucial in obtaining relevant results from an experiment; some so much so that experts feel the field of proteomics is currently being limited by the lack of significant advancement in sample preparation techniques.
This facet of proteomics is becoming particularly critical in the case of high throughput protocols where the necessary conditions of a sample in one stage may directly conflict with the efficacy of a second stage. For example, during the initial step in 2D electrophoresis, isoelectric focusing, all proteins in a sample are given a net charge of zero; while the second step, gel electrophoresis, requires a negative charge on all products in the sample in order to induce movement through the gel matrix.
Many companies offer pre-packaged kits that will allow you to prepare samples for many different techniques. They also offer many protein samples, and other protein technologies. Many of these companies are also on the forefront of protein analysis technology. Some examples are: