Jesus is called the son of David because he is reincarnated through the virgin Mary who was bethroned to Joseph. Joseph is a descendant from the family line of David. This is why he returned to Bethlehem to take census when the Roman emperor make it a requirement for everyone to go to their hometown to take a census. Jesus Christ is fully human and God. He was reincarnated into human being so that he can die for our sins on the cross. The death and resurrection of Jesus Christ is the beginning of the New Testament. According to the New Testament, anyone who believe in Jesus Christ can be saved and receive redemption.
When Jesus was on earth, he experienced all kinds of sufferings and temptations like human beings. He was subjected to the temptation of the devil in the wilderness when he fast for 40 days and 40 nights. Yet, Jesus Christ did not give in to the devil. He received much rejection from the people. His mission was to spread the good news to the Jews first but the Jews rejected him. It was the Jews who cause him to be crucified on the cross.
All these happen so that the will of God can be fulfilled in order for the gift of salvation to be available to other nations in the world. If Jesus Christ did not reincarnate into human being and die for our sins on the cross, we would still be sinners and receive punishment in hell after death. Because Jesus become a lamb of sin offerings for us, we can have a chance to go to heaven when we believe and follow him.
Jesus possesses the full quality of a human being and god. He and the Father God and the Holy Spirit are the same one God. Jesus acts as the son of God. His role is to act as a mediator and intercede for our sins in heaven. Nothing is impossible for him to do. The palms of Jesus’ hands and his feet still retain the marks of the nails that fastened him to the crucifix. The disciple Philip doubted that Jesus had risen from the dead and he would not believe unless he put his finger on his side. When Jesus appear to his disciples again, Philip was among them this time and he let him put his finger on the nail marks on his hands.
David already knew about the Lord Jesus Christ even though before his coming on the earth. “The LORD said unto my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool.” (Psalm 110:1 KJV). There are also other prophets that prophesied about Jesus Christ including Jeremiah, Malachi and Isaiah.
And we know that the Son of God is come, and hath given us an understanding, that we may know him that is true, and we are in him that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ. This is the true God, and eternal life. (1 John 5:20 KJV)
And the angel answered and said unto her, The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee: therefore also that holy thing which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God. (Luke 1:35 KJV)
For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. (John 3:16 KJV)
For there is one God, and one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus (1 Timothy 2:5 KJV)
I will declare the decree: the Lord hath said unto me, Thou art my Son; this day have I begotten thee. (Psalm 2:7 KJV)
In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. (John 1:1 KJV)
But to us there is but one God, the Father, of whom are all things, and we in him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him. (1 Corinthians 8:6 KJV)
And now, O Father, glorify thou me with thine own self with the glory which I had with thee before the world was. (John 17:5 KJV)
And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent. (John 17:3 KJV)
Therefore the Jews sought the more to kill him, because he not only had broken the sabbath, but said also that God was his Father, making himself equal with God. (John 5:18 KJV)
And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, (and we beheld his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father,) full of grace and truth. (John 1:14 KJV)
All things were made by him; and without him was not any thing made that was made. (John 1:3 KJV)
God, who at sundry times and in divers manners spake in time past unto the fathers by the prophets, Hath in these last days spoken unto us by his Son, whom he hath appointed heir of all things, by whom also he made the worlds; Who being the brightness of his glory, and the express image of his person, and upholding all things by the word of his power, when he had by himself purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high: Being made so much better than the angels, as he hath by inheritance obtained a more excellent name than they.
For unto which of the angels said he at any time, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee? And again, I will be to him a Father, and he shall be to me a Son? And again, when he bringeth in the firstbegotten into the world, he saith, And let all the angels of God worship him. And of the angels he saith, Who maketh his angels spirits, and his ministers a flame of fire. But unto the Son he saith, Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever: a sceptre of righteousness is the sceptre of thy kingdom. Thou hast loved righteousness, and hated iniquity; therefore God, even thy God, hath anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows. And, Thou, Lord, in the beginning hast laid the foundation of the earth; and the heavens are the works of thine hands: They shall perish; but thou remainest; and they all shall wax old as doth a garment; And as a vesture shalt thou fold them up, and they shall be changed: but thou art the same, and thy years shall not fail. But to which of the angels said he at any time, Sit on my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool? Are they not all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation? (Hebrews 1:1-14 KJV)
And when all things shall be subdued unto him, then shall the Son also himself be subject unto him that put all things under him, that God may be all in all. (1 Corinthians 15:28 KJV)
For in him dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily. (Colossians 2:9 KJV)
And he is before all things, and by him all things consist. (Colossians 1:7 KJV)