Home » World Maps » Asia » Cambodia
Cambodia Map and Satellite Image
Cambodia Bordering Countries:Laos, Thailand, Vietnam
Regional Maps:Map of Asia, World Map
Where is Cambodia?
Cambodia Satellite Image
Cambodia Information:Cambodia is located in southeastern Asia. Cambodia is bordered by the Gulf of Thailand to the southwest, Vietnam to the east, Laos to the north, and Thailand to the northwest.
Cambodia Cities:Battambang, Kampong Cham, Kampong Chhnang, Kamport, Kohnieh, Kompong Thom, Krakor, Kralanh, Kratie, Lomphat, Lovea, Pailin City, Phnom Penh, Poipet, Ponlei, Prek Kak, Puok, Pursat, Siem Reap, Sisophon, Stung Treng and Takeo.
Cambodia Locations:Chhung Kompong Som, Gulf of Thailand, Mekong River, San River, Sen River, South China Sea and Tonle Sap.
Cambodia Natural Resources:Cambodia's mineral resources include gemstones, iron ore, manganese, phosphates, oil and natural gas. Other natural resources include timber and potential hydropower.
Cambodia Natural Hazards:Although Cambodia’s natural hazards include the occasional drought, the country experiences monsoonal rains and flooding from June to November.
Cambodia Environmental Issues:Cambodia’s environmental issues include illegal logging activities and soil erosion, throughout the country. There is strip mining for gems in the western region (along the border with Thailand), which have resulted in habitat loss and declining biodiversity. This has particularly been destructive to the mangrove swamps and threatens the natural fisheries. The fish stocks are declining due to illegal fishing and overfishing. In the rural areas of Cambodia, most of the population does not have access to potable water.
Copyright information: The images on this page were composed by Angela King and Brad Cole and are copyright by Geology.com © 2008. These images are not available for use beyond our websites. If you would like to share them with others please link to this page. The satellite image was produced using Landsat data from NASA and the map was produced using data licensed from and copyright by Map Resources © 2008.