California is seeking the ability to
to help cope with its severe financial crisis. Californians voted decades ago to place severe limits on their legislature’s ability to raise taxes, and Democratic Governor Jerry Brown intends to ask the people for modest tax hikes to the state’s sales tax and on the income taxes of high earners. In exchange, he will cut less than would otherwise be required to slay the state’s $16-billion deficit. If the tax hikes don’t pass, Brown has warned that education, universities and public-sector workers, among many sensitive programs and budgets, would be cut or eliminated.
It will be difficult for Brown to get this passed. Not only because the state’s Republicans are predictably opposed, but because there will be
on the ballot in November, and there is a high chance that the vote will be split between them. That will leave California with a $16-billion deficit and no way out but to cut, cut cut. This is a remarkably similar situation to Ontario, which is also grappling with a deficit in the $16-billion range. But it’s when you compare the rest of the numbers between these two jurisdictions that Ontario comes off looking poorly.
Not to deny California’s fiscal plight. It’s serious. California saw a steep decrease in revenues after the 2008 global crisis, and that led to some interesting measures by the state. It ordered public-sector workers to take a furlough day every month, then two, then three. Each day per month equals a 5% pay cut. It began issuing IOUs instead of tax refunds. The budget has already been cut several times. This has led to protests, and speculation that the state might be America’s Greece.
But California is also an economic giant. The state has a GDP of $1.9-trillion, and a population of almost 38 million people. That makes California, by itself, larger than Canada by both GDP and population. Though the numbers fluctuate yearly, the state would, if independent, be in the top-10 economies in the world. Even so, its government spending is surprisingly small — projected expenditures for the next fiscal year are roughly $104-billion (including carried over debt), against projected revenues of $95.4-billion.
Those numbers align surprisingly well with Ontario’s. In fact, they’re smaller. Ontario plans to spend
-billion next year, while expecting to bring in $112.2-billion — a larger government than California, even when you account for the (currently tiny) difference in the exchange rate. This would leave the province with a deficit of $15.2-billion. And yet Ontario is a much, much smaller entity. By both population and GDP, it’s about a third the size of California.
And yet it’s somehow managing to generally mirror its much larger partner to the southwest. Similar (somewhat higher) revenues, similar (somewhat higher) expenditures. Comparable projected deficits. One-third the population and economy.
California is in a bad way, and its system of government will make it hard for it to get out of it. But for the Ontario taxpayer, this should come as an unpleasant wake-up call. Perhaps the only thing preventing Ontario from being called Canada’s Greece is Quebec’s helpful efforts to do everything in its power to make sure that that title belongs to it.