CERN isn’t only breaking ground in physics, but also in open access to science.
It's not enough to do groundbreaking research if the results are kept from the public. So CERN is making its results available to everyone via open access, showing how science should be done.
There’s a lot we still don’t know about antimatter.
One of the great mysteries of the universe is why there is so much more matter than antimatter. Now a new experiment is helping us understand the nature of antimatter better than ever before.
When particles collide.
New research has compared hydrogen and antihydrogen up to ten decimal places for the very first time.
We hear a lot about the marvellous science going on at CERN. But what goes on behind the scenes?
The sky is the limit for African science when universities work together.
Mohamed Nureldin Abdallah/Reuters
Collaboration is one of the keys to making African science soar: when the continent's universities work together, they can produce amazing results.
There have been squabbles of course, but the science project in Geneva is an example of putting differences aside to pursue common goals.
Genomes don’t translate easily into an understanding of disease.
Big data is all well and good, but if we want medical breakthroughs, we'll need big theory too.
There’s evidence that antimatter is produced in thunderstorms.
Antimatter is at the heart of one of the biggest conundrums in physics. Here's why.
The Large Hadron Collider is playing a key role in enabling the collection of big data.
Big data is about processing large amounts of data. It is often associated with multiplicities of data. But the ability to generate data outpaces the ability to store it.
Academics are under enormous pressure to publish prolifically because this generates subsidies for their universities.
A new policy on research outputs and funding will be introduced in South Africa in 2016. But it leaves too much unchanged from the old policy.
The latest data from the particle accelerator that found the Higgs Boson has confirmed another of our theories about how the universe works.
Running the world's largest particle accelerator requires a lot of energy, but it could reveal the secrets of the universe.
An artist’s impression of the much-searched for magnetic monopole.
Heikka Valja/MoEDAL Collaboration
The restart of experiments at CERN's Large Hardron Collider could mark the start of a new era of discovery or a big disappointment.
Gearing up for another run.
CERN's huge particle accelerator has been switched back on after a two-year upgrade to continue its search for answers.
The CMS detector at the LHC.
New results from the Large Hadron Collider further could help eliminate some theoretical possibilities for what lies beyond the standard model of particle physics.
Look into my high-energy particle physics and what do you see?
For less than the cost of a single Typhoon jetfighter, the upgraded LHC will push our understanding of physics to the brink.
The CERN datacentre is the ground zero, but only part, of a worldwide computing grid.
The 'supercomputer' that processes LHC's data is a networked grid that spans the entire planet.
What lies within?
Ticking off subatomic particles one by one, now let's see what an LHC upgrade will do.
Before the big bang.
SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory
Scientists working on an experiment at the SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory in the US have taken a step forward in developing a technology which could significantly reduce the size of particle accelerators…
The five storey Swiss watch.
The challenge for the documentary filmmaker is to persuade the viewer to take the images and sounds with which they are presented for the world itself. The documentary viewer willingly collaborates in…