Send the link below via email or IMCopy
Present to your audienceStart remote presentation
- Invited audience members will follow you as you navigate and present
- People invited to a presentation do not need a Prezi account
- This link expires 10 minutes after you close the presentation
- A maximum of 30 users can follow your presentation
- Learn more about this feature in our knowledge base article
Do you really want to delete this prezi?
Neither you, nor the coeditors you shared it with will be able to recover it again.
Make your likes visible on Facebook?
Connect your Facebook account to Prezi and let your likes appear on your timeline.
You can change this under Settings & Account at any time.
Does the storage temperature affect the acidity of orange ju
Transcript of Does the storage temperature affect the acidity of orange ju
1. Obtain five cups of orange juice.
2. Use pH strips to test pH level of orange juice and record in chart.
3. Pour each cup in a different container.
4. Take pH of orange juice that has been in a refrigerator and record in chart.
5. Place one container in a room temperature area and leave for one day.
6. Place one container in a -2 degree freezer and leave for one day.
The orange juice looked milky for the stovetop & microwave.
The ph paper for room temperature was sort of dark, but light on the tip.
The ph paper for the stovetop and microwave was sort of like a very light orange.
The ph paper for freezer and refrigerator was orange color.
Dependent: pH of orange juice
Control: Juice in fridge
Does the storage temperature affect the acitidy of orange juice?
Does the storage temperature affect the acidity of orange juice?
If the temperature is low, then the pH will be high because the movement of the orange juice particles will be slowed down.
5 cups of orange juice
pH test strips
33 degree refrigerator
-2 degree freezer
The pH scale measures how acidic or basic a substance is. The pH scale ranges from 0 to 14. A pH of 7 is neutral. A pH less than 7 is acidic. A pH greater than 7 is basic. When the temperature increases, hydrogen ions concentration increases too which means the ph level decreases.
Taking the ph of orange juice
In the experiment I noticed that the ph of the cold temperature was higher than the others. Which means that my hypothesis was correct that if I increase the temperature than the ph will decrease. The colder the temperature the higher the PH. When the juice starts to become room temperature, the lower the PH becomes.
7. Microwave one container on medium.
8. After taking container out of microwave, use pH test strips to test pH and record measurement in chart.
9. Boil one cup of orange juice on high for 5 minutes. When finished boiling, use pH strip to test pH. Record measurement in chart.
10. Remove container from freezer, test pH and record in chart.
11. Remove container from room temperature area, test it’s pH and record in chart.
By: Assa Diaby