4 Health Benefits of Stevia Leaf [Infographic]
Stevia leaf is one of the sweetest herbs in the world and it is 300 times sweeter than table sugar but adds no calories. The herb also shows great promise in a number of medicinal applications. Modern research studies have found that the leaf promotes muscle recovery, prevents heart disease, and has an anti-obesity effect. It can be added in any tea blend as a natural sweetener.
What is stevia leaf?
Stevia leaves contain a number of sweet-tasting chemicals which makes it much sweeter than table sugar. Believed to be a healthier alternative to sugar by proponents, stevia sweeteners, the powdered extract of stevia, have grown significantly in popularity worldwide. Stevia leaves have been used for centuries in South America to sweeten foods and beverages and as medicine. Stevia has been used as a weight loss aid, for treating diabetes, high blood pressure, and heartburn. Today, chemical analysis and studies show that the leaf adds no calories, has no harmful side effects and is more palatable with less aftertaste than any artificial, chemical sweetener.
The health benefits of stevia leaf according to research
1. Fitness & Strength
Stevia may be beneficial for promoting muscle recovery from injury. According to research studies, stevioside, a constituent found in stevia, helps regenerate muscle after injury without negative effects. There is significant scientific interest in further investigating the effect of stevioside on muscle function recovery.
2. Heart and Circulatory Health
Clinical research conducted in Taiwan suggests that stevioside may potentially reduce blood sugar levels and lower blood pressure, consistent with results from earlier animal and human studies. These effects may have therapeutical potential in the treatment of metabolic disorders such as diabetes. Another study found stevia increases glucose tolerance in humans.
According to an article published in 2016 in the Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture, stevia can be safely used an anti-diabetic herb, as a sweetener substitute and may help prevent heart diseases.
3. Immunity and Overall Health
Stevia has been found to have antioxidant properties and may have potential against oxidative stress. Oxidative stress is an imbalance in the body which results in numerous chronic diseases such as cancer, diabetes, arthritis, and various heart diseases.
Other studies have established stevia’s anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory (i.e. modulates the immune system) properties. This suggests that stevia has potential for boosting immunity or supporting overall health.
A study published in the academic journal Nutrition and Cancer associated stevia consumption to breast cancer reduction. Stevioside compounds found in stevia caused cancer cell death and decreased certain stress pathways in the body that contribute to cancer growth.
4. Weight Loss and Metabolism
Stevia has a negligible effect on blood sugar levels, has zero calories, and is safe for consumption, which makes it attractive for people on carbohydrate-controlled or weight loss diets. Stevia has been used a natural, zero-calorie sweetener in Japan since the 1970’s. In a 2010 animal study, stevia extract was found to have an anti-obesity effect on laboratory mice that were on a high-fat diet.
* These are some of the pharmacological actions that have been observed or are under study in various evidence-based research studies. Herb may have other properties not listed here.
The statements on this page are for educational purposes only and have not been evaluated by the Food and Drug Administration. The information is not intended to diagnose, treat, cure, or prevent any disease. Please consult your healthcare practitioner prior to the use of any herbal products, especially if you are pregnant, breastfeeding, or have allergies or medical conditions.
The information has been sourced and extracted from scientific papers, academic journals, research abstracts, and other sources. While Purify Tea makes every effort to present accurate and reliable information on this website, Purify Tea does not endorse, approve, or certify such information, nor does it guarantee the accuracy, completeness, efficiency, timeliness, or correct sequencing of such information. Use of such information is voluntary, and reliance on it should only be undertaken after an independent review of its accuracy, completeness, efficiency, and timeliness. While many traditional or folkloric remedies have a long history of use, modern research has only begun to investigate and substantiate their effectiveness. Research is still ongoing in many areas therefore conclusions are subject to change.
Chaiwat Boonkaewwan, Chaivat Toskulkao, Molvibha Vongsakul. “Anti-Inflammatory and Immunomodulatory Activities of Stevioside and Its Metabolite Steviol on THP1 Cells.” J Agric Food Chem. February 8, 2006;54(3):7859.
Duke J. A. Phytochemical and Ethnobotanical Databases. Natural Agricultural Library. United States Department of Agriculture. Web. June 26, 2016.
Mathur Ritu, Johri Nandini. “Nutritional Composition of Stevia rebaudiana - A sweet herb and its Hypoglycaemic and Hypolipidaemic Effect on Patients with Non Insulin Dependent Diabetes Mellitus.” J Sci Food Agric. January 19, 2016. Epub January 19, 2016.
Ming-Hsiung Hsieh, Paul Chan, Yuh-Mou Sue, Ju-Chi Liu, Toong Hua Liang, Tsuei-Yuen Huang, Brian Tomlinson, Moses Sing Sum Chow, Pai-Feng Kao, Yi-Jen Chen. “Efficacy and tolerability of oral stevioside in patients with mild essential hypertension: a two-year, randomized, placebo-controlled study.” Clin Ther. November 2003;25(11):2797808.
Natural Medicines Comprehensive Database Consumer Version. Therapeutic Research Center. Web. June 22, 2016.
P B Jeppesen, S Gregersen, S E D Rolfsen, M Jepsen, M Colombo, A Agger, J Xiao, M Kruhøffer, T Orntoft, K Hermansen. Anti-hyperglycemic and blood pressure-reducing effects of stevioside in the diabetic Goto-Kakizaki rat. Metabolism. March 2003;52(3):3728.
R Curi, M Alvarez, R B Bazotte, L M Botion, J L Godoy, A Bracht. “Effect of Stevia rebaudiana on glucose tolerance in normal adult humans.” Biol Pharm Bull. November 2002;25(11):1488-90.
Shruti Shukla, Archana Mehta, Pradeep Mehta, Vivek K Bajpai. “Antioxidant ability and total phenolic content of aqueous leaf extract of Stevia rebaudiana Bert. Exp Toxicol Pathol.” March 4, 2011. Epub March 4, 2011.
Søren Gregersen, Per B Jeppesen, Jens J Holst, Kjeld Hermansen. “Antihyperglycemic effects of stevioside in type 2 diabetic subjects.” Metabolism. January 2004;53(1):736.
Tipwadee Bunprajun, Tossaporn Yimlamai, Sunhapas Soodvilaia, Chatchai Muanprasat, Varanuj Chatsudthipong. “Stevioside Enhances Satellite Cell Activation by Inhibiting of NFκB Signaling Pathway in Regenerating Muscle after Cardiotoxin-Induced Injury.” J Agric Food Chem. February 9, 2012. Epub February 9, 2012.
United States Department of Agriculture Agricultural Research Service, Beltsville Area Germplasm Resources Information Network (GRIN). November 28, 2015, Web. June 26, 2016.
Víctor López, Sergio Pérez, Arturo Vinuesa, Christian Zorzetto, Olga Abian. “Stevia rebaudiana ethanolic extract exerts better antioxidant properties and antiproliferative effects in tumour cells than its diterpene glycoside stevioside.” Food Funct. April 20, 2016;7(4):210713.