STRETCHING YOUR WAY TO BETTER HEALTH IN UR LIFE
A.N.A. Stretching.5 seems to be the most promising stretching technique to increase flexibility. It’s unique way of performing the stretch makes it more beneficial than the other techniques. It gets the muscle and connective tissues past the three processes the body goes through to get an efficient stretch that would increase ROM (range of motion).
A.N.A .STRETCHING 5.
STRETCHING IS BY FAR THE BEST STRETCHING TECHNIQUE TO PROMOTE A HIGHER LEVEL OF FLEXIBILITY.
Stretching helps improve circulation.
By making the muscle relax, the blood that is normally stuck in the muscles (ex. “pump” effect after workout or having tight muscles after a long day of work) is release.
Stretching helps improve flexibility.
Having tight muscles makes it difficult for an individual to do various tasks. Improving ones flexibility would mean less injury (muscle tear, ligament tear and tendon tear). With greater flexibility an athlete can do better performance due to a better or larger range of motion.
Stretching helps improve posture.
Tight muscles can affect the posture of an individual causing pain and stress on the joints. Stretching makes the muscles supple and through this posture can be corrected.
Stretching helps to relieve stress. Stress can cause muscle stiffness and stiffness can be painful. Stretching can relieve muscle stiffness and make muscle relax thereby giving an individual a sense of well being and a more relaxed disposition.
Stretching helps injuries to heal
Rehabilitation uses a lot therapeutically stretching exercises to help muscular-skeletal injuries heal faster.
A.N.A STRETCHING 5
Static Stretching is able to give the muscle and the connective tissues sufficient stretch because it is able to go beyond the stretch reflex and the lengthening reaction that can cause a certain amount of flexibility change but it falls short of the reciprocal inhibition for the reason that there is no contraction made by the stretched muscle and connective tissues that can trigger the inhibition of the opposing (antagonist) muscle which can therefore make a higher level of flexibility.
Dynamic Stretching falls short because it is explained as controlled movements that goes to the furthest point of the range of motion. This technique will activate the stretch reflex that will only make the muscle to contract and it would not have any effect on a higher level of flexibility.
Ballistic Stretching also falls short because it also triggers the stretch reflex that will make the muscle to contract and no elongation will be achieved, in fact it is a very risky way of stretching simply because it forces the muscle and the connective tissues to go beyond the normal range of motion and can likely cause connective tissue or muscle tear from the force it produces when it is performed.
Active Stretching is like static stretching it gives a certain amount of change in flexibility because it passes the stretch reflex and the lengthening reaction but it also falls short of the reciprocal inhibition which can cause more higher or longer range of motion.
Isometric Stretching is also another effective way of stretching because it can go beyond the stretch reflex and activate the lengthening reaction and maybe trigger the reciprocal inhibition. Effective because it can cause the lengthening reaction but there are no studies if can trigger the reciprocal inhibition that causes a longer stretch on the joint.