Story Kit has been around for quite some time. It was one of the first applications that the teachers of East Noble really jumped on using to have kids create projects with their iOS devices. Now there are so many options for students to produce work and send to their teacher. However, instead of looking for a new tool, Mrs. Carroll of North Side contemplated how the tool could be used. Here she has provided two examples of her Butterfly project. The students recorded the events that occurred with their own butterflies as well as reported about facts and vocabulary that they were learning over the course of the project. Overall, I am very impressed with the quality of work from these second grade students. Story Kit worked well for her students because it allowed them to save their projects on a daily basis, take quick pictures and insert them into the work, and record briefly each day.
I know what you are thinking. You are thinking that you already know about Story Kit. It is old news. Your kids already use it. Though those things are true, I thought I would throw out how it was used today. This morning I worked with two first grade classrooms. The students had a sheet of paper had several boxes for illustrations and spaces for written text. The students made a how-to draft on this sheet of paper, and used the illustrations for use in StoryKit. Instead of using multiple pieces of paper for publishing, students used Story Kit and took pictures of their illustrations using the iPod touch. Check it out for yourself!
Story Kit still remains one of my favorite apps to use in the classroom. Yesterday I had the opportunity to introduce it to two first grade classrooms at Avilla Elementary. It took a little time to get things going, but once the students got started, they were quickly able to complete a small e-book with text, pictures, and audio. The project was to create a five senses book. Prior to yesterday, both classes took a walk outside to find things that they can hear, see, touch, and smell. (They had to take a picture of something to taste later so that we could discourage them from tasting objects outside!) Yesterday, they used the pictures saved in their camera roll to make a short book. The results were great, and the best part is that the app no longer continually crashes on the students as they use it.
Here is an example that I particularly liked. The student didn’t exactly record what was written, but it was too much fun so I couldn’t resist sharing.
One of the challenges that Zack and I have faced the last few weeks is finding apps that allow primary students to create on an iPod. Sure, there are a lot of apps out there that help kids practice and develop skills, but most of the production opportunities are with the iPads and are too complex for a kindergartener or a first grader to use. Doodle Buddy has worked well in the past, but teachers obviously need more than one free app that will allow the students to be creative. This week I came across an app called Story Kit. (New to me, not to iPods.) I think this app will really allow young students to show their creative abilities. The kids have the option to take pictures, add text, and record their voice while reading it. I could see this being used in all content areas. It could be to demonstrate a skill, publish a story, publish a how-to book, share an event, etc. Not only that, but it is a pretty simple and straight-forward app. I hope to have the opportunity in the near future to work with some teachers and students on a project using Story Kit.