You've probably heard over and over again that you should cut your sodium intake to improve your health and lower your risk of certain illnesses and diseases. It's sound advice, and eating more vegetables, such as green bell peppers, is one way to do that because fresh veggies are naturally low in sodium. As a bonus, adding raw green bell peppers to your diet also increases your intake of certain vitamins and minerals.
A 1-cup serving of raw green bell peppers contains 4 milligrams of sodium. That translates to less than 1 percent of your daily 2,300-milligram sodium limit. In fact, you can eat an entire raw green bell pepper and consume just 5 milligrams of sodium.
You need small doses of sodium to regulate your blood pressure, as well as to help your nerves and muscles work properly. When you consume more than you need, your kidneys aren't able to get rid of it efficiently. Over time, this can cause sodium to build up in your blood, which increases your blood pressure. High blood pressure puts you at an increased risk for heart disease and stroke. If you already have high blood pressure, heart problems or kidney disease, your doctor might recommend limiting your sodium intake to 1,500 milligrams or less per day to help prevent these potentially life-threatening health problems.
Vitamins and Minerals
While raw green bell peppers are low in sodium, they are high in other key vitamins and minerals. A 1-cup serving of chopped green peppers contains about 120 milligrams of vitamin C, which is more than the 75 milligrams women need each day and the 90 milligrams men should aim for. Vitamin C helps protect you from infection and aids in wound healing. The same serving of raw green bell pepper delivers 11 micrograms of vitamin K. That's 12 percent of the 90 micrograms women need each day and 9 percent of the 120 micrograms men require. Vitamin K is essential for proper blood clotting. Raw green bell peppers also supply vitamin A for healthy eyes and potassium, which regulates your heart beat.
Eating Raw Green Bell Peppers
Eat raw green bell pepper strips with hummus or low-fat ranch dressing for dipping, or sprinkle them with fresh black pepper for a tasty and low-sodium side dish. Chop the bell peppers and scatter them over a spinach or pasta salad. Toss diced green pepper with onions, jalapenos and mushrooms for a quick, healthy and low-sodium salad. Stir raw green bell peppers into cooked quinoa or rice to add a boost of flavor and nutrition.
- green bell pepper image by Chef from Fotolia.com