It is estimated that all species of tigers will all be extinct within a decade.
Out of the nine different species of tigers, only six remain.Four of the remaining species are considered endangered and two are considered critically endangered.
-Siberian Tiger (critically endangered)
-South China Tiger (most critically endangered)
-Bali Tiger (extinct in the 1930’s)
-Caspian Tiger (extinct in the 1970’s)
-Javan Tiger (extinct in the 1980’s)
WHAT IS THE PROBLEM?
One of the major reasons that tigers are going extinct is because of habitat loss. Tigers are constantly competing with humans for land.
Over the past 40 years, China’s population has doubled and 99 per cent of China’s forests have been destroyed, leaving the tigers with no where to live.
This causes another issue of tigers living in close quarters with humans. This means that many tigers are poisoned, shot or snared.
Here is a video that was shot in 2010 at a protected forest. In this video you will see a bulldozer encroaching on a tiger’s habitat.
IS THERE A SOLUTION?
To try and save the tigers, animal conservationists work with governments to set up wildlife preserves.
Unfortunately, most reserves are located on isolated islands which makes it very hard for tigers to survive. It will be extremely hard for the tigers to meet mates, there is threat of disease and threat of genetic drift.
Genetic drift: variation in the relative frequency of different genotypes in a small population, owing to the chance disappearance of particular genes as individuals die or do not reproduce.
Ultimately there is not one solution to make this problem go away. But if you would like to help, visit WWF’s website.
WWF is doing a lot of amazing work to help protect the tigers.
Some of the work that WWF is doing includes: protecting and connecting tiger habitats, monitoring tigers and their prey, eliminating tiger trade and working with governments to help them realize the benefits of respecting tigers.
Remember that even though you may not be the direct contributing factor to the problem, you can be the direct contributing factor in helping to find a solution.