[muh-tab-uh-liz-uh m] /məˈtæb əˌlɪz əm/
Biology, Physiology. the sum of the physical and chemical processes in an organism by which its material substance is produced, maintained, and destroyed, and by which energy is made available.
Compare , .
any basic process of organic functioning or operating:
changes in the country’s economic metabolism.
the sum total of the chemical processes that occur in living organisms, resulting in growth, production of energy, elimination of waste material, etc See anabolism, basal metabolism, catabolism
the sum total of the chemical processes affecting a particular substance in the body: carbohydrate metabolism, iodine metabolism
in physiology sense, 1878, from French métabolisme, from Greek metabole “a change,” from metaballein “to change,” from meta- “over” (see meta-) + ballein “to throw” (see ballistics).
metabolism me·tab·o·lism (mĭ-tāb’ə-lĭz’əm)
The chemical processes by which cells produce the substances and energy needed to sustain life. As part of metabolism, organic compounds are broken down to provide heat and energy in the process called catabolism. Simpler molecules are also used to build more complex compounds like proteins for growth and repair of tissues as part of anabolism. Many metabolic processes are brought about by the action of enzymes. The overall speed at which an organism carries out its metabolic processes is termed its metabolic rate (or, when the organism is at rest, its basal metabolic rate). Birds, for example, have a high metabolic rate, since they are warm-blooded, and their usual method of locomotion, flight, requires large amounts of energy. Accordingly, birds usually need large amounts of high-quality, energy-rich foods such as seeds or meat, which they must eat frequently. See more at cellular respiration.
metabolic adjective (mět’ə-bŏl’ĭk)
The total of the chemical reactions that maintain the life of a living thing.
Note: In humans, metabolism is related to the intake and use of food; persons with a high metabolism can eat more without gaining weight.
[muh-tab-uh-lahyz] /məˈtæb əˌlaɪz/ verb (used with or without object), metabolized, metabolizing. 1. to subject to ; change by . /mɪˈtæbəˌlaɪz/ verb 1. to bring about or subject to metabolism v. 1887 (transitive), 1934 (intransitive), from Greek metabole “a change” (see metabolism) + -ize. Related: Metabolized; metabolizing. metabolize me·tab·o·lize (mĭ-tāb’ə-līz’) v. me·tab·o·lized, me·tab·o·liz·ing, me·tab·o·liz·es metabolize (mĭ-tāb’ə-līz’) […]
/mɪˈtæbəˌləʊm/ noun 1. the full complement of metabolites present in a cell, tissue, or organism in a particular physiological or developmental state
/mɪˈtæˌbəˈlɒmɪks/ noun (functioning as sing) 1. the study of all the metabolites present in cells, tissues, and organs
/mɪˈtæbəlɪ/ noun 1. (biology) the ability of some cells, esp protozoans, to alter their shape