Earthworm Activities for Kids
Earthworm activities have great educational value as it teaches life science and ecology at the same time.
Though not many people fancy these crawlies but it is interesting studying and observing them. Watch how earthworms live......yes, you can do it without living under the soil by building a hotel for the worm.
How to Build a Worm Hotel
What you need:
Some earthworms, a big clear plastic bottle (about 1.5 litres) without cap, some dam soil, a dark cloth
What to do:
Make some small holes on the plastic bottle (this allow air into the bottle as living things need air!). Fill the bottle with damped soil together with the earthworms. Leave the “worm hotel” away from sun light (earthworm does not like hot sun light) and covered it with the dark cloth. Ensure the soil stay damped throughout. Observe the “hotel” in the next few days. You will start seeing the “path” dig by the earthworm from the clear plastic bottle.
Kids will be thrilled to observe the daily life of the earthworm.
Release the earthworms back to the garden after this activity if you do not intend to keep them. Never kill any living creatures.
How long is the Worm?
Apart from observing the living pattern of an earthworm, let the kids feel the body of the earthworm.....Yes, it is cold. Ask them why is the body of an earthworm cold.
If you manage to dig a huge earthworm out from the garden, let's measure it. It can turn out to be a fun math activity by learning how to measure the earthworm!
Make a Worm Craft
How about creating a worm? Yes, you can make a worm from tissue paper. Take a look at how this cute little worm look like in worm craft.
More Science Activities to Build Kids' Observation Skills
Many simple and interesting hands-on life science activities help to expand our children’s science knowledge. Children are curious by nature. Such activities help them to answer the “how” and “why” in science through their observation skills. These elementary activities recommended here let children gain knowledge about fundamental life science.
- the basic needs of living things
- how plants reproduce
- ecology; how living things co-exist
- life cycle of animals
These life science activities are simple and interesting. Parents doing homeschooling can organize it easily.