|How to submit educational material to Enchanted Learning|
|Our subscribers' grade-level estimate for this page: 3rd - 4th|
Nebraska Map Quiz/Printout
Nebraska Outline Map Printout
Nebraska Label Me! Printout
Facts, Map and State Symbols
Nebraska Flag Printout/Quiz
Large Flag Printable
State Abbreviation - NE
State Capital - Lincoln
Largest City - Omaha
Area - 77,358 square miles [Nebraska is the 16th biggest state in the USA]
Population - 1,711,263 (as of 2000) [Nebraska is the 38th most populous state in the USA]
Name for Residents - Nebraskans
Major Industries - farming (corn, soybeans, wheat, sorghum), grain processing, meat-packing the Air Force Strategic Air Command,
Presidential Birthplace - Gerald Rudolph Ford was born in Omaha on July 14, 1913 (Ford was the 38th US President, serving from 1974 to 1977).
Nebraska's official flag was adopted in 1925. The flag has a deep blue field with the state seal in the center, pictured in gold (yellow) and silver. The state seal, designed in 1867 by Isaac Wiles (a member of the House of Representatives), pictures a blacksmith hammering on an anvil, a settler's cabin, sheaths of wheat, a steamboat on a river, and the transcontinental railroad, with mountains in the background. The state motto, "Equality Before the Law," is on a banner above the landscape. The date of Nebraska's admission to the union, March 1, 1867, is listed below the seal.
|State Mammal||State Fish
|State Fossil||State Insect
||State Soft Drink
Developed in Hastings, Nebraska, by Edward E. Perkins in 1927
|State American Folk Dance
Nebraska: Map/Quiz Printout
Answer geography questions about Nebraska using the map on this quiz.
Nebraska: Outline Map Printout
An outline map of Nebraska to print.
Nebraska: US State Dot to Dot Mystery Map
Connect the dots to draw the borders of a mystery state of the USA. Then use a globe or atlas to figure out which state you have drawn. You might want to give students clues, such as that it is in the midwestern USA, that its capital is Lincoln, or that its name starts with "N." Answer: Nebraska.
Nebraska: Label Me! Printout
Label the major features of Nebraska.
Large Coloring Printable
A large black-and-white printable of the flag of Nebraska.
Nebraska's Flag Printout/Quiz
Read about and answer questions on the flag of Nebraska.
Read about Tornado Alley, an area in Mid-USA that is prone to dangerous tornadoes.
Tornado Quiz + Label Tornado Alley Printout
Answer five questions about tornadoes and label the states in the heart of Tornado Alley. Or go to the answers.
Lewis and Clark: Follow the Instructions
Color the trail that Lewis and Clark and the Corps of Discovery followed in their exploration of the Louisiana Purchase according to simple directions, such as, "They sailed up the Missouri River, passing through what is now Nebraska and South Dakota. Color Nebrask gdark green. Color South Dakota gray." For beginning readers. Or go to the answers.
Lewis and Clark: Follow the Instructions #2
Color the trail that Lewis and Clark and the Corps of Discovery followed in their exploration of the Louisiana Purchase according to simple directions, such as, "The Corps of Discovery traveled up the Missouri River. In August, in what is now Nebraska, they met with the Oto and Missouri Indians. Color Nebraska dark green." For fluent readers. Or go to the answers.
Draw and Write
Draw a map of the state that you live in (in the USA) and write about it.
US State - Find Related Words
For a US state, write eight words related to the state, then use each word in a sentence.
US State Graphic Organizer
For one US state, write the name of the state, draw a map of the state, then write the state capital, postal abbreviation, date of statehood, state bird (draw and write), state flower (draw and write), a major body of water in the state, two bordering states, and state nickname.
US State Report Graphic Organizer Printout #1
This printout helps the student do a short report on a US state, prompting the student to draw a map of the state, locate it on a US map, draw the state's flag, and write its capital city, state nickname, area, population, date of statehood, and state bird.
US State Report Graphic Organizer Printout #2
This printout helps the student do a short report on a US state, prompting the student to draw a map of the state, locate it on a US map, draw the state's flag, and write its capital city, state nickname, area, population, date of statehood, state bird, state flower, climate, and major industries.
A short, printable book on a US state. To complete the book, the student must research a US state, draw its map, draw its flag, and answer simple questions about the state.
USA Map: Find Your State
Find and label your state in the USA, and label other important geography.
USA Map: Where I Live
Write your country, state, and city, and then find and label your state (and a few other geographical features).
Write Ten Things About Your State
A one-page printable worksheet. Write ten things about your state (plus one thing you would like to change).
US State Wheel
This 2-page print-out makes a wheel about a single US state; the student fills out the information on the wheel. It consists of a base page together with a rear wheel that spins around. After putting the wheel together, the student follows the instructions on the front wheel (coloring in the state on a US map and drawing a small map of the state) and fills out the 12 sections of the wheel with information about one state. When you spin the wheel, facts about the US State appear, including: Biggest Cities, Capital, Flag, Bodies of Water, Postal Abbreviation, State Bird, Population (rank), Area (rank), Residents Called, Bordered by, Major Industries, and Entered Union (order).
US State - Find a Related Word for Each Letter
For a US state, see if you can think of and write down a word or phrase that is related to that state for each letter of the alphabet. Think of cities, famous people from the state, bodies of water, mountains, landmarks, and other features. Find words for as many letters as you can.
A census is an official count of the number of people in a region. The survey is done by a government, usually periodically. This page explains how and why censuses are taken.
Printable Read-and-Answer Worksheet
A printable worksheet on the census, with a short text to read, a map to color, and questions to answer. Or go to the answers. Or go to a pdf file with the worksheet and the answers.
|US State Facts, Map and State Symbols|
|Order and Dates of Statehood||State Population Figures||State Area Figures||State Extremes and Records|
|US Postal Codes||US Postal Codes Matching||Guidelines for Writing a Report on a State||US Geography|
Over 30,000 Web Pages
Sample Pages for Prospective Subscribers, or click below
Overview of Site|
Enchanted Learning Home
Monthly Activity Calendar
Books to Print
Parts of Speech
The Test of Time
TapQuiz Maps - free iPhone Geography Game
Biology Label Printouts
Physical Sciences: K-12
Art and Artists
Label Me! Printouts
|Search the Enchanted Learning website for:|
Copyright ©2001-2010 EnchantedLearning.com ------ How to cite a web page