Emerging infectious diseases pose a significant threat to public health. Therefore, it is paramount to establish decent preventive measures. However, when infectious diseases emerge, there is usually little data on them, and many health professionals are often caught off-guard. In the wake of emerging infectious diseases, three challenges often take center stage.
First, molecular diagnosis of such diseases is at times unknown, or extremely limited. Since the diseases are new, standardized diagnosis protocols are not available, and clinicians often gamble when detecting and diagnosing those diseases. Secondly, the hospitalization of victims of emerging infectious diseases, there is usually a high chance of nosocomial infections. Otherwise known as hospital-acquired infections, nosocomial infections can bring the operations of any given hospital to a halt. In such circumstances, if measures are not taken, the diseases could spread within the hospital and infect other patients, and this can turn out to a catastrophic affair. Thirdly, most infectious diseases show instances of antimicrobial resistance. Because there is limited data on the molecular basis of such diseases, the current antimicrobials might not be effective in treating infectious diseases.
Professor Linfa Wang of the Medical Graduate School of Duke University, Singapore argues that knowledge and research form the bridge between shielding the public from infectious diseases and spread of infectious diseases. In order to remain on point, Linfa suggests that every government through their public health parastatals must set up infectious diseases centers. These centers must be equipped with trained medical personnel and scientists, as well as state-of-the-art equipment. Once an infectious disease has cropped-up, it is the duty of such centers to give guidance to the public, as well as define the diagnosis and treatment of that disease.
Infectious disease research centers must be proactive in nature. They must have the know-how of possible infectious diseases in their locality, and map at-risk areas. In order to remain alert, infectious disease research centers must invest in the study of diagnosis of infectious diseases, as well as design preventive and counter-action measures of dealing with emerging infectious diseases. In addition, victims of emerging infectious diseases must be kept in isolation rooms while at the hospital in order to minimize chances of nosocomial infections. In summary, this paper has revealed the three significant challenges that crop-up in the wake of infectious diseases. They include poor diagnosis, nosocomial infection and antimicrobial resistance. Infectious disease research centers must be proactive in nature if they intend to nest emerging infectious diseases.
© Copyright 2003-2017. FtwayneMagazine.com. All Rights Reserved.