A person’s body can shake uncontrollably for a variety of reasons, chiefly a seizure. Of course, there are essential tremors, which is not just a symptom but an actual condition. Did you know that there are millions of people that actually have this condition? That’s right, and the condition itself is something that is treatable, if not curable. You see, people develop this condition having been through all kinds of situations, including developing other medical conditions prior to having essential tremors.
One example of this would be a drug addict who is experiencing withdrawal symptoms. People also have essential tremors when they have Parkinson’s Disease. It is said that anxiety can cause essential tremors, too. So you can see that these tremors can be part of so many different things that require different treatments.
Naturally, this means that it’s very important to seek treatment because you need to pinpoint the reason for the tremors. You might think you know or have no idea at all, but you’re going to want to know of course by way of diagnosis from a doctor. What are all the associated symptoms that can occur when a person is experiencing essential tremors?
The uncontrollable shaking is only part of the picture, but that doesn’t mean you’re going to experience all the symptoms all the time. Some people experience uncontrollable shaking all day, while others just have periods of shaking. Of course, you might not experience all of the symptoms anyway. As for the other symptoms, people sometimes have a shaky voice. They can also experience their head nodding uncontrollably as well.
It’s unfortunate that a lack of balance can be part of the problem because this can cause falls. One universal treatment for tremors is rest, which means that a person with essential tremors shouldn’t be pushing themselves too hard. Stress is also going to make your tremors worse, so it’s important that you realize that when a stressful situation presents itself.
We should all focus on less stress in our lives. Of course things happen, that’s for sure. Remember what’s important is that you talk about your symptoms with a doctor and know what natural remedies you can use as well as your options medically speaking. Your doctor will help get you on the right course of treatment, and hopefully you can see a decline in how often you experience tremors.