Diego Cano, 7th grader says, “Robotics is fun. It challenges me. I’m learning how to program and I will possibly get a job doing computer programming.”
Students have been studying and practicing all semester to the point where robotics is becoming second nature and they are gaining the foresight to see how these new acquired skills will benefit them in the future.
“I am a driver and builder. It’s certain careers out there where you need machines and I will be able to get one of those jobs." says Edward Yates as he talks about how Robotics will benefit him in the future.
There’s a misconception that girls aren't as interested and involved in Robotics as boys, but Ashley Molina an 8th grader rejects those stereotypes.
“I think girls should give Robotics a try. I thought in the beginning that it might be hard but I was programming and building and I found it very easy to do," says Ashley. “I think other girls can do it as well.”
Ashley already sees how robotics will benefit her in the future. “I want to be a video game designer or a doctor. Learning how to code and program – I think will make it easier for me to get a career because I understand that there is a need to use computers to create games and for doctors to help sick people.”
Principal Salvador Aquino, explained the benefit robotics has had for the students:
“Robotics provides a path to college and career readiness. As far as communication and collaboration the students have been able to build those skills by being involved in this program. Robotics allows our students to be creative, to learn how to trouble shoot and solve problems."
“I’m the one who built the robot. It wasn’t easy. The directions in the book were difficult to use, but I’m learning to get through those challenges. Robotics is teaching me to problem solve and I’m starting to use that in everything I do." says Kevin Sanchez, 8th grader.
The Roosevelt Elementary team ranked a respectable 8th out of 15 teams taking part in the competition. But these students are relatively new to these types of events while some schools have been competing for years.
Yahir Zamora, 8th grader, says she and her teammates are building up their experience to perform better. But she has set her sights beyond this competition.
“I like the competition and the building of the robot. Learning robotics has taught me that any job can use robotics even making some jobs safer, like construction, and that is the type of career I want in the future," says Zamora.
When it comes to his team Yahir says, “What I like most about my team is that we collaborate together to solve our problems.”