ANSWER ID:129, 371
About domain names (web addresses)
Domain names (or web addresses) are used to address computers and information on the internet. Most commonly, they're used to locate websites.
There are two parts that make up a domain name:
- a unique string of alpha-numeric characters, dashes and periods (such as bluebowlhomewares), and
- an extension (such as .com.au in Australia, or .co.nz in New Zealand)
When you combine these, you get a domain name (such as bluebowlhomewares.com.au or bluebowlhomewares.co.nz).
Why do I need to know about domain names?
The domain names attached to your MYOB Atlas website will be used by your visitors to access your site. When visitors use a search engine (such as Google) to find your website, your website's title and domain name will appear in the search results. Or, if visitors already know your domain name, they'll enter it into their web browser's address bar to access your site.
If you didn't choose to register a personalised domain name when you first set up your MYOB Atlas website, you'll have received a temporary domain name. But you can still register a personalised domain name through MYOB Atlas at any time. A personalised domain name makes your site look professional and makes it easier to find. For more information, see Registering domain names (Australia | New Zealand).
An extension is one of the two parts that makes up a domain name. For example, in the domain name bluebowlhomewares.com.au, the extension is .com.au. Similarly, in the domain name bluebowlhomewares.co.nz, the extension is .co.nz.
Domain name extensions are often categorised by level. Top-level domain names include .com, .net and .org. Second-level domain names include .com.au, .net.au, .co.nz and .net.nz.
Which domain name extensions can I register?
The following domain name extensions are available for you to register through MYOB Atlas:
- .com.au (Australia only)
- .net.au (Australia only)
- .co.nz (New Zealand only)
- .net.nz (New Zealand only)
Why should I purchase variants of my domain name?
If you've already registered a domain name (such as bluebowlhomewares.com.au or bluebowlhomewares.co.nz) it's a good idea to register variants of your domain name (such as bluebowlhomewares.com). This means that you're registering multiple extensions for your domain name.
There are a couple of important reasons why it's a good idea to own variants of your domain name:
Protect your brand and online identity
Domain name 'squatters' often register variants of your domain name and then try to sell them back to you at an inflated price.
Registering multiple variants of your domain name also prevents others from registering a similar name that attracts customers to their site instead of yours, or conflicts with or misrepresents your business.
Drive more traffic to your website
Registering multiple variants of your domain name and pointing them to your primary domain name can help customers find your site.
You might also like to consider registering common misspellings of your business name and/or primary domain name to prevent lost business.
Securing variants of your domain name is a small price to pay to keep your brand and online identity safe. To register variants of your domain name, see Registering domain names (Australia | New Zealand).
Your website's primary domain name is the domain name all of your other domain names redirect to. For more information, see Setting your website's primary domain name.
You can find details in Registrant Rights and Responsibilities Under the 2009 Registrar Accreditation Agreement.
At some point you may need DNS management for your domain name. MYOB Atlas does not offer DNS management, but you can transfer your domain name to a 3rd party registrar of your choice—just follow the instructions in Transferring domain names to another registrar.