when does daylight saving time end when does daylight saving time end when does daylight saving time end when does daylight saving time end
Daylight Saving Time ended in the early hours today (Nov 1, 2015) and most Americans set clocks back. This time changing affects people in different ways. There are several documented cases where people find it difficult to adjust to falling back.
At this point in the season, days have grown shorter and nighttime has gained an extra hour. This man made time adjustment can bring about health issues. In regions where there is a conspicuous lack of sunlight in the fall and winter times the people have significant disruption to circadian rhythms. Many studies have shed light on the body’s response to shifts in daylight. Most notable of daylight deficiency afflictions is Seasonal Affective disorder (SAD).
Humans are designed to be awake during light and asleep during dark.
When days get shorter and nights get longer your circadian rhythms have to adjust. Daylight saving time adds a little twist in that we change the time to accomodate the daylight . When we manually change time we lose one hour sleep during the fall and gain one hour sleep the following spring.
Setting time back is much easier on our circadian rhythms than the reverse.
However, some people find themselves having trouble making the transition. To combat the effect studies have suggested getting more exposure to sunlight in the early evenings, try taking a walk around 5 or 6 p.m.
As the days get shorter and temperatures drop, many people will begin to feel psychological symptoms known as seasonal affective disorder. Seasonal affective disorder is depression that begins around the beginning of fall and is tiggered by low sunlight. Sufferes may notice a loss in energy, moodiness and a mild depression.
The seasonal changes have an impact on bodily systems, particualrly the pituitary gland and the hypothalamic system. These seasonal changes can also trigger an increase the severity of bipolar disorder, mood disorders and previous depressive conditions.
Nearly 20% of U.S. citizens feel some psychological effects as fall approaches. People living in northern climates, experience a marked response. Most people get through the season just feeling “winter blues”.
There are several ways to battle these symptoms, including light therapy, maintaining a sleep routine and structuring your day to get more sunlight.
Eating a diet rich in energy boosting foods can help battle the effects of colder weather coming. Exercise has great benefits. If you’re prone to seasonal depression, exercise will certainly combat the sluggishness.
If you haven’t already done itwhen does day saving time end
Daylight Saving TimeEnded at 2 am November 1,2015
Set Your Clock Back One Hour!
Read More about S A D: Winter Blues