American History is a fascinating subject. Sadly, textbooks for United States history can be incredibly expensive. How would you like some FREE resources for teaching history to your kids? You’ve come to the right place!
Learn United States History for FREE
The first resource I would recommend is Guest Hollow. Their history curriculum was made by a mom just like you, and includes an entire year’s worth of lesson plans. The curriculum is more than just a textbook with reading comprehension questions; you’ll get fun map activities, cooking recipes, lapbooks and more. Definitely worth checking out!
American Heritage is also a great resource for a free history curriculum. You can download each lesson in an individual PDF file, or order a FREE cd containing the curriculum, or even purchase printed versions. This is suitable for all grades, with each level building on the one before. Elementary students learn about how the colonists lived under a monarchy, middle school students learn about important American symbols and texts that govern us today and high schoolers focus on the in-depth analysis of our American ideals.
Ushistory.org is perhaps my favorite; there is a complete outline of topics; click on a topic and it brings you to a chapter complete with interesting and informative links. Make sure you pay attention to the links in the sidebar; they lead to more information on the topic in the chapter.
Interactive timelines and multiple organizational access points make Digital History an excellent choice for learning American History. You’ll also find a variety of helpful tools to help with learning; a textbook, various media sources, documents and more.
Last, but certainly not least, we have the US History Open Textbook from Boundless. This reads a lot like a typical textbook, and has a glossary of must-know terms. Check out all of the extra features that Boundless offers; it’s a complete package that won’t disappoint!
What do y’all use for your history? Do you know of other American History resources? Please share in the comments below!