Address / Location: Located northeast of Marco Island, with currently gated access from Curcie Road off CR 82, surrounded by state and federal conservation lands, the McIlvane Marsh Project consists of an 800-acre mangrove salt marsh. Conservation Collier acquired 369 acres between 2007 and 2009. Collier County also owns 20 acres within McIlvane Marsh, acquired as mitigation in a land swap in 1999, making a total of 389 acres in County ownership for conservation. The State of Florida owns 329 acres within the marsh in a mosaic pattern with Conservation Collier lands, for a total of nearly 718 acres out of the 800-acre marsh currently in conservation status. Conservation Collier is seeking to partner with Rookery Bay National Estuarine Research Reserve, the entity having local state management authority, for ongoing management of the marsh, in providing public fishing opportunity in the borrow pit shown above.
Manager Contact Information: McIlvane Marsh does not currently have an assigned Manager, but inquiries about the status of this property can be directed to ConservationCollier@Colliergov.net and 239-252-2961.
Preserve Size: 389 acres
Dates Acquired: Between July 2007 and August 2009
Cost of Acquisition: $2,802,900
Printed materials: Interim Management Plan
Public Access Facilities: McIlvane Marsh preserve is currently gated and not open to the public.
Plants and Wildlife: Native plant communities existing in the marsh include mangrove swamp and salt marsh. The area is home to listed species including American crocodile, American alligator, snowy egret, wood stork, tri-colored heron, osprey, little blue heron, bald eagle, everglades snail kite, Florida panther and Florida black bear. Many other species of birds and amphibians also live within and utilize the McIlvane Marsh.
Reason for Acquisition: The McIlvane Marsh contains coastal wetlands that protect water resource values by providing habitat for wetland dependent wildlife, many of them listed species. The marsh serves as a filter for pollutants running off adjacent developed areas before the water reaches nearby marine and estuarine communities and protects developed properties to the north from hurricane storm surge.