Candida & Yeast Symptoms
If you smell a musty smell, see mold, or know you are around mold, then chances are you have a candida problem because mold and candida go hand in hand. This is a serious problem for many people and new studies show that fungus in the body causes cancer. Some of the symptoms you may find are below.
Do you have a Candida or mold infection or allergy? Symptoms include sneezing, congestion, itchy or watery eyes, a persistent cough, or a tickle at the back of your throat. Do you clear your throat a lot? Even asthma can result in those who do not normally have asthma. Do you crave sweets or feel chronically fatigued? Do you suffer from brain fog? Headaches? Dandruff? These can all be symptoms of mold allergy.
If you have found mold in your bathroom or bedroom (the most likely places), you will need to handle its effects. You can also find mold in air conditioning systems, face creams, basements, and anywhere you smell a “musty odor.” Many people think that if they just clean up the mold in their environment, then their work is done, but mold throws off the delicate balance of the body. And where you have a mold exposure, you have a Candida overgrowth. They go hand in hand.
On the outside of the body, you can find mold or fungus on fingernails or toenails, thrush (tongue), and bumpy skin. If you have bumpy skin, you can kill the mold colonies with apple cider vinegar on a cotton swab. Unfortunately, most doctors receive very little training in mycology (the study of fungi and their effects) during medical school, often less than veterinarians. As a result, many common activities can be overlooked as the cause of a patient’s health problems. Worse, recent studies point to fungus being the precursor to cancer.
Here are a few of the most common things that contribute to mold problems and Candida overgrowth
Exposure to pesticides. Pesticides kill bugs, including the colony in your gut. You do not have to eat them to be exposed.
Antibiotics. Used to kill disease-causing bacteria, antibiotics are very effective in killing normal, protective bacterial flora throughout the body.
Swimming in chlorinated pools. Copper and Silver Anodes, Salt water, and Chlorine are used in swimming pools and Jacuzzis to kill bacteria and algae. Just as these things kill bacteria in the water, they also kill the body’s normal bacterial flora. This is one of the reasons that I have designed my Oxygen Harmony™ pool system. It reduces chemical use by 90%. Go to www.idealearthwater.com for more information.
Alcohol use (most often beer, wine and vodka). Frequent use of alcohol encourages the growth of yeast in the body.
Mercury and mercury fillings (silver amalgam fillings). Mercury has antibacterial, fungal-promoting effects.
Use of corticosteroids that turn off normal immune reactions leave a person without their natural defenses against fungi
Birth Control pills, injections, or patches. Women’s bodies naturally experience highs and lows of various hormones. Birth control pills, injections, or patches cause these hormones to become even, which encourages fungal growth. This may be why so many women on the pill experience more yeast infections than women who use other contraception.
If you need to handle mold in your environment, then send me an email and request my free MOLD Report. It will help you to clean up the mold without using chlorine bleach.
When I was a volunteer in 2005 after hurricane Katrina struck New Orleans, exposure to mold almost cost me my life, but I did some experimentation and healed myself.
Since then, my wife and I have developed our Candida Relief™ program.
It rapidly helps return the body’s balance without a restrictive diet!