Welcome to the University of Oregon's Green Chemistry website. In the links that follow there is information about our green chemistry curriculum, research programs, database of educational materials, workshop on incorporating green chemistry into the undergraduate curriculum and our textbook on Greener Organic Chemistry.
Curricular Innovations in Green Chemistry Organic and Beyond (March 2006)
Going Green Lecture Assignments and Lab Experiences for the College Curriculum, Presentations from the National ACS Meeting (March 2005)
Greener Education Materials (GEMs) for Chemists An interactive database of education materials focused on green chemistry. Available in June 2005, a comprehensive resource of education materials including laboratory exercises, lecture materials, course syllabi and multimedia content that illustrate chemical concepts important for green chemistry. Each entry includes a description of the item and is searchable by a variety of parameters, including chemistry concepts, laboratory techniques, green chemistry principles, and target audience. Database entries incorporate both published and unpublished materials.
Green Organic Chemistry: Curriculum Development and Dissemination provides a brief description of our work in this area and the history of the program.
Green Chemistry Education Network (GCEdNet) serves as a catalyst for integrating green chemistry in chemical education at all levels. As a network of educators we support opportunities to research, develop, implement and disseminate green educational materials. The GCEdNet reaches out to all chemistry educators through collaboration and mentoring, facilitating professional growth, and fostering the synergistic integration of green chemistry in education.
Map of the Green Chemistry Community Looking for a green chemistry contact in your area? Consult the recently updated Green Chemistry Google map, listing over 500 individuals and organizations worldwide. The map project was initiated at the University of Oregon and its growth and success is the result of an amazing three-year partnership with the green chemistry community. We invite you to add yourself to the map.
Green Organic Chemistry: Tools, Strategies and Laboratory Experiments A textbook/laboratory manual for undergraduate organic chemistry laboratory. Includes ten comprehensive introductory chapters describing the strategies and tools used in practicing greener chemistry and nineteen extensively student-tested laboratory experiments that teach fundamental organic chemistry concepts and lab skills in a more environmentally-friendly (greener) fashion.
Green Chemistry in Education Workshop A week-long, hands-on workshop for university educators that wish to adopt a greener organic laboratory curriculum. Please visit the Center for Workshops in the Chemical Sciences (CWCS) for application information.
Green Product Design Network this virtual center brings together talent from around the UO and the world to catalyze implementation of greener products by addressing each stage of innovation – from chemical content to product design to supply chains to consumer awareness.
Greener Nanomaterials and Nanomanufacturing The goals of the Safer Nanomaterials and Nanomanufacturing Initiative [SNNI] are to develop new nanomaterials and nanomanufacturing approaches that offer a high level of performance, yet pose minimal harm to human health or the environment. Research under the Initiative will merge the principles of green chemistry and nanoscience to produce safer nanomaterials and more efficient nanomanufacturing processes in the context of producing nanoparticles and nanostructured materials for applications in fields such as in photovoltaics, nanoelectronics and sensing.
Center for Sustainable Materials Chemistry (CSMC) The vision for this National Science Foundation funded Center is to conduct curiosity-driven and use-inspired research to enhance the sustainable chemistry toolbox with new methods and new techniques that will advance the scientific enterprise and transform the next generation of products, while preparing students to become the next generation of green chemists. CSMC leads the study and design of environmentally benign chemistry platforms for the fabrication of high-performance inorganic electronic devices. The Center seeks to revolutionize device fabrication for applications spanning the space from large-area displays and electronics to nanoscale integrated circuits.