Dodgem Quantum Cycloids
12 Mar 2013
An amusing way how Nature determines Least-time , Effort or Distance . A ball rolling on a bigger ball (epicycloid) dodges inside (quantum effect) and rolls inside (hypocycloid) . Repeat . Reconciling the two gives two equations for two variables . Solvable . With all sorts of delicious extras.
3.Both systems are non-linear . See the little animations in the above links . All those spiky points . Where linearity breaks down .
4.Which explains why the http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Schwinger_limit is so small (only 1.3 x 10^18 V/M)
5. The maths is a nightmare . Any Calculus using infinitesimals have to stitched together . Still do-able if the quantum-dodgem is only Beth(0) random . But random orders of Beth(1+) will require something better .
6.Remember , photons do this while moving along a geodesic (“orbit”)
7.A Cheat : see Appendix I
Twistors enable a much simpler calculation .
In physical terms , it means slightly lower energy levels at quantum levels . (Calculation costs energy)
The photon/particle slivers into “forbidden” quantum states .
8.Stacking them :
We can stack them to get really nifty quantum catalysts . A little bit at a time . Nibble them to death .
9. Some Applications :
The splitting of water into Hydrogen and Oxygen (about 4% at present) can be ramped up to about 80% .
9.2 Burning nitrogen as fuel (catalyst)
10. You cannot have the benefits without the dangers and the responsibilities .
If you exterminate yourselves , God will be disappointed that you did not do more .
Light Amplififcation by Zeropoint Emission of Radiation(LAZER)
5 Mar 2013
A Zeropoint Energy tap is achieved by combining Maxwell’s equations , Twistors and the Schwinger Limit .
1.Transform the usual solution to Maxwell’s equations (sine forms) to cylindrical co-ordinates .
The solution then becomes 1/r*sin(x) for E(electric field) and B(magnetic field)
2.Twist the fields and reduce r .
3. Somewhere on the twistor axis , r reduces enough so that the Electric field increases above the Schwinger limit .
4.Space then goes non-linear .
Even for Beth(0) , there is an energy gain .
The Zeropoint energy arises from random (Beth(0) ) particle-anti-particle interactions . The electric field is strong enough to tease them apart .
(Schwinger) . Inside bubble r0 , particles recombine . Outside r0 , particles combine with existing matter , giving rise to current flow .
A circle always fits inside a bigger circle . From this , Calculate the random energy escaping from around a bubble .
5.But it is a twistor . Energy release is not Beth(0) , ie flip-of-coin random .
6.There are eight = 2^3 possibilities in 3D+T space.
6.1Positive feedback : Energy keeps being pumped in with no limit : Big Bang
6.2 Steady state : Energy pumped in is limited in some way . Very long , very massive electromagnetic wave (basically , a cosmic string)
6.3. Severely limited energy pump . Maxwell's Classical equations applies . Pinching out to simple EM wave .
6.4 6.1+ 6.2 Big Bangs + steadystates
6.5 6.1+6.3 Big Bangs + waves (observed per present theory)
6.6 6.1+6.2+6.3 All of the above . The most likely .
6.7 6.2 + 6.3 Strongly radiating Cosmic Strings .
6.8 The Null case : there is no quantum particle-antiparticle formation . There is no ElectroMagmetic Waves . Pure Mass .
7.Gravitational effects :
There is a measurable gravitational wave generated at the Schwering limit . But it is +g , -g affair at right angles to the Electric and Magnetic field.
Can be quite strong at Schwering limit .
7.1 On Earth :
There is a strong Electric field from the ground to the ionosphere , a magnetic field from the sun at right angles . The +g , -g effect would be at right angles to both .
Why do you think these small asteroids disintegrate ? Urals , 2013 . +g , -g .
7.2 More useful is anti-gravity system .
Simply create a very strong local electric field parallel to the ground and at right angles to the Solar magnetic field . Do the above tricks , configured so that +g is towards the planet and –g away from it .
7.3 Using twistors, this is self-powering . Nifty .
The positives far outweigh the negatives .
You can try to use these technologies for negative purposes . See what happens to you .
Things are not what they seem .
Skimmed milk masquerades as cream .