This beautiful material presents a great diversity of tints, but a rich hyacinth red is common.
Buffon remarked that the same temperature might have been expected, all other circumstances being equal, to produce the same beings in different parts of the globe, both in the animal and vegetable kingdoms. Yet lawns in the United States are destitute of the common English daisy, the wild hyacinth of the woods of the United Kingdom is absent from Germany, and the foxglove from Switzerland.
It crystallizes in hyacinth-red prisms, which are very hygroscopic and melt at 320° C.
When the peduncle proceeds from radical leaves, that is, from an axis which is so shortened as to bring the leaves close together in the form of a cluster, as in the primrose, auricula or hyacinth, it is termed a scape.
8, is elongated, and gives off pedicels, ending in single flowers, a raceme is produced, as in currant, hyacinth and barberry.
Elongated form(Raceme), Hyacinth, Laburnum,Currant.
Race- mosum, grape hyacinth, occurs in sandy pastures in the eastern counties of England.
This mode of increase applies specially to bulbous plants, such as the lily and hyacinth, which produce little bulbs on the exterior round their base.
Botryoides (Grape Hyacinth), 6 in., blue or white, is the handsomest; M.
By cooling the aqueous solution, hyacinth-red octahedra of a crystalline hydrate of composition Br 4H 2 O or Br2.8H20 are obtained (Bakhuis Roozeboom, Zeits.
Hyacinth, we calyx and FIG.
In the same year as Klaproth detected uranium, he also isolated zirconia or zirconium oxide from the mineral variously known as zircon, hyacinth, jacynth and jargoon; but he failed to obtain the metal, this being first accomplished some years later by Berzelius, who decomposed the double potassium zirconium fluoride with potassium.
Nutans is the bluebell or wild hyacinth; Ornithogalum (Europe, Africa and west Asia) is closely allied to Scilla0.
Klaproth in 1789 analysed the mineral zircon or hyacinth and found it to contain a new earth, which he called "zirconia."
Moschatum (Musk Hyacinth), Io in., has peculiar livid greenishyellow flowers and a strong musky odour; M.
Monstrosum (Feather Hyacinth) bears sterile flowers broken up into a feather-like mass.
Hyacinth (Botany) >>
Besides these there are the various spring-flowering bulbs, such as the varieties of Hyacinthus, Tulipa, Narcissus, Fritillaria, Muscari or Grape Hyacinth, Crocus, Scilla, Chionodoxa and Galanthus or Snowdrop.