Arrange eight identical coins into the shape of a cup shown in the
illustration. The object is to move only two of them in a new position to
get the cup standing upside-down. You're allowed to move the coins as you
wish but at the end the cup has to have exactly the same shape only
rotated at 180 degrees from its initial position.
Arrange 8 matchsticks to form the fish swimming left as shown in the
illustration. The object of the puzzle is to move 3 matchsticks to make
the fish swimming in the opposite direction, i.e. to the right.
Six pennies are placed on the table to form a triangle as shown in the
uppermost illustration. By sliding one penny at a time, reverse the
triangle so that it points in the opposite direction. How many pennies do
you have to move? Now put ten pennies on the table to form a bigger
triangle as shown in the lower illustration. Reverse the triangle by
sliding one penny at a time. How many pennies do you have to move?
The object of this puzzle is to visit all the 20 green points on the
graph. You can start at any point but you may visit each point only once.
Moving from point to point you have to travel along the white lines
(alleys) only. You have to finish at the point where you've started your
Without doubt the Tangram is the most popular put-together puzzle, and one
of the most well known puzzles ever. The origins of the Tangram are
unknown, but the earliest references date back to the beginning of the
19th century, China. That's why the puzzle is also known as the Chinese
puzzle. The puzzle consists of seven pieces - tans - obtained by dividing
a square as shown in the illustration. To play with the Tangram simply
print all the seven pieces and then cut them out. Now you're able to
arrange them in many different ways making an infinite number of nice,
fun, and sometimes very puzzling figures. For every figure you have to use
all the seven tans. You're allowed to rotate the pieces as you wish, and
even flip them over. But you can't overlap the pieces. We've chosen just a
few most popular figures that you may assemble using all the seven tans.
They will give you a good taste of the puzzle.