Earlier in the day, Russia submitted a revised application to the United Nations, seeking the expansion of its Arctic shelf border through the inclusion of the Lomonosov Ridge
and other sections of the Arctic Ocean seafloor that have continental shelf properties.
Laurent will go on a six-week mission to map the Lomonosov Ridge
, an undersea feature.
The two vessels will be surveying an area in the Eurasian Basin on the eastern side of the Lomonosov Ridge
In fact, only one month after the prime minister made us all a little antsy about Arctic sovereignty, a team of Russian scientists used two mini-subs to plant their flag on the Lomonosov Ridge
under the North Pole.
Canada's follow-up submission will include a claim to the Lomonosov Ridge
, an undersea mountain range between Ellesmere Island, Canada's most northern land mass, and Russia's east Siberian coast.
interpretation, the Lomonosov Ridge
"is an oceanic part of the Arctic basin and not a natural component of the continental margins of either Russia or of any state.
The Lomonosov Ridge
is generally viewed as a continental sliver that stretches across the Arctic Ocean (e.
Denmark, Canada, and Russia will soon be faced with the problem of resolving a dispute over the Lomonosov Ridge
because the CLCS process provides no mechanism for resolving simultaneously submitted conflicting claims.
Moscow is one of three countries planning to file claims to the United Nations to prove their respective rights to the Lomonosov Ridge
, an underwater mountain range.
The Orpheus is on a mission to isolate and exploit the genetic qualities of the extraordinary organisms found in the vent fields of the Lomonosov Ridge
The answer varies: Russia claims its shelf extends some 350 miles from Siberia all the way to the Lomonosov Ridge
, placing the North Pole directly above Russian territory.
Of primary interest is the Lomonosov Ridge
, an undersea mountain range thought to extend approximately 2,000 kilometres, from a point north of Ellesmere Island/Greenland, across the Arctic Ocean to the vicinity of the Siberian coast.