Psychologists have known for some time that individuals have a variety of ways to successfully learn new information, and all people have methods that work better for them. The various ways people learn has led to the development of a multitude of teaching strategies to better reach all students. These five strategies are examples of the diverse methods teachers can employ to facilitate learning.
1. Active Learning: This method requires students to get involved in the learning process instead of simply listening to a droning lecture. Examples role playing or something as simple as breaking into small group discussions. The analysis active learning encourages results in greater retention of information.
2. Experiential Learning: By requiring students to learn by their own subjective experience, this technique provides a learning experience that is tailored to each person’s learning style. Having students travel to experience workshops or museums in other states or countries is an excellent example of this method.
3. Inquiry-Guided Learning: Students guide their own learning in this technique, and discover answers themselves. It depends on each student investigating a topic themselves, either with guidance or independently, to arrive at their own results instead of memorizing the product others produced.
4. Interdisciplinary Teaching: This teaching strategy requires educators to combine two subjects during their instruction. This forces both teacher and student to approach the material in a different manner, which increases understanding.
5. Teaching With Cases: This last example involves the use of case studies as a teaching medium. By presenting students with real-world problems, the information becomes relatable in a way that a lecture is not. The knowledge gained can then be applied to other situations a student encounters.
There are many more teaching strategies available, all allowing for better education. Often many will be used in concert, complimenting one another to the student’s advantage. With the development of new applications and techniques, the ability to teach all students, no matter how they learn best, will improve as well.