Most men have heard of the legendary Nubis Wisefoot, who descended from the clouds after heavy rainfall. Just a quarter day's travel south of the Ketturra Village, in a clearing in Ketturra Forest, a young carpenter found the child within the petals of a large lotus flower right in the center of a small pond. The man and his wife had been praying for a child for no less than five years. Seeing this as an answer to their prayers, the young man freed the child from the lotus flower only to find he had a jackal's head; however, the man was not put off by the child's strange appearance and brought him home. The wife of the young man also found great solace in finally having a child and felt no concern over the child's difference. They named the child Nubis, as they reasoned he had descended from the clouds, as a gift from the gods.

As Nubis grew into a man, the carpenter, and his wife noted that not only could Nubis speak and reason better than most other people in Ketturra Village, but he was adept at swordplay and fighting. Often, Nubis spoke of joining the royal guard of the Kingdom of Akhetua and training tirelessly with the local smith to hone his skills in swordplay. One day, Nubis packed his horse, Cabbage, and made his way to the capitol to submit himself to the trials meant to test would-be knights.

The first trial, meant to test one’s strength, took place in the Colosseum, in which the contestant fought off several terrible monsters. Nubis completed the trial with ease, much to the surprise and delight of the royal court.

The second trial, meant to test one’s mind, consisted of several puzzles, all of which Nubis again solved with ease.

The third and final trial, meant to test one’s loyalty, required the contestant to obey the order of the king. Nubis was ordered to kill a man believed to be innocent without question. Unable to follow through with such a task, Nubis abandoned his quest to become a knight and chose to roam the world instead. Those who honored his display of character deemed him Nubis Wisefoot.
