People who study on Khan Academy achieve greater-than-expected learning outcomes.
Learning outcomes exceed typical growth.
Students who complete 60% of their grade-level math on Khan Academy experience 1.8 times their expected growth on the NWEA MAP Test, a popular assessment test.
FSG conducted a study of a statewide pilot of Khan Academy in Idaho with 173 teachers and 10,500 students during the 2013-14 school year.Full study
Student use of Khan Academy correlates with score gains on standardized achievement tests.
Stanford Research Institute conducted a two-year study with 20 public, private, and charter schools; 70 teachers; and 2000 students during the 2012-13 school year.Full study
“I love that Khan Academy shows you your errors. It really helped me in understanding words in context; it really broke it down for me. With the PSAT/NMSQT score I doubted myself, but my teachers showed me with Khan Academy I could do it. If it wasn’t for Khan Academy, I wouldn’t have access to SAT practice at all. It’s a godsend!”
Students who prepare using Official SAT Practice see substantial improvement in their SAT scores.
20 hours of practice is associated with a 115-point average score increase from the PSAT/NMSQT to the SAT, nearly double the average gain of students who do not practice on Official SAT Practice.
In 2017, Khan Academy and the College Board, the maker of the SAT, analyzed gains between the PSAT/NMSQT and the SAT for approximately 250,000 students and found a positive relationship between the use of Official SAT Practice on Khan Academy and score improvements on the SAT. Score gains are consistent across gender, family income, race, ethnicity, and parental education level.Full study
Top university students use Khan Academy.
Stanford Consulting Group ran a survey in 2015 that included the question, “Have you found Khan Academy meaningful to your education?”
Here’s the breakdown of students who replied yes:
of Stanford students
(out of 504 surveyed)
of students in top schools including
Harvard, Princeton, Yale, UPenn, UC Berkeley,
Caltech, and MIT (159 surveyed)
of first-generation college students
“For all the times I couldn’t turn to my parents for homework help, I had Khan Academy videos to help me. Khan Academy was the private tutor that my family could not afford. For all the times I wanted to learn for the sake of learning, I would pick from the hundreds of Khan Academy videos.”
Khan Academy reduces remediation rates.
Khan Academy reduces the number of remedial courses students need to take.
The New England Board of Higher Education conducted a two-year study of Khan Academy with 1,226 students in developmental math classes at 12 community colleges in five states.Full study
Student performance in algebra increases from the 76th percentile to the 94th percentile.
Oakland Unity, a charter school serving low-income students, increased scores after using Khan Academy for two years, starting in 2013.Full study
Results span countries and grade levels.
Students using Khan Academy experience double the growth of their peers.
In 2014, an after-school math program in South Africa found an average 14% improvement in arithmetic and pre-algebra test scores when Khan Academy was used for approximately two hours per week for 10 weeks.Full study