Milk has been part of the human diet for thousands of years. It is one of the most nutritionally complete foods available and is a natural source that contains a whole host of vitamins and minerals needed for good health. In a world where people are increasingly focused on health and wellness, milk is as relevant today as it ever was.
Today’s consumers live busy, complex lives and many increasingly skip breakfast, which is a prime consumption occasion for milk in many developed markets. But it creates plenty more on-the-go opportunities and we’re seeing many examples of new flavours and new combinations of ingredients.
In developing markets, milk’s nutritional value for children is particularly important, and children’s health is notably improved where school milk programmes are implemented. The most common kind of milk is cow’s milk, but buffalo, goat, sheep and camel milk are also on the market.
In many countries, the UHT (Ultra High Temperature) treatment is the most used process to prolong milk’s shelf life. After the UHT process, the milk is cooled and packaged in an aseptic carton that can be stored in room temperature up to six months without refrigeration and preservatives, making it a convenient and safe choice for consumers all over the world.
Using UHT treatment, liquid food products are exposed to brief, intense heating to temperatures in the range of 135 to 140 degrees Celsius for a few seconds. UHT treatment is a continuous process which takes place in a closed system that prevents the product from being contaminated by airborne micro-organisms.
Pasteurization is another heating process where micro-organism and pathogens are eliminated, resulting in a safe-to-drink product without any additives. The pasteurization process involves heating milk to 72-75 degrees Celsius with a holding time of 15-20 seconds before it is cooled. Along with correct cooling and chilled distribution, pasteurized milk has a shelf life of 5-15 days.
View our packaging and processing solutions for both chilled milk and aseptic milk and a selection of carton packages for milk in Customer products. You can read more about pasteurization and UHT Treatment and also take a look in our Tetra Pak Dairy Index 2015: Revitalising Dairy – The new good of milk.
Do you want more information about Milk? Please contact us