ASTRONOMERS in Wales and Northern Ireland have discovered new ways in which the seeds of life may have spread throughout the galaxy.
Scientists working at Armagh Observatory and Cardiff University have independently uncovered new inter-stellar routes for the possible transmission of micro-organisms.
The discovery supports the view that life did not originate on Earth.
It also strengthens the bacterial-organic model of inter-stellar dust that Professor Chandra Wickramasinghe, director of Cardiff University's Centre for Astrobiology, and the late Sir Fred Hoyle had been developing since 1974.
Scientific papers by Professor Bill Napier of Armagh Observatory and Dr Max Wallis and Professor Wickramasinghe will appear simultaneously in notices to the Royal Astronomical Society.
Although it is known how material for life could have been spread across relatively short distances in space, it has not been known how micro-organisms could travel the thousands of light years needed to colonise the galaxy.
For instance, within the solar system, boulders and other debris may be thrown from the Earth into interplanetary space as the result of collisions with asteroids or comets and that micro-organisms within the boulders could survive the enormous accelerations involved.
In this way life could easily have crossed the few astronomical units separating Mars and Earth.
However, to colonise the Galaxy, thousands of light years must be traversed and up until now these enormous distances have always seemed an insurmountable barrier.
However, Professor Napier, research astronomer at Armagh Observatory, has found that collisions with interplanetary dust will quickly erode the ejected boulders to smaller fragments and that these tiny, life-bearing fragments may be driven out of the solar system by the pressure of sunlight in a few years.
The solar system could therefore be surrounded by an expanding "biodisc" - thirty or more light years across - of dormant microbes preserved inside rock fragments.
In the course of Earth history there may have been a few dozen close encounters with star-forming nebulae, during which microbes might be injected directly into young planetary systems.
Meanwhile, Cardiff scientists Max Wallis and Chandra Wickramasinghe have identified another delivery route.
They point out that fecund ejected material would, on impact, bury itself in the radiation-shielded surface layers of frozen comets.