Actually, "Educational television" by the name only means the use of television for educational purposes. There is a trend of using television programs as medium for education in distance learning courses. This can be of two different types in their basic design, the first kind of educational television being a particular program on television that can be referred to for some learning purpose and the next kind of educational television is of employing a complete channel dedicated to knowledge programs those are subscribed for various educational purposes. These channels are generally under the regulations of and associated with the cable television in the United States of America and are known as Public Educational and Government (PEG) access channels. These specialty channels can be a source of any kind of information and knowledge shows which may be targeted to a certain group of students.
In addition to these there are also adult education channels which are mainly for post secondary students and can help them earn college credits. These channels generally broadcast content for an older viewership and are also referred to as "instructional television" at times. The shows on these instructional televisions are usually less than an hour or even half in duration so that they can be accommodated within a class timing and also are not too lengthy to make you feel bore and lose interest. Examples of these are shows like the Open University programs on BBC and the likes of it. The instructional television shows can sometimes be combined with teachers' guides and are often broadcasted on the Public Broadcasting Service stations of the United States of America. These days they are also featured on digital sub-channels and on Non commercial educational public stations. However, they can also be passed on to some Educational access televisions which are mainly run by a Public Educational and Government access channels of the cable TV organization of America.
Speaking of Public Educational and Government access channels also known as PEG channels or Local access channels and consist of three different types of specialty channels on cable television. They are Public Access television and Educational access television and Government access television.
Public access television is free of editorial control and is a non-commercial design of mass media where anybody i.e. any common person can develop and broadcast video programs by buying the slot for a minimal charge or even for free at times. The content of these shows are generally community interests
Educational access channels are those which are solely concerned with educational programs and are a part of "educational television" for distance learning courses. These channels are also sometimes inducted in school curriculums as a part of their distance education program. Educational access television is synchronous with educational technology and the channels do broadcast instructional television programs within the city limits of that cable operator.
Government access channels are on the other hand channels airing various government proceedings to the general people of the nation.