It appears that astrology started out as a belief system that sought to explain behavior, life and all the great mysteries by heavenly events. The observations made by the first star-gazers may not have been scientific by our standards, but they did learn that the life experience of every human soul was directed by signals from the sky. They discovered the birthchart. It provides a personal reference that can be examined and investigated. It starts the pursuit of astrological facts. And by observing the planets and their sign positions, house locations and angular relationships, in a timed birthchart, scientific astrologers seek astrological explanations for what is happening.
Astrology’s current knowledge base is contained in two separate portfolios. There’s the ‘pop’ stuff that’s popular with the mainstream astrological community and there’s the Hermetic system disseminated by the Church of Light. And the Hermetic system of astrology provides an interpretive procedure to the birthchart that’s the result of scientific research. It’s the only system of astrology that permits the scientific research of birthcharts.
Research work in any field is very important. And its importance should always be judged by the benefits it provides humanity. Astrological research must provide knowledge and information that people can use in their pursuit of a better life. It must show people how they can attain material and spiritual success. Astrological research at a macro and micro level is vital to the health, security and prosperity of society. Astrological research is essential if we are to get a better understanding of astrology, the birthchart and the future. The scientific pursuit of astrological facts will eventually require the talents of many skilled astrologers.
Astrological research should follow a five step procedure
1 Define the problem
Each astrological problem must be clearly defined. This can be done in a few words or sentences. A more detailed definition can result in a better understanding of the problem.
2 Study the existing data or information
The astrological researcher should obtain and study any previous research work pertaining to the problem (defined in Part 1).
3 Form a hypothesis – a proposed explanation
Using previous research data a hypothesis should be formed. Any astrological hypothesis must explain, unify or organize known facts. It can also open up new areas of research. A new hypothesis should be tested by experiment or other means such as further research.
4 Collect evidence
Astrological research involves corresponding or correlating the astro-data in a timed, computer calculated birthchart with the character traits, attitudes, abilities and life experiences of its owner. The most accurate data will come from birthcharts having a AA-1 data accuracy rating. And a detailed life-history must be obtained. In research work pertaining to character traits and ability each person must be asked to answer the question defined in Part 1. This systematic collection of evidence and data is vital and the dates of major events must be carefully ascertained. Nothing must be left to chance.
5 Draw a conclusion
The results of a character trait, ability or event survey must then be analyzed and a conclusion, based on this analysis, formulated. What the researcher does with the results of their survey is up to them. They should be published in journals or books where the research findings are made available to other astrologers, or interested members of the public. Research findings can also be presented at meetings of professional astrologers or astrological organizations.
So what lies ahead for astrological research? Well there’s a greater understanding of the astrology code and how it works. There’s a greater understanding of the current rules that time events; and there’s the application of the astrodynes in the identification of ability and its application in a vocational outlet. Every new bit of astrological information that research reveals is a new treasure. It won’t make the headlines, but it will be added to astrology’s knowledge-base and made available to those who know that their birthchart is the greatest map of all.