Jean-Paul Sartre was a French existentialist philosopher, playwright, novelist, screenwriter, political activist, biographer, and literary critic. He was born in Paris in 1905, studied at the École Normale Supérieure (ENS) from 1924 to 1929 and became Professor of Philosophy at Le Havre in 1931.
Sartre’s philosophical view about atheism is taken for granted; the "loss of God" is accepted. Man is intended to be free. Free from all authority, which he may seek to escape, distorts, and denies but which he will have to face if he is to become a moral being. The importance of man's life is not established before his existence. Once the freedom is acknowledged, man has to be responsible himself only. The man has to commit himself to a role in this world, has to commit his freedom. And this attempt to make himself is futile without the "solidarity" of others. Sartre's slogan—“existence precedes essence”—may serve to introduce what is most distinctive of existentialism. The idea that no general, non-formal account of what it means to be human can be given, since that meaning is decided in and through existing itself
Sartre’s central philosophical work “
Being and Nothingness” published in1943, is a foundation of his concept of being, from which much of modern existentialism derives. In 19th century Soren Kierkegaard and Friedrich Nietzsche were two of the first philosophers considered fundamental to the existentialist movement, though neither used the term "existentialism". In the 20th century, the German philosopher Martin Heidegger influenced other existentialist philosophers such as Jean-Paul Sartre, Simone de Beauvoir.
Jean Paul Sartre was dazzlingly intelligent and was just less than 5 feet tall; fell in love with Simone de Beauvoir. Simone de Beauvoir was a French existentialist philosopher, public intellectual, political activist, feminist theorist and social theorist. She did not consider herself a philosopher but her significant contributions to existentialism and feminist existentialism have solidified her legacy as a philosopher and feminist. During October 1929, the two became a couple and Sartre asked her to marry him. One day while they were sitting on a bench outside the Louvre, he said, "Let's sign a two-year lease". Near the end of her life, Beauvoir said, "Marriage was impossible. I had no dowry." So they entered a life-long relationship. Beauvoir chose to never marry and did not set up a joint household with Sartre. She never had children. This gave her time to earn an advanced academic degree, to join political causes and to travel, write, teach, and to have lovers.
Sartre and de Beauvoir always read one another's work. Debates rage on about the extent to which Sartre and de Beauvoir influenced one another in their existentialist works such as Sartre's Being and Nothingness and de Beauvoir's She Came to Stay.
Though Sartre’s name and the word “Existentialism” had become a household name in France during sixties, Sartre remained a simple man with few possessions, actively committed to causes until the end of his life. During May 1968 strikes in Paris Sartre was arrested for civil disobedience. President Charles de Gaulle intervened and pardoned him, commenting that "you don't arrest Voltaire."
In 1975, when asked how he would like to be remembered, Sartre replied: I would like people to remember my plays No Exit and The Devil and the Good Lord, and then my two philosophical works, more particularly the second one, Critique of Dialectical Reason. Then my essay on Genet, Saint Genet.... If these are remembered, that would be quite an achievement, and I don't ask for more. As a man, if a certain Jean-Paul Sartre is remembered, I would like people to remember the milieu or historical situation in which I lived,... how I lived in it, in terms of all the aspirations which I tried to gather up within myself.
The main idea of Jean-Paul Sartre is that we are, as humans, "condemned to be free." This theory relies upon his position that there is no creator, and is illustrated using the example of the paper cutter. Sartre says that if one considered a paper cutter, one would assume that the creator would have had a plan for it: an essence. Sartre said that human beings have no essence before their existence because there is no Creator. Thus: "Existence precedes Essence”. This forms the basis for his assertion that since one cannot explain their own actions and behaviour by referencing any specific human nature, they are necessarily fully responsible for those actions. "We are left alone, without excuse".
Jean-Paul Sartre died in Paris on April 15, 1980 and was buried at cemetery at Montparnasse. Simone de Beauvoir, who died on 14 April 1986, and was buried in the same grave that of Jean-Paul Sartre.