There are several types of basement construction. The basement foundation of a home provides the strength to keep the home and foundation standing in all types of weather and environmental changes. There are three types of basement construction that are the most common. These are:
- Poured concrete
- Block, masonry walls
- Precast panels
Poured concrete basement are the most common and the choice that most people prefer. This type of basement construction starts by pouring footing for the basement foundation. After these are set, forms are used to hold the poured concrete wall in place as they dry. Poured concrete walls tend to be stronger than other types of basement walls.
A block or masonry wall is the least expensive for basement walls. This type of basement wall construction are made from cinder blocks. This method requires less time than other methods of basement construction. To increase the durability of this type of basement construction, steel rebar is sometimes used to reinforce the masonry wall.
Precast panel basement wall construction is the method where the walls are molded at another location. Then the walls are transported to the building and place on footers. This type of basement construction is quite strong but is not as commonly done as poured or block basements.
No matter what type of basement wall you may have, each type has its own sets of problems that can arise. A block concrete basement wall will bow easier than other types due to the pressure against the walls that weakens the mortar joints.
High hydrostatic pressure outside a poured concrete basement can cause water to seep through due to the pressure creating floor and wall cracks.
Precast panel basement construction can have moisture problems if the joists are not properly sealed causing moisture vapor to get trapped in the panels. These panels can also attract insects unless they have been treated with boric acid.
Whatever type of basement foundation you have, Epp Concrete can help. We fix basements!