About the Global Fund
The Global Fund is a 21st-century organization designed to accelerate the end of AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria as epidemics.
Founded in 2002, the Global Fund is a partnership between governments, civil society, the private sector and people affected by the diseases. The Global Fund raises and invests nearly US$4 billion a year to support programs run by local experts in more than 140 countries.
The Global Fund operates with three core principles: partnership, country ownership and performance-based funding. All partners need to take part in decision-making. People that implementing grants actually know the best way to fight disease in their country, and come up with the most effective solutions. Funding should be provided where it can achieve the best results. By challenging barriers and embracing innovative approaches, the Global Fund strives for maximum impact.
Working together, Global Fund has saved millions of lives and provided prevention, treatment and care services to hundreds of millions of people, helping to revitalize entire communities, strengthen local health systems and improve economies.
Global Fund staff, all based in Geneva, Switzerland, come from all professional backgrounds and from more than 100 different countries, united in their dedication to the defeat of these epidemics.
The Global Fund to Fight against AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria was created in 2002 to save lives and direct the money from the international community to those who need it most.
Kofi Annan, former Secretary General of the United Nations, has dreamed up a “war chest” to fight against three of the deadliest the world has ever known infectious diseases. In 2000, all three of these diseases have caused six million deaths, often striking people in the most productive years of their lives.
The idea of creating the Global Fund is born of the confrontation between political advocacy from the base and the imperatives of global leadership. It is possible to prevent and treat AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, the resolution of this problem requires not only the commitment of world leaders and international policy makers, but also those working in the field for help men, women and children living with these diseases.
This idea was discussed in 2000 at the G8 summit held in Okinawa, Japan. The real commitment began to take shape at the Summit of the African Union in April 2001, continued at the Special Session of the UN General Assembly in June of the same year, before being finally approved at the G8 summit held in Genoa, Italy in July 2001. A transitional working group was established to define the principles and methods of work of the new organization, and the Global Fund was launched in January 2002.