In the largest study of its kind, a group of researchers has examined the use of open educational resources (OER) and found that students who used OER in their undergraduate courses performed as well or better than those assigned commercial textbooks.
By Laura Devaney, Director of News, @eSN_Laura
Read more by Laura Devaney
November 2nd, 2015
The U.S. Department of Education is launching a campaign that will encourage states, school districts and educators to use open educational resources.
As part of the #GoOpen campaign, the Department is proposing a regulation that would require all copyrightable intellectual property created with ED grant funds to have an open license.
“In order to ensure that all students – no matter their zip code – have access to high-quality learning resources, we are encouraging districts and states to move away from traditional textbooks and toward freely accessible, openly-licensed materials,” U.S. Education Secretary Arne Duncan said. “Districts across the country are transforming learning by using materials that can be constantly updated and adjusted to meet students’ needs.”
Read it Here
Designing an Online Teaching Certification Course
A recent study showed that in 2013 the number of students taking at least one online course is 7.1 million, which means one out three students are taking at least one course online. With higher demands from students, more schools are offering courses/programs online. However, an online course creates an entirely different learning environment that requires the instructor to rethink the pedagogy and learning strategies.
In 2014-2015, the Center for Instructional Design and Academic Technology (CIDAT) at Saint Xavier University (SXU) began working with seven faculty members from each of the schools and college to explore existing online teaching programs/certificates from other institutions. We have successfully designed SXU’s own teaching certificate course, Certificate of Preparedness for Online Teaching (CPOT), which is designed for SXU faculty members who are interested in making online teaching an important part of their academic careers.
Date: November 18, 2015
Time: Beginning @ 10:00am
Saint Xavier University
3700 W 103rd St.
Chicago, IL 60655
Email: email@example.com to register for lunch.
As some of you may or may not know, the TLETC pays for two full online journals for faculty: Online Classroom: Ideas for Effective Online Instruction and Teaching Professor. Most articles are short, quick reads (usually 1-2 pages).
The latest issue of Teaching Professor has articles on the following topics (and if you like any of these and want them to be a focus of one of my Teach Talk faculty discussions for spring, please let me know):
Negotiating the Syllabus
Many faculty consider the syllabus a contract for learning that they set up for students. However, there continues to be suggestions in the literature and among pedagogical experts that this is a troublesome perspective. The language used in syllabi modeled like contracts sets a tone that is often defensive. In strongly worded statements, students are told what to do without having been consulted or being given any choice.
Cellphone Use and Abuse: the Details
Here’s a sampling of details from a recent survey that asked students and faculty a variety of questions about their use of cell phones (including smart phones), their perceptions of the effects of doing so and their estimation of the effectiveness of faculty phone policies.
Optimizing Learning with a Flexible Approach
Being flexible is one of those ongoing challenges for teachers. There’s the desire to be responsive to student needs—life does happen—but then students have been known to take advantage of teachers and granting the request of one student opens the door and makes it difficult to close when another asks. There’s a need for balance—that difficult place between treating all students equitably and fairly, and being sensitive to the needs of individual students, especially if being flexible successfully supports their efforts to learn.
When the Assigned Reading is Too Hard
If students are struggling to understand the assigned reading, teachers can opt for something easier to comprehend or they might consider this strategy developed and used by theology professor Ruth Anne Reese. She purposefully assigns students reading materials written at a level most of her beginning seminary students find challenging.
Integrating Content and Learning Strategies: an Example
It’s a 400-level Development of Sociological Theory course for majors and instructor Julie Pelton aspires not only to teach the content but to introduce students to either different styles of learning or self-regulatory and metacognitive strategies. She writes that most of the students have some familiarity with learning styles.
Six Things I Learned About First-Year College Students
As a tenured full professor, I’m mostly scheduled for upper division and graduate courses. However, last year I taught two classes of traditional aged, first-year students. It was a good learning experience and provided me with new insights about beginning college students.
Lecture Capture: An Analysis
“A quick search of video sharing sites, as well as the web pages of prominent universities, reveals a treasure-trove of content available to students and interested lay-people,” observe political science faculty members Daniel Mallinson and Zachary Baumann. A variety of software products make lecture capture (the recording of classroom lectures) comparatively easy and much less costly than it used to be
Online Forum Posts Improve Discussion in a Face-to-Face Classroom
Jay Howard’s new book, Discussion in the College Classroom (a book that is well worth your time), lays out the research showing that cold calling on students is one of the best ways to get past their “civil attention.” It’s clear to me that once cold calling becomes the norm in a course, using that technique can increase the quality of in-class discussions.
If you have not established your account with Magna Publications yet, please contact Page Wolf for the access code.
October 29, 2015 by Ellen Wexler
College technology leaders appear more optimistic these days about open-source textbooks and open educational resources — teaching and learning materials that can be used at no cost.
According to the latest Campus Computing Survey of top technology officers at colleges, released on Thursday, 81 percent believe that open educational resources will be an important source for instructional material in the next five years. And 38 percent report that their institutions encourage faculty members to use open-resource content, compared with 33 percent in 2014.
Read it Here
The TLETC Blog is a great way to find out what is going on with regard to teaching, pedagogy, and educational technology.