HyperText Markup Language, commonly referred to as HTML, is the standard markup language used to create web pages. Web browsers can read HTML files and render them into visible or audible web pages. HTML describes the structure of a website semantically along with cues for presentation, making it a markup language, rather than a programming language. Latest version of the family is HTML5.
Bootstrap, originally named Twitter Blueprint, was developed by Mark Otto and Jacob Thornton at Twitter as a framework to encourage consistency across internal tools. Before Bootstrap, various libraries were used for interface development, which led to inconsistencies and a high maintenance burden.
The Model-View-Controller (MVC) architectural pattern separates an application into three main components: the model, the view, and the controller. The ASP.NET MVC framework provides an alternative to the ASP.NET Web Forms pattern for creating Web applications. The ASP.NET MVC framework is a lightweight, highly testable presentation framework that (as with Web Forms-based applications) is integrated with existing ASP.NET features, such as master pages and membership-based authentication.
GoDaddy is a publicly traded Internet domain registrar and web hosting company. As of 2014, GoDaddy was said to have had more than 59 million domain names under management, making it the world's largest ICANN-accredited registrar in the world, at the size of four times their closest competitor. It serves more than 12 million customers and employs more than 4,000 people.
GoDaddy has a 65,000 square foot data center in The United States. This data center is connected to an optical fiber DWDM Ethernet backbone with a speed of 20 Gigabits per second. They also have a 270,000 square foot facility in Phoenix, Arizona.
Adobe Illustrator is a program used by both artists and graphic designers to create vector images. These images will then be used for company logos, promotional uses or even personal work, both in print and digital form. So what is Adobe Illustrator used for? It is typically used to create illustrations, charts, graphs, logos, diagrams, cartoons of real photographs, and more.
Adobe Photoshop is a raster graphics editor developed and published by Adobe Systems for Windows and OS X. Photoshop has become the de facto industry standard in raster graphics editing. It can edit and compose raster images in multiple layers and supports masks, alpha compositing and several color models including RGB, CMYK, Lab color space, spot color and duotone.
Edius is a video editing software package for PC computers running Windows.
Edius is a non-linear editor (NLE) that works with most modern video formats. The software is capable of 3D editing. The software comes bundled with a large collection of tools, including NEWBlue Video Filters, proDAD video effects along with image stabilization for unsteady shots and for audio mastering needs iZotope VST audio plug-ins such as Audio Effects Suite, AudioRestore, AGC & Mastering Effects Suite.
Edius was originally developed by the Japanese-based Canopus Corporation and first introduced in 2003. In 2005, the Canopus Corporation was sold to Grass Valley.
Premiere Pro supports high resolution video editing at up to 10,240 × 8,192 resolution, at up to 32-bits per channel color, in both RGB and YUV. Audio sample-level editing, VST audio plug-in support, and 5.1 surround sound mixing are available. Premiere Pro's plug-in architecture enables it to import and export formats beyond those supported by QuickTime or DirectShow, supporting a wide variety of video and audio file formats and codecs on both MacOS and Windows. When used with Cineform's Neo line of plug-ins, it supports 3D editing with the ability to view 3D material using 2D monitors, while making individual left and right eye adjustments.