Juice, sports drinks filled with unnecessary sugar
Published 5:00 pm, Tuesday, May 17, 2005
The answer to whether these drinks are OK depends on how much you drink. The negative effects from the high calorie and high sugar content significantly outweighs the moderate benefits from these drinks. Weight gain and obesity are the results from too much intake of fructose corn syrup - the main ingredient in juice and sport drinks.
Childhood obesity is one of the most serious medical conditions our country is facing today. The latest studies show that more than 25 percent of American kids are overweight. Many children who are overweight experience a poor quality of life full of embarrassing moments. They also face a future of chronic medical problems such as diabetes and heart disease. According to the Harvard School of Public Health and the CDC, obesity of the general population has increased 80 percent over the last 20 years. Concurrently, fructose corn syrup consumption has also increased dramatically.
Fructose corn syrup is made from corn starch and is easier to blend into
foods and beverages than sucrose (table sugar). Sucrose was the main sweetener used by food and beverage manufacturers until the 1970s. Once
processed fructose was discovered and found to be cheaper and sweeter than sucrose, it became the popular sweetener. Juice drinks and sport drinks are the number one source of fructose calories in a child's diet. Fructose and glucose are simple sugars and are the smallest carbohydrates. These sugars are a source of energy for the body. When a person consumes more sugar than the body can use for energy, the excess is stored in the liver and muscles as glycogen. Once these storage sites become full, the body will convert the remaining excess blood sugar to fat.
Drinking juice throughout the day can add up to 300 or more extra calories in a child's diet. A 15-ounce bottle of orange juice has 220 calories and 48 grams of sugar. A 20-ounce bottle of Power Ade has 175 calories and 37.5 grams of sugar. It's enough sugar to fill the palm of an adult hand. The American Academy of Pediatrics recommends that children between the ages of 7 and 18 drink only 8 to 12 ounces of juice a day. Don't be fooled by the name of the drink, e.g., Vitamin Water or Power Ade. These drinks are being advertised as "liquid hydration." Truthfully, only the ultimate athlete, tri-athlete or marathon runner should drink these beverages. Children who exercise for an hour or play sports for two hours do not need a sport drink. They only need water. Replacing lost fluids in order to avoid dehydration when exercising or playing a sport is important. Fluid replacement should be done with water before, during and after any activity. Dehydration can severely limit performance, cause fatigue, dry skin, headaches and constipation. Fructose from natural fruit is not the same as fructose corn syrup. Fruit contains natural fructose while fructose corn syrup is processed fructose and is used as an additive to beverages and candy. Therefore, there is no reason to limit fruit in a child's diet. Fruit also contains enzymes to effectively metabolize its fructose for consumption. The
fructose level from whole fruits is also compensated by the fruit's fiber content which helps delay the absorption of the sugar. Whole fruit is much more filling, contains valuable nutrients and antioxidants, and supplies the brain with a gradual supply of the energy it needs.
So take the time to read drink labels. Don't forget to multiply the number of sugar grams by the number of serving sizes. What looks like 15 grams of sugar for a 32-ounce bottle of Gatorade is actually 60 grams once you multiply the number of sugar grams by the number of servings. Kids are worth a better choice. Processed fructose corn syrup does not need to be in any child's diet. Additionally, juice and sport drinks are not necessary for good health. Water is the best drink you can offer your child.
Diane L. Decker is a nutrition lecturer and a freelance writer. She lives in New Preston.