Diseases and Conditions Encyclopedia
Tap into this interactive encyclopedia for instant access to information on more than 835 diseases and conditions.
The latest studies conclude that a successful weight-loss plan is a mind/body undertaking that not only involves monitoring calorie intake and expenditure, but dealing with the psychological side of weight loss and habit change.
What's the difference between a bad case of the blues and the painful mental disorder known as depression? According to the experts, impaired functioning is usually a clear-cut indication of clinical depression.
Parents and pediatricians should know how to detect hearing problems at various stages during a child's first three years of life.
Your child should see a dentist six months after eruption of the first tooth, experts say. The dentist can provide or recommend preventative information regarding baby bottle tooth decay, infant feeding practices, mouth cleaning, teething, pacifier habits and finger-sucking habits.
With childhood obesity on the rise, should parents worry about the weight of their babies?
Bruises are a part of life. By the time you notice a bruise, though, it's already started to heal.
Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is not a disease; it is a disorder that interferes with the normal function of the large intestine (colon) and is characterized by cramping, abdominal pain, bloating, constipation and diarrhea.
Polycarbonate plastic is durable, impact-resistant, and clear. It is widely used in food and beverage containers, but research has raised concerns over its health effects.
In a root canal, the soft tissue inside the tooth's canal is removed and the space is filled with a material that's compatible with the body's own tissues.
It's important to encourage good eating habits, while allowing kids to enjoy the fun of the holiday.
Here's your guide to the best foods to nourish you, as well as those foods best left for that occasional need to indulge in guilty pleasures.
In your grocer's case, you'll find whole turkeys and parts — fresh, frozen, and smoked. You'll also see ground turkey, turkey cutlets, turkey hot dogs, turkey sausage, and turkey burgers.
Skin problems such as pimples, blackheads, rashes, and oily skin are common in both teens and adults. But you don't necessarily need a dermatologist to treat them.
Walking is one of the best and easiest exercises someone can do.
Whether they are coming for an afternoon or a week, taking some steps before your grandchildren arrive can help keep them safe during their visit. Consider these guidelines.
Here's a look at some of the more common medicinal herbs. Most herbs have not been thoroughly tested for effectiveness or interactions with other herbs, supplements, drugs or foods.
If you're just getting started with herbs, go at it gradually. Experiment with one or two herbs at a time. For freshness, purchase herbs that have been newly dried, and buy in small amounts.
Eyeglasses can be prescribed for a range of vision problems, from nearsightedness to farsightedness to the diminished vision of advancing age.
You should cut back on foods that have only limited nutritional value, that are overprocessed or that contain too much fat, salt, sugar and refined white flour.
Jogging strollers come in a variety of shapes and sizes to match almost anyone's needs, including parents with twins or children with physical disabilities.
Coaches should tell players not to tackle or block with their heads or run head-down with the ball.
Whether they're called subs, hoagies, heroes or grinders, long sandwiches stuffed with a variety of ingredients are a favorite lunch choice.
From the food you stock in the freezer to the silverware you put on the table, your kitchen is your partner in health. When you fill your kitchen with the right tools and foods, you reap the benefits.
The “secret” to maintaining a healthy weight is not found in any magic diet or weight loss system. In fact, it’s no secret to it at all. You just need to take in about the same amount of calories that your body uses up.
No one is fond of change, and big changes during the holidays can be particularly difficult to cope with for everyone involved.
Your gut is home to trillions of microorganisms. Although few cause illnesses, probiotics may keep the harmful bacteria in check so that you avoid or shorten a bout of stomach upset.
Although older adults still need plenty of fruits and vegetables, whole grains and fiber, they need to add or subtract a few things from the diet they followed earlier in life.
Drug-drug interactions occur when one drug interacts or interferes with another drug. Such interactions are dangerous because they can alter the way one or both of the drugs act in the body. They can also cause unexpected side effects. The following information can help you avoid drug-drug interactions.
As a parent of a young child, one of the most important decisions you will make is choosing who will care for your child while you’re at work.
The way you think about exercise can be the crucial factor in sticking with your fitness program.
For long-lasting health and well being, stay physically active, challenge your mind and stay involved with others.
Your little ones can learn a lot about safety if you take some time to teach them. Here's an ABC that you and your children can recite together.
Our taste buds are important, but smell seems to play a bigger role. Most people who complain of loss of the sense of taste are surprised to learn they are actually having problems with their sense of smell.
What happens when your health care provider taps on your knee with a rubber mallet? Your leg kicks forward, seemingly on its own. And in a sense, your leg has a mind of its own -- in your spine.
Many of today's generation of musclemen are told by nutritionists and bodybuilding experts that well-balanced meals will offer enough protein for all but the most intense exercisers.
Eight minutes in the morning -- that's all it takes to help launch you toward a fitter, trimmer lifestyle.
Although most foodborne illness stems from raw animal foods -- such as eggs, meats and dairy products -- fruits and vegetables may carry germs, too.
Although the cause of rosacea is unknown, people with fair skin who blush easily may be at the greatest risk for it.
This back exercise improves strength and flexibility of your spine. Start by sitting in a sturdy chair, with your feet flat on the floor.
Something as simple as getting out of bed properly can help to ease strain on your back and prevent injury.
You can help keep your children safe by following these precautions.
Fainting is a loss of consciousness, falling down or needing to lie down, followed by spontaneous recovery. Fainting by itself is not a problem, but it could be a sign of a serious health condition.
You can avoid the flu this season by taking one simple step: Get a flu vaccination.
To reduce scarring, keep the skin area out of the sun. Ultraviolet rays can darken your scar, making it more noticeable.
Today’s goal is not to re-create a Norman Rockwell painting, but to produce a festive meal you will be happy to serve on Thanksgiving Day. The biggest change: If you don’t need to present the whole turkey for carving at the table, cook a turkey breast instead.
Childhood obesity is more prevalent in the Northeast, followed by the Midwest, South and West. It is also more prevalent in cities than in rural areas.
Although colds cannot be prevented -- or cured -- you can take precautions to reduce the chance of infection.
Surveys show fewer than one in 10 women perceive heart disease as their greatest health threat. But it's the nation's number one killer, and women are its prime target.
You run two miles every other day and lift weights twice a week. You've been trying to eat more fruits and vegetables and less meat. You don't smoke. When it comes to your health, you figure you've got everything covered. But when was the last time you saw your doctor for a health screening?
With today's world filled with flashing images of MTV, quick news reports, and fast-food restaurants on every corner, are we capable of concentrating as well as we used to?
A balance disorder is a disturbance of the inner ear that can make you feel unsteady or like you’re moving or spinning.
High blood pressure is a sneaky ailment. The condition has no symptoms that you can see or feel. Having your blood pressure checked is the only way to know if it is high.
Your neck is a complicated piece of human anatomy. Here's a closer look at this area of the body.
It's important to reduce your medical expenses. Even if you have health insurance, you pay a percentage of every health care bill you incur.
Taking arthritis medication is important, but what you do for yourself, including exercising, doing relaxation exercises and managing your emotions and attitudes, is just as crucial to your ability to lead an active, productive life.
Being active is a great way to help control diabetes. Exercise helps lower your blood sugar.
Parents of kids with attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) face a tough choice: whether to medicate their children or not.
If you've been thinking about adding a cuddly new cat or dog to your household, take some time to think about what type of pet will best suit you, your family and your lifestyle.
Immunizations aren't just for children. Adults need immunizations, too. Ask your doctor which of the following shots you may need.
Technology has given us the automated external defibrillator (AED), which is turning up far from hospitals. Some schools and public buildings already have AEDs.
Having a baby is a life-changing experience, and there's no way to know just how exhilarating and challenging the first few months can be.
Recovering people can use the tools they learn in rehab to begin the intense challenge of avoiding relapse.
Many people think of asthma as a childhood disease, but it often occurs as a new condition in older adults.
More than ever before, Americans older than 65 are turning to yoga for exercise. What is yoga, and why is it so popular? Yoga is a series of stretches and poses done with breathing techniques. It offers the powerful benefits of exercise. And since yoga is gentle, almost anyone can do it, regardless of age or fitness level.
As your eyes age, their lenses become less flexible, and they slowly lose their ability to focus. It's an ongoing, lifelong process called presbyopia, which you begin to notice between ages 40 and 45.
A car with an air bag is considered safer than a car without one. But for children under 12 years old, air bags can be dangerous.
Here are some helpful tips for understanding the air in your house and the air-quality appliances that can alter it.
Most people know air pollution can hurt your lungs and make it tough to breathe. But a growing body of research shows air pollution can be as bad or worse for your heart.
Many older adults enjoy a glass of wine with dinner or a beer while watching the game on TV. In fact, half of Americans ages 65 and older drink alcohol. Having a drink now and then is fine—as long as you don’t overdo it.
Alcohol may have some health benefits, including lowering the risk for heart disease, but it may also lead to abusive drinking and other diseases.
Genetics can play a part in whether you have problems with alcohol. But many other factors also have an influence.
Age-related macular degeneration is the leading cause of irreversible vision loss in people older than 60.
Do you know the difference between normal changes in vision that occur with age and abnormal changes caused by age-related eye disease? Here are some answers.
Several kinds of medicine are commonly prescribed for high blood pressure. Here are some of the main types.
Installing your child's car seat properly and using it every time your son or daughter rides in the car is one of the best ways to help keep him or her safe in case of an accident.
According to the American Heart Association, there are five main types of cholesterol-lowering medications.
Most people with color blindness -- also called color vision deficiency -- can see certain colors. Usually, the difficulty involves distinguishing between shades of red and green.
Hormones, which are chemical signals, affect growth, metabolism, blood pressure and even behavior.
Every year, more than 400 million prescriptions are filled with generic medications in the United States.
The first genetically modified food product for human consumption was a tomato, which went on the market in 1994.
Are you going bald? Which conditioner should you use? Here are the answers to these and other questions about your head of hair.
A kidney stone is a solid piece of material that forms in the kidney out of substances normally dissolved in the urine.
LSD, also called acid, is one of the most commonly used hallucinogens or psychedelic drugs.
Melatonin is a hormone that regulates your circadian rhythm, or the 24-hour cycle of biological processes called your "internal body clock."
Muscle cramps -- involuntary muscle contractions -- are common. But even though they can be quite painful, they don't cause damage.
If you're confused by the numbers and types of sunscreen, welcome to the club. Many Americans, it seems, are so confused by sunscreens that they don't even use them. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention says that only about 30 percent of adults regularly use sunscreen.
Your stomach's starring role is as an organ essential for digestion. The stomach breaks down all the food you eat.
Viruses are familiar from the common diseases they cause: colds and flu, for instance. But what are they, and how do they cause sickness?
Occupational asthma is a lung disease in which the airways overreact to dust, vapors, gases, smoke or fumes that exist in the workplace.
Quality time should be woven into our lives. As our children get older and slip away, we need to stop worrying about the extraordinary and think more about the ordinary."
You need to consume some fat to maintain good nutrition, but many Americans eat more fat than they need.
About half of people with nail problems have fungal infections. For some of these people, antifungal medications may help.
If you’re heading out of town, and you or your child has allergies or asthma, proper planning can help you keep sneezes, sniffles, wheezing and attacks under control.
Roughly one person in four has some kind of allergy. The most common is "allergic rhinitis," which includes seasonal hay fever and year-round allergies to dust, animal dander, mold and some foods.
As you age, you should check with your health care provider about any allergy medications you take and make sure you are up to date on your shots.
Some treatment programs teach problem drinkers to reduce their drinking, an approach that appeals to people who otherwise might not seek treatment.
Just when you thought you had your summertime outdoors routine down -- plenty of sunscreen, a large hat, limited exposure between 10 a.m. to 2 p.m. -- comes the news that Americans aren't getting enough of the "sunshine vitamin" -- vitamin D.
More than half of Americans have used an alternative therapy instead of -- or in addition to -- Western medical treatment for their conditions. Among these therapies are acupuncture and other Chinese-medicine practices that have been used for more than 3,000 years.
The four most common heat-related emergencies are cramps, fainting, exhaustion, and heat strokes. These illnesses occur when the body can no longer cool itself properly.
More than a million people have pulled up roots and hit the road full time in recreational vehicles (RVs). If you're thinking of joining them, be sure to consider your health.
Vesalius revolutionized the science of anatomy by basing his findings on direct observation of the body itself, rather than on centuries-old received wisdom.
There's evidence that people who respond rigidly to anger-provoking events are likely to wind up with significantly elevated levels of heart-damaging cholesterol.
Although some behavior problems can be attributed to normal child development, some require professional help.
What causes diabetes? Scientists aren't sure, but heredity, obesity, lack of exercise and other factors play a part.
Codependency is an emotional and behavioral condition. It affects a person’s ability to have healthy, mutually satisfying relationships.
Wouldn't it be wonderful if you could look and feel years younger just by taking a supplement? The makers of "anti-aging" hormone supplements would like you to believe that this is possible. But before you accept their claims and open your wallet, see what medical researchers say.
Most of the time, however, a cold passes in a week, with or without the use of antibiotics. Taking these drugs does not help you get better faster. In fact, it can create problems.
People with generalized anxiety disorder worry about their finances, their health, their jobs, world events, and the future. Their worry is often out of proportion to reality.
Appendicitis, an infection of the appendix, is the most common reason for a child to need emergency abdominal surgery.
If you are having problems with back pain, shin splints, knees or hips, look to your feet. Although these ailments might seem totally unrelated to one another, they can sometimes be linked to problems that start with your feet and how they're built, foot experts say.
Compulsive shoppers generally are people prone toward low self-esteem, anxiety and depression, as well as fantasizing, perfectionism and lack of sufficient social contacts, one expert says.
Thrill rides at amusement parks and traveling shows are higher, faster and wilder than ever. But are they dangerous?
Experts say you should pay close attention to what is, by far, the most useful genetic knowledge—your family medical history.
What if you could do one simple thing to significantly improve your health? Eating at least five servings a day of fruits and vegetables can do just that by reducing your risk for cancer, heart disease and stroke.
Doctors and physical therapists say people with arthritis can improve their health and fitness through exercise without damaging their joints.
You’ve probably seen the ads for toning shoes and Shake Weights. Do these gadgets deliver the workouts they promise?
Youths of all ages from 2 through the teen years snack more often. With 13 to 14 percent of children and adolescents overweight, we can blame eating between meals for part of the trend.
Getting too little vitamin B12 may leave you feeling fuzzy in your thinking and lead to numbness or tingling in your hands and feet.
Although aspirin is a common over-the-counter medication, it’s not appropriate for everyone.
If you set professional goals for yourself at the beginning of the year, don't forget to take a look at what you have and haven't accomplished as the year progresses.
If you have asthma, a healthy lunch can help your lungs work better.
Simply lacing your shoes or sneakers properly, along with choosing a shoe that fits your foot correctly, can add comfort to your stride and prevent foot injuries.
ADD can have a significant social impact on a person's life, affecting relationships in the family and on the job.
Men who think they're too "macho" to seek medical help could end up making more trips to the doctor's office in the long run.
Walking aids can help you stay mobile—but only when they’re used safely.
Because barbecue grills are operated in a casual, relaxed atmosphere, they tend to be taken for granted. And that can lead to serious injury.
Staying active—getting regular exercise—is one of the best ways to minimize the effects of aging. Exercise helps prevent chronic illness and loss of function in older adults.
Not progressing wisely—exercising too much, too hard, or too often instead of gradually working out longer and harder—is a common mistake made by many fitness enthusiasts. But it’s not the only one.
If allergies bother you in the fall, you’re most likely sensitive to one or more molds, weeds, trees or grasses.
Common injuries include a twisted ankle, sprained wrist, overextended elbow and damaged knee ligaments. Fortunately, you can take steps to help prevent joint damage.
You may think wearing goggles is enough to protect your eyes, but many injuries can happen to your eyes that goggles won't prevent.
Salmonella causes diarrhea and gastroenteritis, and, rarely, typhoid fever. It is often spread through contaminated food or water.
Like cancer or heart disease, alcoholism is a primary chronic disease with its own symptoms and causes. The disease is progressive and often fatal if not treated.
email this article