We had great fun creating realistic self-portraits. We started with a cross in the middle of our paper to help us put our eyes, nose and mouth in the right place. We then had to add in our ears and hair. To finish it off we had to create a zentangle design around the endless of our portrait.
This week we revised our contractions. Contractions are the way we can shorten a word using an apostrophe, for example they are = they’re. We worked on them outside because the weather was so nice. We used chalk to record our answers and wrote them on the pavement. We shared our learning at the end!
We learnt all about Rights and Responsilibites. We talked about the differences and how they both affect each other. We then worked in pairs to outline the differenes and the links between them both. We then had to present our posters to the class and share our leanring!
Today, some of the children went to Lochend Park to release the frogs into the loch. We have looked after the tadpoles and watched them transform into frogs over many weeks. Whilst we were at the park we also saw some cygnets and swans and enjoyed feeding all the birds.
We also loved performing at the Garden Party! We have been singing our French songs all week long 😀
This week we had lots of fun with NYCOS, we learned all about rhythm using a parachute! We had to move the parachute up and down following the rhythm of a song and then move places if our number was called out. It was really helpful having a fun way to remember what the words rhythm and beat mean!
What is going well?
“ I enjoyed learning about Ramadan in RME.” –Florence
“I enjoyed writing our own stories in literacy.” –Amy
“I enjoyed watching The Hobbit.” –Kaitlyn
“I enjoyed learning about quarters and halves in maths.” –Ayla
“I learned how to count to 70 in French.” -Krystian
What could be better?
“I would like to learn more about taking away in maths.” –Rory
“I would like to learn my 10 times tables.” –Nina
“I would like to learn about numbers under 0. For example, -1,-2, -3.” –Martin
“To count to 100 in French.” –Tymi
“To play more tricky word hangman in literacy.” -Kian
What is going well?
I enjoyed learning about fractions this week. I have learnt more about ½ and ¼ – Eva
I enjoyed finding halves and quarters of shapes in maths – Christopher
I enjoyed meeting Miss Alexander again. We have set goals for P3 – Luci
I have been writing sentences using ‘ing’ words – Oskar
I enjoyed writing this week and using adjectives in my writing – Eloisa
I enjoyed playing maths games with Mr Hutcheson – Karly
It was great fun playing the colour game in French – Severijus
I liked learning about Eid – Laila
We enjoyed ‘The Hobbit’ – P2b
I have enjoyed French this week – Josie
What could be better?
I would like to do more writing with compound words – Laila
I would like to get better at writing and try and use the connective ‘because’ – Chloe
I would like to get better at reading – Bailey G
I would like to get better at PE – Elza
I would like to keep word building with my new sounds – Bailey B
This week we have been busy writing stories, working independently on maths, using the different strategies we have learned this year, and adding lots of detail to our drawings.
Maths – it was really good doing cheating with tens. If the last digit of a number was 8 or 9 you could add or take-away 10 then add or take-away the difference. Having 30 to do was a lot of work but fun. (Miller)
We were doing near doubles which was good and we learned a new game using dice. (Cammy)
PE – we got to choose what we would like to do, like rounders, basketball, football, tennis, parachutes or hula hoops. We all played a parachute game together at the beginning. It was a cool game. I liked it. (Lainey)
Literacy – it was good writing the sentences and having to add the speech marks to them. (Ella)
Art – drawing the pictures was good. Everyone got to choose their own things to draw and drew lots of people in the park or beach. You could add people on swings or walking dogs. Or the ocean and an ice cream van. We had to add lots of detail. We have so much detail we still need to finish them. (Charlotte)