Clean and abundant water is essential for all life. It is likewise a basic ingredient in our economic well-being. This is a truth that our state’s leaders acknowledged when they adopted the Public Trust Doctrine in to the Wisconsin Constitution. The Public Trust Doctrine states that the waters of the state are held in trust by the state for the use of its citizens. That means that Wisconsin’s many lakes, rivers, trout streams, creeks, streams and even the groundwater belong to us all. We all benefit from them and the water’s health is important to us all.
Water is protected by state and federal laws that protect both water quality and its quantity. The central most important law is the Clean Water Act, enacted by Congress in 1972. Wisconsin, like all other states, has its own set of laws to protect water quality, based upon what the Clean Water Act requires. These laws, at their most simplistic, seek to set rules and regulations that set scientific standards for what is considered “clean” water, eliminate pollution, clean up polluted water and keep clean water clean.
Midwest Environmental Advocates works for strong water policies and provides legal representation to groups that are working to reduce water pollution, conserve water supplies, uphold the public trust, and protect water – their water. Our work covers the whole state, Great Lakes and the Mississippi River Basin, and takes in to consideration all downstream waters. We put our years of experience and expertise in the law to work for the citizens of the state and their rights to clean, healthy water.
More Clean Water News from MEA
Healing Our Waters-Great Lakes Coalition to U.S. Environmental Protection Agency: Protecting our Great Lakes depends on the positive impacts of robust federal laws. Midwest Environmental Advocates' Kim Wright was among the 31 midwest conservation leaders who signed on to this May 14, 2017 letter to the EPA when the newly appointed EPA Administrator, Scott Pruitt, asked for public input on environmental regulation.
Healing Our Waters-Great Lakes Coalition to U.S. Congress: Don't cut funding for the Great Lakes Restoration Initiative and other valuable investments in our freshwater resources. Midwest Environmental Advocates is proud to be among the over 150 conseration organizations and leaders who signed on to this letter.
MEA to DNR: animal unit limit needed at Richfield Dairy, LLC - On January 17, 2017, Midwest Environmental Advocates submitted comments to the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources explaining why an animal unit limit should be reinstated in a draft pollution permit renewal for the Richfield Dairy of Milk Source Holdings, Inc. in Adams County. An animal unit cap in a pollution permit is a practical way for the DNR to limit the source of pollution – in this case, manure waste – produced by an industrial livestock facility. In our comments, we explain how a September 2014 court order in a Friends of the Central Sands/Family Farm Defenders case and two other MEA-involved judicial decisions demonstrate the DNR’s authority to set these limits that may ultimately help to protect area water from pollution associated with spreading manure waste on land. (Attachments 1, 2, 3)
December 6, 2016 Comments on Da Ran Dairy LLC WPDES permit - MEA submitted comments to the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources on behalf of the Sustain Rural Wisconsin Network detailing the coalition's concerns with the livestock operation's prior WPDES law noncompliance, an underestimation of annual manure generation, and whether the pollution permit would resolve conditions that led to an October 25, 2016 manure spill.
September 2016 Flint aid via the federal Water Resources Development Act - MEA joined dozens of clean water and clean government organizations to sign on to a September 2016 letter to the U.S. Senate in support of the Senate’s bipartisan version of the Water Resources Development Act that includes which features $100 million to help Flint and other communities improve or replace their aging water infrastructure. A separate letter was sent to the House as the body has yet to take up a water resources bill or enact any measure providing funding for Flint. Groups once again urged Congress at the end of October to act during the lame duck session to fund aid for Flint.
Resources Related to this Issue
Assessing Groundwater Quality in Kewaunee County, WI report by principal investigators Maureen M. Muldoon, University of Wisconsin – Oshkosh and Mark Borchardt, Laboratory for Infectious Disease and the Environment
USDA-Agricultural Research Service and USGS-Wisconsin Water Science Center with co-investigators Randy Hunt, US Geological Survey – Wisconsin Water Science Center; Laura Hubbard, US Geological Survey – Wisconsin Water Science Center; Davina Bonness, Kewaunee County Land & Water Conservation Department County Conservationist / Department Head; Kevin Masarik, UW-Stevens Point Center for Watershed Science & UW – Extension
Kewaunee Groundwater Susceptibility Map showing areas of the county that could have groundwater contamination depending on the likelihood of contaminiant release, the type of contaminants released and the sensitivity of the area to contamination to the intensity of contamination and land use.
Kewaunee County Public Health and Groundwater Protection Ordinance passed unanimously by the county board on Sept. 23, 2014. Ordinance was sent to a public referendum vote in the spring of 2015, was passed and will be in effect in the spring of 2016.
Presentation by Mark Borchardt and Susan Spencer, USDA-Agricultural Research Service and USGS Wisconsin Water Science Center, Marshfield, WI; Maureen Muldoon, UW-Oshkosh, Dept. of Geology; Laura Hubbard and Randall Hunt, USGS Wisconsin Water Science Center, Middleton, WI; Davina Bonness, Kewaunee County Land and Water Conservation Department; and Kevin Masarik, UW-Stevens Point, Center for Watershed Science and Education
Presentation by Mark Borchardt, Susan Spencer, and Spencer Borchardt of the USDA –Agricultural Research Service and USGS Wisconsin Water Science Center, and Becky Larson and Asli Ozkaynak of UW-Madison Biological Systems Engineering
Petition for Corrective Action - outline of petition
Petition for Corrective Action Executive Summary
Petition for Corrective Action - full petition with signatures
CAFO Toolkit: Protecting Your Community From Existing and Proposed Concentrated Animal Feeding Opera
When an industrial animal farm proposes to locate or expand in your community, know the basics of water and air regulations and your property rights. This toolkit covers how to stay informed and participate in CAFO permitting processes.
A toolkit published by the U.S. EPA to assist state and local agencies, watershed and community groups, NGOs and the like in developing communication materials about nitrogen and phosphorus pollution.
A two-page fact sheet from the U.S. EPA regarding the sources, effects and impacts of nutrient pollution in the U.S.
Article 9, Section 1 of the Wisconsin Constitution lays out Wisconsin's Public Trust Doctrine. This is a body of common and statutory law that says that the state holds the the waters of the state in trust for public purposes. This extremely important right, guaranteed by our state Constitution, is the foundation of water law in the state of Wisconsin.
This 2007 tool-kit provides an overview of stormwater regulation in Wisconsin, including information on what to do if you spot a violation of these laws.
This is a basic, easy-to-follow guide on how to organize your neighbors to take action regarding a problem in your community.
Natural Resources Code - NR 102 - Water Quality Standards for Wisconsin Surface Waters
This 2005 report provides policy recommendations to shape the future of water conservation in Wisconsin.