With: Julie Rowe
When you think of the Center for Disease Control, do you think of geeky techs working with world-ending diseases in a sterile lab deep inside a secure facility? While it’s true some CDC lab techs do work in secure labs, that’s only one small part of the CDC. The reality of what the leading United States Public Health agency does is far larger.
Here are some fast facts about the CDC:
- · Formed in 1946 and headquartered in Atlanta, Georgia
- · Facilities in 10 additional locations inside the U.S.
- · Employs more than 14,000 people
- · Field staff work in 50 states and more than 50 countries
- · Prepared 24/7 to respond to any natural or manmade event
- · Able to deliver lifesaving medicines from the Strategic National Stockpile to anywhere in the U.S. in 12 hours or less
During 2015 and 2016, the CDC conducted more than 750 field investigations in 49 states, 5 U.S. territories, and in at least 35 different countries.
Who conducts these investigations? Disease detectives (epidemiologists) are officers in the CDC’s Epidemic Intelligence Service (EIS). Like Crime Scene Investigators, these disease detectives begin by looking for evidence and information. They ask:
WHO is sick?
WHAT are their symptoms?
WHEN did they get sick?
WHERE could they have been exposed to the cause of the illness?
To become a CDC disease detective, you must be a doctor, scientist, veterinarian, or other health professional; then you must complete a special 2-year training program.
CDC disease detectives go into harm’s way to track down the cause of sickness, and how it’s spread. Several members of the CDC have died in the line of duty. It takes the right training and equipment to stay safe while doing field work in difficult conditions.
Visit the CDC to learn about the current outbreaks under investigation: CDC Current Outbreak List.
Want to learn more about Disease Detectives? Check out the Epidemic Intelligence Service playlist!
Special Forces soldier and medic Walter River would give anything to snatch more than a few seconds of down time to see if he can rattle the no-nonsense and incredibly hot Dr. Lloyd he's protecting, but dodging explosions, snipers, and student radicals who've unleashed a lethal bio-engineered microorganism have made that almost impossible. Maybe he'll get a chance—if he can figure out how to keep them both alive.
CDC microbiologist Ava Lloyd races to find a cure for a bio-terrorism organism sweeping El Paso. The few stolen moments with her very hunky bodyguard River have been explosive, but no matter how alluring he is, she can't afford to get distracted. The clock is ticking, people are dying by the hundreds, and once this crisis is solved, they'll both be off on their next assignment, thousands of miles apart.
One of Julie’s favorite lines of dialogue from Viable Threat:
River made a frustrated noise at the back of his throat. “You want to play hide and seek in a bathroom full of fragmentation grenades, a corpse, and Dr. Frankenstein’s shooter bar, go right ahead. Just wait a minute so the rest of us have time to leave.” He shook his head. “It wasn’t nice knowing you.”
Julie Rowe’s first career as a medical lab technologist in Canada took her to the North West Territories and northern Alberta, where she still resides. She loves to include medical details in her romance novels, but admits she’ll never be able to write about all her medical experiences because, “Fiction has to be believable”. Julie writes romantic suspense and romantic military thrillers. Her most recent titles include Viable Threat, the first book in the Disease Control and Enforcement series, and Viral Justice, book three of the Biological Response Team series. You can find her at www.julieroweauthor.com , on Twitter @julieroweauthor or at her Facebook page: www.facebook.com/JulieRoweAuthor