Capacitive Sensing for MEMS Motion Tracking By Dave Brennan Advisors: Dr. Shannon Timpe, Dr. Prasad Shastry Introduction Part 1) Quick MEMS introduction Part 2) Capacitive Sensing Part 3) Goal MEMS background Microelectrical mechanical systems (USA), Microsystems Technology (Europe), Micromachines, Japan…etc MEMS are in the micro-meters range Arranged hundreds on a small cm by cm chip typically MEMS background Manufactured by various etching techniques Silicon based technology MEMS applications Sensors such as to sense collisions for air bag deployment Bio MEMS similar to the Bradley MEMS project Inkjet printers Bradley Bio MEMS Project Main purpose is to analyze plant samples for medical applications Chip can be targeted with a specific receptor, such that a plant bonding with the chip alerts us of possible biomedical applications of that plant Electrical Engineering component is capacitive sensing Capacitive sensing Useful to solve for an unknown mass (of plant sample) after it is adsorbed on the MEMS chip Very small scale (atto farads = 10^-18, smaller than parasitic capacitance in most devices EE’s typically use) Useful equations Where k is beam stiffness, wn is natural frequency in rad hz, m is mass in kg C is capacitance (F), epsilon is permittivity of free space constant, A is area in meters^2, d is distance in meters Capacitive Sensing Measuring capacitance Two main ways to measure capacitance ◦ Change in area over time ◦ Change in distance over time Cantilever beam capacitance We can find the oscillation distance by measuring capacitance by: C C C A d d A d d C A d w( x, y) p C p MEMS basic cantilever design MEMS device with non constant area Sample capacitance values for a fixed distance (at rest) Sample of 4 different MEMS devices each with a different capacitance Initial tests Set up an RC circuit with 10pF capacitor (smallest in lab) Parasitic capacitance on breadboard warped data greatly Fixed by using vector board thanks to Mr. Gutschlag’s suggestion Cut down leads on capacitor/resistor to minimize error Initial tests Used system ID to identify the capacitor based on RC time constant Compared capacitor value found with system ID vs measured on LCR meter ~20% error Initial tests Currently modeling probe capacitance and resistance, reattempting system ID experiment ASAP with probe model included Will this work for smaller capacitors? Instrumentation Andeen-Hagerling 2700A Bridge can measure down in aF range $30,000+ Not realistic for this project Agilent LCM in Jobst can only measure down to ~.1pF range Instrumentation Will explore the possibility of creating a bridge circuit for measuring capacitance Eliminating error Ideally, want to measure capacitance as accurate as possible, however settle for 5% error Parasitic capacitance is approximately desired capacitance in magnitude, this will skew results highly Eliminating error Eliminating error Since Cv is adjustable, “tune” out the parasitic capacitance Goals Minimize the error of all calculations by doing multiple trials Learn about MEMS topology Learn about capacitive sensing methods If time permits, add a control system that monitors the maximum peak of the voltage wave and adjusts the frequency of the applied voltage signal to ensure the peak is always known Goals Learn how to use the probe station to make connections to a MEMS chip Learn how to accurately measure and verify capacitance of the selected MEMS device(s) Obtain the natural frequency of the MEMS device Accurately track the mass adsorbed by the cantilever beam and have it verified System inputs System inputs are voltage wave (special attention paid to the frequency) Plant mass System outputs Oscillation distance Capacitance Natural frequency Mass Complete system Voltage wave (AC) MEMS chip Oscillation distance (found by capacitance) Frequency (Hz or Rad/Hz) of Voltage wave Peak monitoring system Capacitance Adjust frequency of AC Voltage wave Is capacitance different? Mass can now be calculated if desired Project Summary By accurately measuring capacitance, we can determine the natural frequency of various MEMS chips The natural frequency will be at the peak of the oscillation distance Oscillation distance can be found through capacitance Project Summary This will allow us to determine the mass of the plant sample adsorbed Once mass is verified externally, possibilities are endless References Baltes, Henry, Oliver Brand, G. K. Fedder, C. Hierold, Jan G. Korvink, and O. Tabata. Enabling Technology for MEMS and Nanodevices. Weinheim: Wiley-VCH, 2004. Print. Elwenspoek, Miko, and Remco Wiegerink. Mechanical Microsensors with 235 Figures. Berlin: Springer, 2001. Print. Timpe, Shannon J., and Brian J. Doyle. Design and Functionalization of a Microscale Biosensor for Natural Product Drug Discovery. Tech. Print. Questions?