Some simple questions doesn’t have definite answers. Just think about this. When I say ‘me’ or ‘I’, what does it really mean? Does it mean my behavior and characteristics? or my DNAs of the gene packets inside the 46 chromosomes given by my parents, which holds my characteristics encryption codes? or the billions of cells with complex polypeptides that makes up my body? or my consciousness, effected from the neuronal electro-chemical activity in my brain? or the illusions of my world created by the sub conscious mind? or does it really mean anything?
Oh yeah! May be, ‘me’ or ‘I’ invokes the answer for above questions all at once. Whichever answer that was resulted on invocation should collectively mean it. If a word’s meaning is a collection of answers, can we say that the word itself is meaningless, unless it is linked with another word? Are we calling the collection of all those meanings as knowledge? Does Interlinking of all the words or symbols creates an illusion of knowledge which in turn used to understand things?
If there is a possibility to store a book in my brain directly using some future technology and read from it, can I still claim that I’ve acquired the knowledge from the book? Processing the knowledge through the neural network of our brain is what we call understanding? Do we understand the process of understanding while trying to comprehend the process itself?
If Consciousness is experiencing the happening through our sensory receptors, which gets converted into memories that gets triggered later on the purpose of re-linking to experience the current, then if a person forgets almost everything event after events, does he still have consciousness? or What if we were created with all those conscious memories that never actually happened but the universe and the things that it contains was created just an hour ago? What if everything that was happened before is just an illusion?
Chemistry is beautiful. I never liked that subject when I was schooling and don’t ask me “how much you scored in your board exams?” I’m just an above average student (That may be the reason for the ridiculous questions that I’m asking). But when I started understanding the elements in the periodic table and their reaction on certain situations, I started liking the subject in every aspect. I wonder on seeing chemistry influences in everyday life. Every object is made up of molecules with certain type of chemical elements. Each element has own property. But every element is made up of atoms which differ at the number of electrons.
Atoms have four forces (strong nuclear force, electromagnetic force, gravitational force and weak force) to keep protons, neutrons and electrons together. Protons repel each other as they are positively charged. Electrons do repel each other as they are negatively charged. Protons and Electrons attract each other as the charges are different. Nucleus of an atom is packed with Protons and Neutrons using a Strong nuclear force. That is the reason for which the electrons are moving around nucleus of an atom. This is astounding. It is so structured. Well designed. Good. But who could possibly be the creator of the extraordinary architecture of an atom? Who should have created these forces? To say if it was random, there would have been other chances for the architecture of an atom. However, this type of architecture won the probability and stability to structure by its own.
Which is the fastest processor in the world? Don’t tell me it is “Pentium Core Millennia V2 Processor with Speed 1 Terra Hz and Memory 1 Zeta Byte”. This processor may be bit slower than the world’s fastest processor. Yeah, it’s our brain. Oh wait… don’t just start to compute the next Mersenne’s prime number. I just told fastest processor in terms of multitasking, resource scheduling, analyzing, decision making and so on. Brain runs an extraordinary memory management program and controls the critical events happening inside the body. But how does the brain have the intelligence of learning and adapting? Does god gives that power to every brain? Or should it be a survival instinct? If survival doesn’t works, no organisms would have existed in this world. Could god be the programmer for this survival instinct inside DNA? Or it was developed by the organisms itself through generations? Simplifying the questions will give us the question “Is it Random or God’s creations?”
Randomness is based on the probability. Probability is based on chances of an event to occur. I admire nature as it shows the permutation and combination using available chances. God wouldn’t want to reason every one by keeping the hints here and there using the randomness. By the way, could god have created everything, for the purpose of man, who could explore each and everything in the universe to get the sophisticated life in the world? Why he should have created this universe only for man? God must be having some other plans or he/she should be simply choosing random choices from the available chances.
I do not completely deny the existence of God. But I’ve only a minimal belief (Say, 1%). I could not simply accept that God is watching me. He/she might be having some other important work than that. We need a moral support on our hard situations. Believing God will be a moral support for peoples on those situations, even he/she doesn’t do anything. I used to think “Does god really exist?” when lots of people die on the case of natural events like Tsunami, Earthquakes, Floods and so on. If God exist, those will not happen without the knowledge of him/her. Does he play with the life of everything in the planet? Or God simply does it for no reason? Or God doesn’t care about the importance of our life? In the movie Dasavatharam, Govind (Kamal Hasan) will say at last “Will be good if God exist”. Yes. I would say the same. If he/she exists there will be a peaceful life around the world for every living being.
Once, I had posted in facebook saying that “I don’t believe god, because god doesn’t believes me” This could be a confusing one liner. I said this, because how could I believe even if the God exists, when he/she is playing randomness with the universe? Even if I believe god, he/she will not believe me as I’m just a social animal. I could hear a mind voice saying “hey shaitaan… you will definitely go to hell…”
Charles Darwin, though he is not an atheist, believed that every single organism is surviving upon the natural selection. That doesn’t mean nature selects the organism which to survive (Survival of the fittest). But, he found that every organism changes its characteristics based upon the environment through transmutation. The characteristics are getting transferred to the next generation using DNA. DNA is a double helix spindle resides inside the nucleus of a living cell. The code of the DNA differs between each living being. Wow!! What an intelligent design? I’m so much interested when I happen to read about the structure of a DNA. It uses an encryption technique to encode and decode the form of an organism. Most probably God do not want to encrypt DNA of every organism. So, the program in nature writes the encryption of the DNA by the organism itself.
Well, what about mutation? It happens when a mistake happens in the genetic DNA thread on transferring the DNA from one generation to the next. If the organism survives with the mutation, the generation may continue to evolve as mutated organisms. God’s play should be there. The mistake should be done purposely by god. But why should he do this transformation when he could create everything at a spark of the second? Does he/she want, a man to believe that it is random or it is really random? OK. What about the very first organism? It was also random. Shoot… Just give me a break…
Many scientists believe that the first organism was born (?) after the early development of the earth on a lightning strike at the stagnant soup of amino acids with carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, oxygen, phosphorous and with other elements which is available in a living cell. The organism then got the intelligent to divide further and grows throw the process of mutation. Would god be responsible for the life of the first organism? Why shouldn’t he/she have just sent the lightning spark with the intelligence packed for the life of a first organism? If yes, we again are getting the same question. Why should he do this when he could create everything at a spark of a second?
Survival is the basic instinct for a living being to be existing. Man exists only after a long chain of mutations happened over many organisms from the first living cell. Every organism follows a strategy to survive with its own characteristics. Human DNA was programmed with the package of intelligence, which none of the other life forms have. That difference makes a human to stand out from a monkey.
A living being cannot be made without chemistry. It follows the chaotic behavior of the nature. It is a structured chemical factory with structured molecules. Organic chemistry takes the responsibility for the chemical reactions that is happening inside an organism. Those reactions are continuous, environment depended and chaotic. God should have automated everything, so that they will be very easy to handle. It could be a controlled automation, on which god could interfere anywhere and anytime whenever he/she wants to. But why should he/she hide from everyone? Why god does create an image as like he/she doesn’t exist?
Even our emotions are the result of a chemical reaction inside our body. For instance, consider a person who is getting ready for a fight. When his brain has decided to fight, it will try to prepare the body first. So that it will send a signal to every part of the body. Next thing, when this reaches the adrenaline hormone, it releases the chemical noradrenalin which immediately joins the circulation of blood and increases the heart rate so that it prepares the brain and muscles by sending more oxygen and glucose. This is a survival instinct that is stored on a DNA. Instincts are genetic memory which will be used on the course of emergency. Will this genetic memory hold the memory of our ancestors? Some people think they are reincarnated. Will genetic memory be the reason for this?
Though emotions are continuous chemical reactions, we could not simply ignore it. It is a non verbal communication which would say how happy or sad a person is. There is a difference with the communication between The Terminator (Arnold Schwarzenegger) and John Connor (Edward Furlong) in Terminator movie. Mind would be the combination of these emotions and intelligence.
Disclaimer: This article is fully based on my view on God. I have tried to provide scientific explanation wherever possible which i read in books and internet. Thanks to Wikipedia and Google on helping me finding articles related to science. If it spoils your mood or you started feeling boring on reading this article, please don’t scold me. 🙂
Everyone should have thought about god at least once in their lifetime. Doesn’t matter if he/she is a theist or atheist. Denial of god is the matter of fear which we think what if the god exists? Every time when scientists untangle the puzzles of nature, god goes far beyond the ring of puzzle. But still it puzzles with what is beyond the ring. Science takes an advantage of using “Infinite” when they can’t reach the limit of certain things. May god exist beyond infinite? In toy story Buzz Light Year will come with a caption says “To infinity … and beyond!” If Buzz could take us beyond infinity, we may meet god.
A series of questions will arise on our mind when we think of god. Why god does this to me? I smoke daily, will I go to hell? Well, I’ve donated blood many times, is heaven a sure thing for me? What is the calculation god will make for one to go to hell or heaven? Why god plays in my life? Will God look at me when I bribe with the constable standing on the roadside for coming in one way? Why God created us? What is the purpose for me to live in this world?
Every questions turns to be logical or illogical depend upon the situation they are in. When I feel hopeless, I would want the god exists. I would try to get the solution by a miracle. Only a superior who is far greater than human can do that. We could see miracles happening in someone’s life. Yes, God if exists can do that. On the other sense, it should be a coincidence. But how god could enter in each and every one’s life of >6.7 billion population overall this world? This world has so many other living beings. God doesn’t care about them? We could answer this question. God is superior to everything, so he could do anything. Cool.
I love science. When I read it I get so many questions, which when asked to someone they may look at me as if I’m an alien. So, I stopped asking questions. But the questions started building up in my mind and started confusing with myself. I never tried to find God. But those questions started finding the solution for “Where is God?” The most comforting answer for that question is “God can’t be limited by science”. There are chances where god could be in the reverse direction of science. But still, I wanted to find the answer as I live directly with science.
Big Bang theory explains how this universe could have been started from. This theory doesn’t care about the previous state before Big Bang or the initial state of it. But it says that the universe was extreme hot and dense that expanded rapidly after the initial state. Universe is still expanding. Time and Space didn’t exist at the initial state of big bang. There was only a point from where the Big Bang could have started. Could God have started this Big Bang by keeping the point in the void space which is available of nowhere? If everyday life is pre-determined, how there exists randomness on everything?
Einstein quoted “God doesn’t play dice with the universe”. Means that if god is determining the life and everything, why should he hides behind the randomness with the nature? Butterfly effect tells about the chaotic behavior of the nature. A flap of the butterfly wings may lead to the delay or creation of a tornado. But the probability will be depends upon the event chains that happens events after events. I believe chaos. It happens around me. Every event is the chain reaction of another event. A superior power could redirect the sequences of these events. But why God should need to control the events of the nature? Is he/she controlling the randomness too? Who could possibly be the designer of nature and its laws? God or Chaos? Oh My God, why does u want me to ask about all these silly things?