MEXICO CITY — The world`s worst air pollution just gave Pedro Salvador Mendez Sanchez another month of vacation, but the 1st grader is not happy about it. The same pollution that freed him from school also is keeping him indoors.
``The pollution ruined my vacation because I can`t go to the park,`` said Mendez, 6, who vows to ride a bicycle-not a smog-belching car-when he grows up. ``My sister is sick with a cough, and I have a sore throat. And the doctor says it`s from breathing only smoke and no clean air.``
For the first time, Mexico`s infamous air pollution forced the government to extend Christmas vacations for schoolchildren until the end of January to minimize their exposure to the smog.
The school closures are part of Mexico`s most comprehensive campaign to date against the pollution that smothers this city of 20 million and reaches its deadliest levels during winter.
But many environmentalists argue that the measures, most of which take effect this month, are too little, too late.
As of last week, mandatory auto emission inspections are required for the 3 million vehicles circulating in the capital. Annual registration stickers now come in five colors, so that 20 percent of the cars can be ordered off the streets at least one work day a week to reduce pollution.
Ecologists say Mexico City is the most polluted metropolis on Earth. Some claim children and the elderly are dying by the thousands from pollution-related illnesses-though they can offer no proof and the government puts out no statistics.
Doctors warn that jogging can permanently damage the lungs. Scientists say a 20-minute wait in traffic exposes motorists to twice the levels of carbon monoxide considered to be hazardous to health.
And ecologists estimate that 70 percent of the children in the metropolitan area suffered from respiratory ailments over the holidays because of unusually high levels of ozone and other pollutants.
This is the season when thermal inversions-cold air masses that trap pollutants in the Valley of Mexico for hours at a time-send concentrations of contaminants soaring. Vehicles and 35,000 industries in the valley spew 6.7 million tons of toxins, smoke, gas and lead into the air each year.
``The city can`t wait any longer,`` said poet Homero Aridjis, president of the Group of 100, an environmental organization made up of noted Mexican writers and artists. ``We are living in a state of chronic ecological disaster right now.``
Aridjis said that he and other environmentalists are convinced Mexico City has already experienced winters like the one in London in 1952, when 4,000 people were said to have died after a prolonged thermal inversion trapped deadly smog over the British capital.
``Pollution here has not produced spectacular death tolls,`` he said,
``but a slow death of the citizens who live here.``
However, many Mexicans are finding hopes for a better environment in the early actions of the new administration of President Carlos Salinas de Gortari and his handpicked mayor of Mexico City, Manuel Camacho Solis.
The administration of President Miguel de la Madrid had started to restrict traffic in downtown Mexico City as an antipollution measure, but it was frequently criticized for not enforcing laws to close polluting industries when air quality deteriorated to health emergency levels.
Following Salinas` instructions, Camacho last month announced an eight-point plan aimed at reversing the trend that turned this city from a beautiful, clean tourist paradise two decades ago to a gray-cloaked health menace today.
First, the government extended vacations for children in public schools. Experts say the air is most threatening during the dry months of December through March, when thermal inversions are daily events.
Starting Monday, the plan calls for the government to pull cars off the streets between now and March 21 if they are found to be polluting
excessively. On Jan. 16, special hours go into effect for loading and unloading merchandise.
Under the new rules, the government is to provide help to parent and community groups working on smog-control programs. It will also be illegal until March 21 to burn tires, plastics or other substances that produce irritating smoke.
Camacho promised to announce other measures, notably in the areas of public transportation and limiting the growth of the capital, where 23 percent of Mexico`s population resides.
Jose Arias Chavez, energy coordinator for the Pact of Environmental Groups, a national coalition of 60 ecological organizations, termed the new antipollution measures ``superficial`` and said, ``They don`t get to the root of the problem.
Arias said the Federal Electricity Commission failed to convert its two thermoelectric plants in the valley from burning fuel oil to using cleaner natural gas. He also complained that a refinery operated by Petroleos Mexicanos (Pemex), the national oil monopoly, generates perhaps 5 percent of the valley`s pollution.
Aridjis said ozone levels on Dec. 14-15 reached .27 parts per million, more than double the acceptable limit of .11 parts per million, but the government never warned the public.
He also said ozone levels exceeded the health standard on more than 300 days last year.