When children move to a new school they often report that they are scared. Children need to understand what being “scared” really means. Parents would love their child to be able to distinguish between the levels of being scared, a little afraid and nervous. what being “scared” really means.
Families that move need to make sure that reoccurring things such as going to a new class or moving to a new school is not lightly passed over or treated like “no big deal”. Even children who successfully handle transitions need to have the support and understanding from their parents that transition takes effort to be successful, even if you are used to moving.
Moving and disruptions
Research shows that moves tend to disrupt younger children’s education, particularly when they are developing the basic skills of reading, writing, and math. Dr Elmore Rigamer, a child psychiatrist, found that while older children have more difficulty adjusting socially following a move, younger children have more difficulty adjusting academically. The move itself interrupts the continuity in development of basic skills. Once those skills are in place, moves become easier and students can keep up with their schoolwork more easily, even following a transition.
I believe the foundation for an even easier transition is expanding the emotional intelligence of your children. If they have a firm foundation in understanding and applying their feelings to actions and reactions they understand themselves and others better.
Key things we can teach at home or school
Please make sure your child knows the following emotions and how they feel in his/her body.
When parents first see this list, they might be concerned that they can’t teach these emotions. But you can. Start out by using them in your everyday interactions. Explain them to your child and relate that emotion to something you are currently doing. If you are not that great at “explaining” you can look for faces with emotions and get your child to express what they think that person is feeling.
These videos might be helpful for some families:
After you have mastered these, you might want to learn about the other emotions that are often harder to teach. Many families feel these emotions are negative. I like to present kids with all emotions so they can learn to express themselves as they really feel.
Please email me at firstname.lastname@example.org if you’d like the next three video links. (Found on youtube and free)