A great organic mulch for acid-loving plants is pine needles. Each fall mulch your acid-lovers with a nice, thick layer of pine needles, which are acidic themselves. The pine needles will decompose and leave their acid in the soil. Your plants will love this extra acid in their roots.Organic gardens are perfect for gourmet cooking. If you plan to use some your garden for this type of cooking, try growing your own organic herbs. They make great landscaping plants too. They can add fresh flavors to foods, provide natural medicinal products, and provide fragrances. Most don’t even require attention to grow.
Start your organic garden with a good strategic plan. This helps you know exactly where each plant will go in your garden so that you can maximize the few hours you have to garden each day. As part of your plan, take notes on what plants you will use to replace short-lived crops such as spinach and lettuce.Cultivate your soil to improve the quality of your soil. When you cultivate, or till, your soil, you loosen up parts that may be compacted. Compacted soil does not absorb water well, and it discourages soil micro-organisms from growing in it. When your soil is properly tilled, seeds can thrive and grow.
If you live in the city, you can still reap the benefits of organic gardening through container gardening. Herbs especially will thrive in indoor pots, as long as they are large enough. Container gardening can be easier than outdoor gardening when going organic, as there is less risk of exposure to insect pests or weeds.
A great tip for getting the most out of your organic garden is to use soaker hoses. These hoses can be left on for several hours on low pressure, which will save you time from having to stand with a regular hose or filling up a watering can. This will give you time to work in another area of your garden.
When starting your organic garden, a great tip is to make sure you have the right timing when sowing your seeds. If your timing is off when planting a particular plant, you will have very disappointing results. If you make sure you have your timing correct, you will likely be pleased with your results.
As you can see from the above list of tips, organic gardening can be very useful in getting the best and freshest produce possible from your plants. After following these tips, you will no longer be new to the world of organic gardening, but you will become an organic gardening expert.