Spinach: You either love it or dislike it with a passion. The green leafy vegetable has long been the topic of culinary lore and scientific explanation, jokes and cartoons, and believe it or not, the focus of many specialty cookbooks.
Spinach: You either love it or dislike it with a passion.
The green leafy vegetable has long been the topic of culinary lore and scientific explanation, jokes and cartoons, and believe it or not, the focus of many specialty cookbooks.
Food historians believe that the vitamin-rich green leafy vegetable originated many centuries ago in ancient Persia (modern-day Iran). Spinach was brought to the Mediterranean Basin by the Moors sometime between 800 and 1200 A.D., and was initially cultivated in this country during the early 1800s.
Cartoon fans and trivia buffs know that the legendary character Popeye the Sailor Man, created in 1929, always gains strength after devouring a can of spinach, and has probably influenced many children to at least try the colorful vegetable.
According to Andrew Pollock, owner of Silverbrook Farm in Dartmouth, one of the region's largest sustainable farms, spinach is a crop that thrives in cool temperatures.
Pollock grows about 5,000 plants annually, starting them in the fall from seeds planted in the greenhouse. After slowly maturing all winter, some of this year's crop was ready in March, while other plants were transferred outdoors and will be harvested until June.
Silverbrook only uses organic pesticides on its crops. Pollock says that spinach ideally grows in sunny, cooler weather in well-drained, moderately rich soil.
"Make sure the leaves are healthy and shiny," he advises, adding that spinach leaves should always have a rich green color. Pollock says that leaves harvested in warm weather can be tougher.
Pollock prefers his spinach lightly sauteed in a high-quality olive oil and splashed with a little balsamic vinegar just before serving.
Silverbrook Farms is selling fresh spinach and other produce on the first and third Wednesdays of the month from 1 to 6 p.m. at the farmers market located at the Green Bean Coffee Shop, 740 Purchase St., New Bedford.
According to Mary Goldberg, a registered dietician with Southcoast Health System, spinach is one of most versatile of all vegetables. She advises her patients to incorporate the nutritious vegetable into omelets, salads and entrees. It is especially good when combined with colorful fresh fruit, like berries and oranges.
"It doesn't get any greener than spinach," Goldberg quips, describing the verdant vegetable as "nutrient rich and low in calories.
"It gives you the biggest bang for your calorie buck," she continues. A cup (30 grams) has only 7 calories, zero carbs and zero grams of fat.
Goldberg notes that spinach is a good source of niacin and zinc, as well as lutein, vitamins A, B6, C, E and K, calcium, iron, magnesium, potassium and other essential vitamins and minerals. Canned spinach, however, is high in sodium, and Goldberg cautions patients that spinach is so high in vitamin K, it could interfere with a blood thinner such as Coumadin.
"I tell patients to cook the spinach as little as possible," Goldberg says. "Baby spinach holds its color beautifully."
One of the nutritionist's favorite seasonal treats is a late spring salad made by tossing fresh baby spinach with assorted greens, sliced fresh strawberries and red onions and served with a tangy poppyseed dressing.
Unlike Pollack and Goldberg, local restaurateur Mariano Pinho, owner of The Urban Grille, readily admits he's not a spinach fan.
"I've never been a vegetable person until it's incorporated into a dish like shrimp scampi where the spinach takes on the flavor of the other ingredients," he tells, acknowledging that perhaps spinach is "underrated" and should be given some additional attention when planning his seasonal restaurant menu. However, he did find this recipe to share.
Open-Faced Spinach Burger
Makes four to six servings (depending on the size of patty you desire). From Mariano Pinho, The Urban Grille, New Bedford.
1 to 1 1/2 pounds of baby spinach, washed and dried well
1 cup of shredded cheddar cheese
3/4 cup panko bread crumbs
3 large eggs
1 teaspoon crushed red pepper flakes
Salt to taste
4 to 6 slices of Swiss cheese
4 to 6 roasted red pepper halves
4 to 6 Kaiser rolls
Saute spinach in frying pan with olive oil until tender. Place cooked spinach into a bowl and add eggs, shredded cheese, breadcrumbs, salt and crushed red pepper flakes and mix well. Form mixture into patties and place on a baking sheet. Top patties with roasted red pepper halves and Swiss cheese. Bake at 350 degrees until cheese is melted. Serve on a toasted Kaiser roll.
Fruit Smoothie with Spinach
Makes one serving. From Mary Goldberg, Southcoast Health System.
1/2 cup strawberries
1 apple, peeled and cored
1 cup fresh, washed spinach
1/2 cup fat-free Greek yogurt
1 teaspoon honey or favorite sweetener
1/2 cup ice cubes (add after all other ingredients are blended)
Blend and enjoy. Calories: 250; protein. 10 grams.
Chicken Breasts with Spinach and Mushrooms
Recipe adapted from "Simple, Fresh and Healthy" by Linda Hafner, from Mary Goldberg, Southcoast Health System.
1 teaspoon olive oil
1/2 cup finely chopped onion
2 cloves garlic, minced
1 cup chopped mushrooms
3 cups fresh baby spinach, washed, drained and coarsely chopped
1/4 cup grated Parmesan cheese
Dash salt (optional) and pepper
4 thin boneless chicken breast halves, trimmed
2 egg whites
1 teaspoon Dijon mustard
1 cup bread crumbs or panko (Japanese style) breadcrumbs
Dash of parsley flakes, garlic powder, pepper
1 tablespoon grated Parmesan cheese
1 teaspoon olive oil
Cooking spray or olive oil spray
Stuffing preparation: Heat oil in non-stick pan over medium heat. Add onions and saute until softened. Add garlic and mushrooms, continue cooking 3 to 4 minutes longer and then add spinach, cook until wilted, about 30 seconds. Remove from heat and allow to cool. NOTE: This can be done ahead and stored in refrigerator for a few hours until ready to assemble. Chicken preparation: Preheat the oven to 400 degrees. Whisk the egg whites and mustard in a shallow bowl. Mix the breadcrumbs, seasonings, cheese and olive oil in another shallow bowl until the crumbs are evenly coated. Place chicken on a cutting board. (I usually take a minute to pound the breasts on a floured board to achieve even thickness and ensure tenderness, but this is not necessary). If breasts are thick, a 3-inch pocket can be created by cutting horizontally into one side of the chicken breast with a sharp knife. If pounded thin, the chicken breast can be folded over after filling. Fill each pocket with 1/4 of the stuffing. Close breasts over stuffing and secure with toothpicks. Dip each piece of chicken in the egg white mixture, and then roll in the breadcrumbs. Arrange in a baking dish, which has been sprayed with cooking spray or olive oil. Bake chicken breasts 25-30 minutes. Optional: I often pour 1/4 cup of Marsala or sherry wine over the chicken breasts about 10 minutes before they are done and cover with tin foil. This enhances the moisture and flavor. I have often made these ahead of time, kept them frozen, uncooked until needed; bake them in the oven 35 to 45 minutes.