‘Hey, there’s a dead body in here,’ cried Debby.
‘Um,’ said Tom, ‘are you sure? It’s black as pitch in here since the power went out.’
‘Stop being funny, Debby, it’s not funny to say dumb stuff like that,’ said Marcia.
The three youths fumbled about in the dark for a moment. Where was Dougal? It’s not funny, they thought, to do dumb things like pretending to be dead. But God, why was it so dark?
Why did it have to be such poor weather? Thought Debby. Her hands clasped around clammy skin and felt something wet and sticky coat her fingertips.
Just at that moment, Dougal called out, ‘Hey, where is everyone?’ 
Their blood ran cold collectively. Dougal was calling from behind them. So what was in Debby’s hand?
Suddenly, the chilly ankle wiggled and forced its way out of Debby’s hand. 
Presently, the lights flickered back on in the little cottage. Thunder and lightning rumbled and bashed outside, but it had completely missed its dramatic cue, appearing much too late for the proper effect.
Dougal entered the room, saw Debby on the bed with a stranger, and cried, ‘What the hell is going on in here?’
The stranger stood up.
‘Uh, who are you?’ asked Marcia.
‘Well, this is always pretty awkward, but I’m Death, as it happens.’
‘But why are you lying around in the dark, making silly screechy noises?’ demanded Tom.
‘I never really know how to segue into this conversation,’ he said, ‘and to be honest I feel a bit better when you have to come to me, instead of vice versa.’
Debby screwed up her nose. ‘I’d really prefer it if you started making more sense, and quickly, please,’ she said, trailing off into a manic sort of quibble at the end of her sentence.
‘Well,’ said Death. ‘Let’s just say you’ll all have quite a lot of time to process my being here. Because you’re dead.’ He added this bit quickly, seemingly hopeful that his erstwhile companions might miss what he said.
‘Dead?’ laughed Dougal, ‘how can we be dead?’
Death raised a bony finger toward the table in the adjacent room. 'The shrimp salad,' said Death. 'Was off'.
