Lenny and Sally decided on their first date that if they were to continue dating, their second date would involve getting Lenny away from the city and taking him somewhere to be surrounded by nature. Lenny had never been outside of the city in the 26 years he had been alive; Sally, on the other hand, grew up in West Virginia, where she was surrounded by beautiful snow-capped mountains and vast forests. On this second date, Lenny and Sally decided to drive approximately 30 miles north out of the city and away from the hustle and bustle of metropolitan life, toward a rocky mountain trail that boasted several miles of scenic hiking trails and a rumor of a hidden waterfall deep in the valley.

They drove in Lenny's car, a modern SUV capable of transporting two dating humans and their supplies: a cooler filled with ice, drinks and snacks, hiking gear, backpacks and swim attire. Lenny concentrated on the road but was able to keep an engaging conversation with Sally, who sat in the passenger's seat. 

"I haven't been on this particular hike before, but I have read about it online and have been wanting to go. Now I'm glad I have someone to go with me!" Sally told Lenny with excitement in her voice. Lenny was excited as well, but also a bit apprehensive at the idea of going hiking in an unfamiliar environment. The most hiking Lenny had ever done was going from block to block when visiting his favorite restaurants a few miles from his apartment building. He wondered if he would be accosted by bears or bitten by snakes while he was there, but he didn't want to appear nervous and risk looking weak in front of his new friend.

As if Sally had read Lenny's mind, she immediately confessed: "I hope we don't get mauled by bears while we're out there hiking!" Lenny, with a nervous laugh, replied: "Don't worry, I'll protect you." Sally, with a wry smile, let Lenny in on the joke. "I'm just playing. There's no wildlife where we're going. It's mostly well-established trails and lots of trees and birds. Plus, there are park rangers from the nearby forest reserves that can assist us in case we need it. We'll be fine."
