News Clip – A type of film presentation in which editorial content is controlled by the sponsor. It is provided to broadcast media for their use as deemed appropriate.
News Peg – The main point of the news release that justifies the value of using the story to the media. A news peg should indicate how the story material will affect the media audience.
News Release – Information of timely value distributed by an organization to promote views or products/services. The news release is used to influence the media to communicate favorably about the material discussed.
Newsletter – A brief digest of important or noteworthy information. A newsletter may be developed by individuals for sale or distributed free by associations,professional societies, and companies as a method of reaching various public quickly.
NEXIS – A database service that includes over 200 full-text sources. It is used by public relations firms to track publicity for their own and competitors’ products and services.
Niche Strategy – A game plan employed by a firm that specializes in serving particular market segments in order to avoid clashing with the major competitors in the market. “Niches” pursue market segments that are of sufficient size to be profitable while at the same time are less interest to the major competitors.
Nominal Credit Terms – The terms applied to the date in which full payment to the account is due. For vendors that bill customers on a monthly basis, full payment is usually due by the tenth day after billing.
Nominal Scale – A measurement in which numbers are assigned to attributes of objects solely for the purpose of identifying the objects.
Non Tariff Barriers (NTBs) 1. The ongoing administrative, discriminatory, and ad hoc safeguard actions and practices to protect home industries. Typically NTBs include exclusion orders, standards (requiring, for example, that products admitted to the country meet exact specifications that either cannot be met in the case of some natural products or that are very expensive to meet in case of manufactured products), exclusionary distribution, and administrative delays (for example, when the French decided that the imports of Japanese VCRs were excessive, they simply applied the rules and gave each other VCR a complete inspection. The number of VCRs entering the country dropped from thousands to six per day). 2. Any measure, public or private, that causes internationally traded goods and services to be allocated in such a way as to reduce potencial real world income.
Non-Price Competition – The competition among firms on the basis of variables other than price, such as quality, brand, assortment, or services. It implies that a company can influence demand by its marketing activities.
Non-Signer Clause – A clause in state fair trade laws permitting the enforcement of resale price maintenance contracts against all dealers in a state when such a contract had been signed by any one of them.
Nonbusiness Marketing Organization – Nonbusiness entities are usually non profit constitutions that can and do borrow marketing methods and organization structures from business. there is growing acceptance of the concept that nonprofit institutions, as well as for profit businesses, serve markets (i.e., customers) and that their success depends on how well they understand and cater to the needs and wants of these markets. Non-business organizations of ten set marketing goals that are similar to those of business except for the absence of the profit goal. Examples drawn from nonprofit colleges and hospitals and from military organization will illustrate this point. A major marketing goal of a nonprofit college or hospital is to bring in the income needed to operate the institution. A supportive marketing goal is to attract the number of college students or hospital patients that will fully utilize the institution’s facilities. Another supportive marketing goal is to raise specific amounts of money from contributors for capital projects. A military organization is funded by the government and does not raise money. A major marketing goal of the military is to meet recruiting quotas in terms of the quantity and quality of personnel needed to perform its mission. Like companies, non-business institutions can use marketing functions to help in setting their goals such as market research, personal selling, advertising, sales promotion, and product planning and development. Comment: Some non-business organizations are reluctant to use marketing terms for fear of appearing too commercial, although the term marketing is often used. But a sales person may be called “college representative”; advertising may be called “communications”.
Noncoercive Influence Strategy – A means of communication that focuses on the beliefs and attitudes of the target about general business issues.
Noncompensatory Rules – In evaluating alternatives, noncompensatory rules suggest that positive and negative consequences of alternatives do not compensate for each other. The types of noncompensatory rules include the conjunctive rules, the disjunctive rule, and the lexicographic rule. The conjunctive rule suggests that consumers establish a minimum acceptable level for each choice criterion and accept an alternative only if it equals or exceeds the minimum cutoff level for every criterion. The disjunctive rule suggests that consumers establish acceptable standards for each criterion and accept an alternative if it exceeds the standard on at least one criterion. The lexicographic rule suggests that consumers rank choice criteria from most to least important and choose the best alternative on the most important criterion.
Noncoverage Error – A nonsampling error that arises because of a failure to include some units, or entire sections, of the define survey population in the actual sampling frame.
Noncumulative Quantity Discount – A discount granted for volume purchased (measure either in units or dollars) at a single point in time.
Nondurable Good – A good that is (1) made from materials other than metals, hard plastics, and wood, (2) is rather quickly consumed or worn out, or (3) becomes dated, unfashionable, or in some other way no longer popular. This is an awkward term that includes a high varied set of goods and is useful primarily as a contrast with durable goods.
Nonmonetary Transaction – A marketing exchange in which the costs paid by the target audience do not include a transfer of economic assets.