(law) an interest in which there is a fixed right to present or future enjoyment and that can be conveyed to another
groups that seek to control a social system or activity from which they derive private benefit
a special personal interest, usually financial, in an existing system, law, or institution, which hinders a person from making objective decisions regarding that system, law, or institution. A vested interest may be one which benefits a relative, or, in an extended sense, one which defends a person's own reputation or previously expressed views.
a right given to an employee by a pension plan, which cannot be taken away.
pl. the persons, corporations, or other groups which benefit most (usually financially) from the existing system of institutions, laws, and customs.
a right or title that can be conveyed
a fixed right granted to an employee, especially under a pension plan
a stake, often financial, in a particular outcome
a group of people or organizations with such a stake
an exceptionally strong interest in protecting or promoting something to one's own advantage
Vested interest is a communication theory that seeks to explain how influences impact behaviors. As defined by William Crano, vested interest refers to the amount that an attitude object is deemed hedonically relevant by the attitude holder. In Crano's idea of vested interest, if the attitude object is subjectively important and the perceived personal consequences are significant, there will be a greater chance the individual's attitude will be expressed behaviorally. For example, a 30 year old individual is told that the legal driving age is being raised from 16 to 17 in his state. While he may not agree with this law, he is not impacted like a 15 year old prospective vehicle operator and is unlikely to be involved in protesting the change. This example illustrates the point that highly vested attitudes concerning issues are related to an individual’s situational point of view.
The numerical value of vested interest in Chaldean Numerology is: 2
The numerical value of vested interest in Pythagorean Numerology is: 5
Sample Sentences & Example Usage
Capitalism inevitably and by virtue of the very logic of its civilization creates, educates and subsidizes a vested interest in social unrest.
We have a vested interest in this deal because we believe it will reduce tensions. Basically we don't want Iraq to be a score-settling ground between the United States and Iran.
The crux of whole problem of the world is that most people take most often an opinion as a fact and a fact as an opinion; and this is all usually done out of self-vested interest only.
The big question is whether this is part of a larger strategy of delaying elections, everyone who is in this new government has a vested interest in staying in government as long as possible.
A woman is so selfish that in order to safeguard her vested-interest and secure high position, she may even poison with words the minds of her children against her own man or anyone as close one.
Images & Illustrations of vested interest
Translations for vested interest
From our Multilingual Translation Dictionary
Get even more translations for vested interest »
Find a translation for the vested interest definition in other languages:
Select another language:
Discuss these vested interest definitions with the community:
Word of the Day
Would you like us to send you a FREE new word definition delivered to your inbox daily?
Use the citation below to add this definition to your bibliography:
"vested interest." Definitions.net. STANDS4 LLC, 2017. Web. 26 Jun 2017. <http://www.definitions.net/definition/vested interest>.