Stem Cell Training Courses - Forefront of Regenerative Cellular Therapy
No physician in the history of humanity has ever healed a patient. Only the cells of the patient can heal the patient. Only cells know how to close wounds, understand what to do with insulin and how to destroy pathogens. The best a physician can do, is to move obstacles out of the way of cells (e.g. by surgery), supply materials and weapons to the cells (e.g. drugs and building blocks of life) and leave the fight against disease to the cells. Harnessing the power of the cells is the fundamental basis of Regenerative Medicine and the basis for RMTI's stem cell training courses. You get to learn the basics of regenerative cellular therapy through hands on prp training.
Stem cells are generally defined as undifferentiated cells that are capable of self-renewal through replication and cells that undergo differentiation into specific cell lineages. Adult stem cells are necessary to maintain tissue and organ mass during normal cellular turnover. Adult stem cells are found in many tissues. There are undifferentiated cells and differentiated cells in tissue samples. The primary role of stem cells is to maintain and repair the tissue in which they are found. Most Adult Stem Cells are multipotent, not pluripotent. Pluripotent: can differentiate into any cell type. Multipotent: can differentiate into a subset of cell types. Adult stem cells may exhibit plasticity. Our stem cell training courses are designed for you to understand these intricate details about ortho-biologics and regenerative medicine.
Interested in learning more? Check out our schedule and find out which stem cell course is right for you!
Adipose is used in regenerative medicine procedures because mesenchymal stem cells can be isolated from almost every tissue in the human body. The central connecting aspect to explain this fact is that all of these tissues are vascularized and that every blood vessel in the body has mesenchymal cells in abluminal locations. These perivascular cells can be summarily called Pericytes.
Adipose-Derived MSCs are being used therapeutically because they undergo homing to sites of inflammation or tissue injury and they secrete massive levels of bioactive agents that are both immunomodulatory and trophic.
Bone Marrow Aspirate
Bone marrow cells reside deep inside bone cavities in the most protected part of the body and are redundant throughout the organism. This preferential status reflects the primary role these cells play in the survival of the organism.
Tissue repair is a dynamic self-organizing process that relies on cell mobility and growth factor production from cells within a biologic scaffold.
Platelets and Cells from Peripheral Blood Initiate the Inflammatory Process of the Healing Cascade and release cytokines to cause marrow cells to mobilize and home to the injury site (vasculogenesis).
Marrow stem cell and marrow complimentary cell mediated vasculogenesis and cell-to-cell contact with immune system stem cells transition the Healing Cascade from the inflammatory phase to the proliferation and remodeling phase.
Bone Marrow Concentrate
Concentrated Bone Marrow is designed to provide
significant concentrations of CFU-F, CD34+, and total nucleated cell counts. CD34+ are cell markers for hematopoietic stem cells. These are the primary
multipotent cells that replenishes all blood cell types. These cells are crucial for the regenerative processes needed for active tissue repair. In addition to these cells are CFU-F, which are representative of mesenchymal stem cells.
Mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) are multipotent stromal cells that can differentiate into a variety of cell types, including cartilage, bone and adipose cells. BMC provides therapeutic concentrations of these cell types which is the key to desirable patient outcomes.