Short for Vertical Sync, Vsync is a display option found in some 3-D computer games that allow the gamer to synchronize the frame rate of the game with the monitor refresh rate for better stability. If the Vsync is turned off, gamers might obtain a higher frame rate but this action may introduce artifacts in […]
The automated process of proactively identifying security vulnerabilities of computing systems in a network in order to determine if and where a system can be exploited and/or threatened. While public servers are important for communication and data transfer over the Internet, they open the door to potential security breaches by threat agents, such as malicious […]
Short for volume pixel, the smallest distinguishable box-shaped part of a three-dimensional image. Voxelization is the process of adding depth to an image using a set of cross-sectional images known as a volumetric dataset. These cross-sectional images (or slices) are made up of pixels. The space between any two pixels in one slice is referred […]
Introduced by DEC in August 1978, Video Terminal 100 was the first terminal to use a general-purpose processor for interpreting the newly published (1977) ANSI control codes (ANSI X3.64). Quickly, the vt100 become popular, and the ANSI control codes embodied in the vt100 became a de facto standard. Eventually, IBM adopted them for its line […]
(1) Capitalized, VOX is short for voice operated switch it is a term commonly used in telecommunications. It refers to a switch that works when a sound is detected by a device (transmitter or recording device) which is activated by the sound in place of a user a pushing a button to transmit. (2) In […]
In DOS systems, the name of a volume (that is, the name of a disk or tape). Specifying a volume label makes it easier to keep track of what data is stored on each medium.
A fixed amount of storage on a disk or tape. The term volume is often used as a synonym for the storage medium itself, but it is possible for a single disk to contain more than one volume or for a volume to span more than one disk.
(n.) A small device or circuit that regulates the voltage fed to the microprocessor. The power supply of most PCs generates power at 5 volts but most microprocessors require a voltage below 3.5 volts. The voltage regulator’s job is to reduce the 5 volt signal to the lower voltage required by the microprocessor. Typically, voltage […]
The tape volume serial number or VOLSER is the method used to uniquely identify a tape volume. The VOLSER is specified in the tape label, which is the first set of information contained on the tape. [Source: Audit Serve]
Memory that loses its contents when the power is turned off. All RAM except the CMOS RAM used for the BIOS is volatile. ROM, on the other hand, is nonvolatile.