His car was the fastest in town.

I knew this because it always kept me up at night. Well, me and the rest of the people in this slice of suburbia. To me, the way his engine barreled through the dirt roads sounded less like a disturbance and more like a promise of something better. And if there was one thing I knew, it was that I was getting out of this place.

And maybe he was too young, or foolish, or naive- but when I came up to him and laid my cards out on the table he was far too eager to take the bet. What I asked of him was crazy, and I remember preparing myself for the worst, but he just smiled and nodded his head. Looking back, maybe I was too young, foolish, or naive too.

But all the same, I was making a plan. It was easy enough to get a job at the convenience store not long after that, and I remember working every shift I could, meticulously saving every cent in a shoebox under my bed. And each bill or copper round that made its way from my fingers into the pile was another milestone closer to where I wanted to go: anywhere.

It's funny, but I can't quite remember the moment that boy and I became something more. If I had to guess, I would think it was one of the nights we spent together on the hood of that infamous car, driven out into the fields just shy of the border into the city. We talked about the jobs we'd find and the lives we'd soon make for ourselves-

Or I'd talk about the one I was leaving behind. I'd walk in through the doors of my home only to be greeted by the smell of liquor- either on the breath of my father, whose stomach I'd stare at for proof of life, or worked in deep through the threads of our carpet. My mother, who I used to hate (and I still do, but maybe it's because of jealousy now), left him the second he proved he was heading nowhere, leaving me in the aftermath.

When we finally left, my soul was featherweight.

The boy was flashing white teeth at me from the driver's seat, a denim-clad arm working its way from his side and around my shoulder. I don't remember anything playing on the radio, I just remember the way my heart leaped when I read the welcome sign into the nearest city, and concrete-wrapped buildings shot out of the dirt I had grown so tired of. I think back to laying my cards out on the table and to the sound of this boy's engine cutting through the silence at 2 AM and cannot fathom how I was able to bring this fantasy to life-

But the adrenaline wore off about two weeks into our stay at the shelter.

I was back to saving pennies, this time in a duffel bag, and this time working as a checkout girl at the market. It was sobering, seeing the boy come back to me each night looking more defeated than when he left that morning. Some days he smelt like my dad, and just like I did with my dad when I was a kid, I would pretend that he didn't.

It was after the birth of our first son that I realized I was not a martyr. And after our second, I no longer cried to the empty side of our bed that I bought, underneath the roof of a home that was paid for in duffel bag dollar bills. The only thing in this home that was not my own,

sat idly in the garage when it was not in the parking lot of our local dive bar.

It was 2 AM when I told him, pressing his keys into the palm of his calloused hand, to make a choice:

“Leave tonight or live and die this way.”
