a new european recycling law for electronic waste, taking effect in 2006, was voted in unanimously by the european parliament. the law includes rules that stop printer manufacturers from including “clever chips” in their printer cartridges that prohibit different brand cartridges from being used in printers or stop consumers from refilling cartridges.
the new law has been made to help try and curb some of the 6 million tons of electronic waste (“electroscrap”) that is produced in europe. the clever chips were seen as detrimental to future recycling practices as they stopped consumers from recycling printer cartridges altogether, forcing them to always buy a new cartridge. printer companies have warned that the new recycling law could see costs go up considerably and those costs will more than likely be passed on to the consumer.
hp claims that the chips used in their printer cartridges don't prohibit reuse. they say that only 10% of their cartridges include chips that monitor the level of ink in the cartridge. thus, the only negative effect from refilling an hp ink cartridge with an embedded chip should be loss of the features of that chip, and not loss of use of the cartridge itself.
the use of some of these “clever chips” is basically to extract more money from the consumer after a printer purchase and to keep the costs of cartridges artificially high. now the market should eventually open up somewhat with the companies producing cartridge refills and 3rd party cartridges seeing some success.
the recycling laws that are being introduced do put extra pressure on manufacturers to produce goods that are easily recyclable, if they don't then it is now going to cost them more in the long run as they have the job of recycling their own goods. i definitely agree that this will increase the cost to the consumer.
the next thing i would like to see happen is bundled cartridges with printers only being half or a quarter full stopped. although, with the new law it may not matter as a refill could be available for a minimal extra charge.
user comments 49 comment(s)
|first post (9:27am est mon dec 23 2002)
i'd like to see this go through in america. save money on cartridges. i dont need a smart chip to tell me i'm outta ink, a crappy printout can tell me that and save my money for coffee. – by poster magnificence
|agreed… (10:23am est mon dec 23 2002)
it should be the consumer's prerogative as to whether he/she wants to stick with a new, name-brand cartridge, use an off-brand cartridge, or go for an ink refill.
kinda like buying an oil filter for your car. you can go to the dealer and get an oem delco filter for your chevy, of go to an auto parts shop and buy a fram or hastings filter. is one better than the other? probably. but the consumer should have that choice.
we don't need the big corporations (or the government, for that matter) to tell us what's good for us. we get enough of that from the likes of the riaa and mpaa already.
– by k. adams
|great idea…sort of (10:24am est mon dec 23 2002)
yea, we will only being 10 bucks for the printer cartridges, but now we end up paying 600 bucks for a cheap printer. – by covert187
|it's a shame (10:24am est mon dec 23 2002)
it's a shame it takes a law for this kind of crap not to exist.
– by rick c. hodgin
|i would rather pay more for a high quality printer once… (10:41am est mon dec 23 2002)
i would rather pay more for a high quality printer once and have that printer for five years (as i did my espon sylus 800 from 1997) but pay much less for ink continually over the long term. it makes the printer that much more valuable to me. i was afraid to print in color because i could sometimes get three pictures from a couple of 8×10 high res images. not good…10$ for a print…i think not. let me pay a premium once and then pay
7$ for a cartridge. i can deal with that. over the life of the printer…it becomes very worth it. – by distempered
|more governmental interference (11:16am est mon dec 23 2002)
when does it end? the more the government sticks its nose where it doesn't belong, the more expensive everything becomes.
in the us, hp already recycles the damn print cartridges. why do you thing that there is a ups return sticker in every box? i doubt that hp is paying all that money just to toss them in the dumpster.
so the government (in the eu) thinks that the “smart chip” is a sinister plot, do they have any actual proof? or did they go off half-cocked again?
|printer prices… going up! (11:36am est mon dec 23 2002)
many printers are priced near cost because the manufacturer can almost count on revenue from ink sales.
if this guaranteed revenue becomes less secure, printer prices will go up considerably.
don't get me wrong, i like the idea of cheap ink and cheap printers, but i don't think that is gunna happen too soon. – by jason canucklehead
|brian (11:55am est mon dec 23 2002)
i think you are making a very american mistake and thinking that your corporations are run by boy scouts with your best interest in mind.
regardless, please come up with any scenario where having a chip that tells you the printer is out of ink would be beneficial, and wouldn't be better solved by someone (i.e. the printer) taking personal responsibility for their actions. i am, of course, referring to, say, a doctor who may be printing out a prescription to be filled.
|the consumer should decide (11:59am est mon dec 23 2002)
my feelings are that printers should work equally well with or without a smart chip.
personally i like knowing when my cartridges are going to run out. it is very frustrating to run out of ink in the middle of a print job and not have a replacement cartridge on hand. yet you don't want to stock up on cartridges because the shelf life is not all that good. knowing when to go buy a new cartridge is a good thing.
i have also refilled my cartridges but found that the print quality was substantially less then the manufacturer's ink. for this reason i no longer refill. so i agree with distempered. pay more for the printer and less for the cartridges. – by isysman
|ink (12:53pm est mon dec 23 2002)
the issue isn't with knowing when the ink is going to run out, the issue is with hp deliberately designing their cartridges so that the secondary market can't create generic competitors.
hp tries to monopolize the cartridge market for as long as possible, even going as far as making 'new' printers so they can make 'new' cartridges. the laserjet 4050 and the laserjet 4100 are practically identical, except of course the 4100 can't use cartridges for the 4050….
it's a shame hp makes such great printers, because their business practices suck. of course, now that they've combined with compaq, i expect their quality to fall quickly… – by screw hp!
|while it is a shame that… (1:15pm est mon dec 23 2002)
…it takes a law to force a company to be environmentally (and consumer) responsible, thank gawd that a government will do it. the prophet will come back to earth and dance with britney spears become the bush regime does anything like this. – by urgeek
|hp is lying. (2:12pm est mon dec 23 2002)
“they say that only 10% of their cartridges include chips that monitor the level of ink in the cartridge. thus, the only negative effect from refilling an hp ink cartridge with an embedded chip should be loss of the features of that chip, and not loss of use of the cartridge itself”
this is a lie. the chip that monitors the color level only counts the number of times color was used. each cartridge is worth so many prints so when your chip says you have used red up, thats it. you can refill red for ever. it means nothing to the chip. you will no longer be able to print red. i found this out from an hp tech sent out to repair a computer. i had a cartridge that i had refilled and it would not print blue so i asked him about it. – by hp…prevent
|re: eu lover (2:35pm est mon dec 23 2002)
what's 'the bachelor'?
i never said that corporations have my best interest at heart. but then again neither does the government. all the government does is give a group of people the right to steal from another to buy political support from a third group. at least when i give hp $30 of my money i get an ink cartridge. i give the government tens of thousands of dollars every year, and what do i get? i might get my road plowed sometime the week after it snows. given the choice between government and corporations, i'll take the corporate cretins any day. (oh, and if you were thinking of saying the government protects the environment – do a little research on eastern europe – they had more government than you can shake a stick at)
quite frankly, is it really necessary for a government to spend their citizen's hard-earned jack on bulls*** like this?
you do understand why color printers got cheap all of a sudden, don't you? it's because the brains got pulled out of them, and the task of color separation was put on the host cpu.
you can either have a cheap printer with limitations up the wazoo, or you can have a more expensive printer that does not suffer so. take your pick. want to refill colors as they run out? get a phazer. what's that? you haven't got us$3,000? well, stop crying about the $30 ink cartrides then. – by brian
|re: eu lover – again (2:39pm est mon dec 23 2002)
oh, and if any doctor is irresponsible enough to use an inkjet printer to print prescriptions, or anything important for that matter, he should be stripped of his ability to practice.
in case you hadn't noticed, inkjet printers typically use water-soluble ink (i know that a few companies have water resistant ink for a few printers). most professional situations use either laser (molten toner on paper) or thermal wax-transfer (hot wire melts wax from mylar sheet onto paper and smooshes it down) – either of which is infinitely superior for labelling and tagging of anything that matters.
oh, and mylar ribbons don't have a place for smart chips.
|canon (3:27pm est mon dec 23 2002)
i recently purchased a canon multipass f60 and the print quality is great, and i can copy and flatbed scan with it. it also has an alert that tells me when one of the ink cartridges (it has seperate black, cyan, magenta, yellow), are running low. the best part, i get replacement cartridges from an aftermarket company (amazon imaging, not amazon.com) for about $6.00 each……here is a link to the printer:
rhinotech is another place that comes to mind that offers aftermarket print cartridges for all kinds of printers…there are other sources rather than the manufacturer out there if you look for them, and the aftermarket cartridges i've used in my canon have as good a photo quality as the canon brand….. – by bryan
|ps (3:41pm est mon dec 23 2002)
the site for the amazon cartridges i mentioned is at:
they have all kinds cartridges for all kinds of printers….and no, i don't work there…lol…oh, and happy holidays everyone! – by bryan
|canon does do a good job (6:04pm est mon dec 23 2002)
canon has been alerting ink levels without a chip built in for awhile now. they use a optical sensor in the disposable tanks. – by buck
|i'm all for no chip.. (7:48pm est mon dec 23 2002)
they should put the chip in the print head so that it is not a wasted when cartrage is replaced. all manufactures should do the same!
this is just one guy's opinion! – by horrid!
|brian (9:58pm est mon dec 23 2002)
nice to hear from you!
and, yes, many independent doctors use inkjets to print scripts, etc….but i didn't expect you to know that.
but please don't be so american as to use a strawman, i defied you to give me an example where it would be necessary to use a chip. mayhaps your intentional maps and mine didn't correspond (not my fault you are ignorant)but could you do the non american thing and actually answer a question in a straight forward manner? we (the rest of the world) appreciate it. – by eu lover
|re eu lover (11:59pm est mon dec 23 2002)
be careful what you don't expect me to know. if they are printing scripts on inkjet, they are begging for either forgeries or mistakes (unless they use waterproof ink.)
and where the chips would be necessary – i can't come up with any. it's what we call a “nice to have”. adds minimal value to those of use who don't want to waste a slice of paper to find out that we ran out of red ink again.
if i could justify the cost, i'd go for either color laser or dye-sublimation. but i'm not paying $4,000 for a printer.
besides, if you don't want a chip in your ink cartridge, someone else here already posted a perfect alternative – buy a printer from someone that doesn't use them! publish the facts, let the market decide. keep the government out of it, or your likely to end up needing an ink license.
and what is so “american” about using a strawman? the europeans have been doing it for almost a thousand years. we learned well, wouldn't you say?
the only reason the eu did this (the law against chips) is so that some politician somewhere could pander to his left-leaning populist voters. i swear a politician would pass a law ordering the sky to be green tomorrow if he thought he could buy votes with it. – by brian
|damn (12:01am est tue dec 24 2002)
the system keeps eating my grins.
there was supposed to be a “grin” (in the little triangle brackets) after the “bite me”. it loses all it's sarcasm without the grin.
damn bracket-not-printing, grin-eating, html parsers…..
harumph. – by brian
|calculations (12:04am est tue dec 24 2002)
lets see, 40 bucks for a cartridge times 2 in order to get both black and color is 80 bucks. now, if you own that printer for 3 years, you can probably expect to buy at least 6 color and 6 black. and that is only if you print very little. 6 times 80 = 240 bucks. now, consider if cheap ink was easily used, 6 times 14 = 84 … factor in the cost of the printer at different levels.
80 bucks for the printer without the laws makes the total price for 3 years with few prints $320.
i don't think they should have to raise the prices anymore than double the current prices. so … 80 times 2 plus 84 … $244 … that's almost a saving of 76 bucks by allowing them to pass a law that makes using cheaper cartridges easier to use.
ink refill kits tend to make the cost even lower, so if you follow this kind of logic, i think it becomes extremely obvious that if the us was to pass such a law as well, it would only serve to benefit us in the end. – by cwtrex
|european point of view. (6:03am est tue dec 24 2002)
if hp really was concerned with our best interests, they would, just like canon build the ink level detection inside the printer and not in the cartridges….
– by goymodeus
|re: cwtrex (8:36am est tue dec 24 2002)
no, the more likely outcome would be that hp would raise the price of their printers by 100% to compensate for lost revenue. the printer is most likely sold at below manufacturing cost. this is called a “loss leader”, the idea being that you will buy the ink cartridges at any cost once you have the printer (rahter than throw it away).
so either the printers become disposable, or they become more expensive, or they end up like the video game systems – one controller and no game packed in.
no law has ever lowered the price of something. anywhere. – by brian
|printer prices (11:28am est thu jan 09 2003)
printer prices may rise. competition between ink vendors is what a market should be providing. the smart chip practice in phone batteries and print ink and so on is just abuse of monopolies.
in the us the reverse is occuring and it doesn't look like it will be long before hp cd burners require hp cd-rw media, sony pc's require sony monitors, and you may even only be able to put approved petrol types in your car without a little computer chip disabling your engine.
in the same ways as the uk forbids anti competitive use of patents, anti competitve use of digital rights management should be made a serious offence.
|ipr is the market distortion (10:04am est thu jan 16 2003)
there's a wide spectrum of usage out here. i get thru one bw + one color cartridge per week, so this law will help me. you can say it's interference in the market, but imho having intellectual rights laws >at all is a market distortion, and the scope of ipr needs to be strongly restricted.
fyi (in the uk) rymans sell compatible chipped cartridges for half the oem price and they are good quality. sometimes they give you free paper if you buy two rymans cartridges of the same sku. – by shannock9
|let the people decide (11:29am est thu jan 16 2003)
the practice of selling a product (printer) at a loss and making it up on the backend (ink) is quite common. while many of you may not enjoy it, it should remain legal as it is a valid method of making money. if you don't like it, buy another brand of printer. who would you rather have decide if this method of making money is valid – you the consumer or the government?
some other examples of loss leaders with restricted-use to makeup the revenue include:
|loss-leaders (2:28pm est thu jan 16 2003)
yes, i'm all for loss-leading, this is a choice of the companies making them. but, the government should not interfere and prohibit users from working around the restrictions (ie. as in the case of the x-box). digital rights managment rights is interfering with the marketplace. so, if you want to be capitalist, be a real capitalist – don't have the state protecting the corporations… :-) – by anarchist
|let the free market decide? (9:56pm est thu jan 16 2003)
i can't understand why people are saying bush wouldn't support a similar move, or claiming that this is another case of governement restricitng business.
these chips are blatantly anti-competitive!! if you believe in free markets and free trade, you should be favor of banning them. in fact, i can't understand why they aren't already illegal under competition laws. – by roger
|americans and american companies are wasteful (10:35pm est fri jan 17 2003)
subject says it all. in the interest of short term gains, these assholes are screwing the world.
– by greenpeace
|non oem chipped cartridges are available folks (4:14am est fri mar 21 2003)
we've been selling compatible cartridges for years – epson – hp – canon – lexmark. all manufactured new with chip as required, perform far better than refills and a dam sight cheaper than the oem.
– by ss
|competition is the key (10:04am est thu mar 27 2003)
printers prices (assuming something like the eu law ever gets enacted in the us) shouldn't go up much. after all, the chip will be out of the cartridge. the price may come up to make up the loss in revenue from sales of cartridges, but if it comes up too much, there will be a series of taiwanese or korean or malayan company printers out soon enough…hell, they're manufactured there now anyway!
– by grayhaired bill
|chips for hp 4100 (5:13am est sat sep 13 2003)
does anyone out there know whether if it will infringe on ipr if someone resets/ reprograms the hp c8061x cartridge for the hp 4100.
there are already several claims to replacement chips…but this query is on a resetting/reprogramming job.
if anyone out there knows about this, please contact on this id: firstname.lastname@example.org
regards – by a andrew
|printer smart chips, the smart way? (4:24pm est thu feb 05 2004)
you buy a new car, throw away the stupid wheels and buy a set of stylish mag wheels….
…now can the car dealership take you to court cause you not using the wheel they stipulate that the car get sold with….
i would like to take this opportunity to introduce my company.
i focuses in modern chip technology. ranging from rfid, smart card & printer cartridge chip development on gprs & gsm chip technologies.
we believe that my current product list in the printer cartridge chip solutions will interest you. please feel free to give our product list and over view and try some of our new and exciting products for you industry.
you will find our products are competitively prices and service out standing for this industry.
looking for forward to hearing from you.
product & item description list
|epson (9:32am est wed aug 04 2004)
how can it cost more ?. it should cost less if the chip is removed. are we expected to listen to this crap.
i refil an epson and re-set the chip, however i still have to keep buying expensive ink, when i should have gallon tank for each colour..
printer price low > rip off the customer for keeping it running – by r300
|jip chip (9:35pm est fri feb 04 2005)
i will find a way around this if i have to re-wire my epson cx3200 to do it! if i can find out the required voltage and amp level the pins need my printer will be none the wiser. – by renquest
|epson r300 non original cartridges (8:37am est sun may 01 2005)
i bought an epson r300 printer, then once the bundled carts ran out i installed jet tec carts one by one. as soon as i'd fitted one cart i was bugged by “do you want to continue using the currently installed ink cartridges” everytime i printed a document. i can understand epson asking this question on the first use of the cart, but not on every subsequent print job there after. i emailed them and they said that they want to warn people that they could damage their printer using non original carts, but then why question every print, question the first use of a non original at first use, then if the printer does get damaged it is the free choice of the owner of the printer. it's almost as though we are renting the printer off epson and can't choose how we use it.
does anyone know of a way to stop the question popping up at every print? – by entrealz
|thanks (10:53am est fri jan 06 2006)
excellent and very informative site thanks for the information. – by andy
|photoprinters online store (8:13pm est sat feb 18 2006)
and how many there is a print on the photoprinter? who knows? – by photin
|dvd shop: arthouse-films (8:18pm est sat feb 18 2006)
hi! how at you with weather? at us absolutely of gloom = ( – by boris
|funny dvd movies (8:23pm est sat feb 18 2006)
hi! prompt, how to me to you to get? – by kerk
|handtools store (8:27pm est sat feb 18 2006)
tell, and here at you always so? – by artemiy
|olimpiya shoes store (8:32pm est sat feb 18 2006)
good site. it would be desirable to return again and again! – by dori
|saws online store (8:35pm est sat feb 18 2006)
to write the letter, it is necessary … – by slimt
|gambling reviews (8:44pm est sat feb 18 2006)
hi. images are not loading. – by gambling reviews
|omaha highrules (2:12pm est thu mar 09 2006)
i must confuses your site is really cool!!! great site, great idea, just all round great work, everyone. – by jeniffer
|digitalcameras store (4:24pm est sun apr 02 2006)
i want mp3 player. what will advise? – by anton
|cartidge chips (8:40pm est sun jul 23 2006)
i do think it is a good idea for goverments to protect future land fill and not let manufacturs make chips that can only be used once and then have to be throwen away because the printer wont work right like the new canon printer chips some of the hp chips and allso the same as lexmarks new series chip i only think it is to bad the consumer has to be protected because he or she is so nieve as to buy a product without reserching how mush the consumibles will cost them in future i allso dont think that goverments would have to pass laws to protect the land if people did there reserch and didn't buy the chiped printers that were not able to be refilled and have the printer work as it did with the original cartridges gess the point here is to bad the masses are so stupid think if no one bought the product the manufactur wold make a printer that would be what the public wanted after all only a fool would make something no one buyies if you dont want chips that cannot be reset write the company and tell them you are buying there compeditors printer and let them know why bet it wont be long befor they make a printer that sells and dose what you want it to thats why there are so many forems on the net about chips lets stop bitching and do somthing about it write the companies dont buy there products demand what you want in a printer – by jay dee
|oh you live i n france (6:43am est fri sep 29 2006)
sorry to here that, that must suck – by eurojealous