The projected track of Tropical Storm Chantal. (Credit: NHC)
The third named system of the 2013 hurricane season formed late Sunday night about 900 miles east-southeast of Bridgetown, Barbados. Tropical Storm Chantal could approach South Florida if it holds together, forecasters said.
Chantal was at 9.7N 46.1W with sustained winds of 40 mph, just above the threshold for a named system. It was moving to the west at about 23 mph. Tropical storm force winds extended about 23 miles from the center.
The system could be near South Florida on Friday night, National Hurricane Center forecasters said. The early forecast is for Chantal to move south of Puerto Rico, clip Haiti and Eastern Cuba and then move near Andros Island in the Bahamas as a downgraded tropical depression.
South Florida up to Palm Beach was given a 5 percent chance of experiencing tropical storm force winds from Chantal by 8 p.m. Friday.
Chantal is a rare early July Cape Verde storm, which form from thunderstorms coming off the coast of Africa. This type of system is more typical for August and September. It’s even more unusual for a depression or storm in Atlantic to form east of the Lesser Antilles this time of the year.
Since record keeping began in 1851, only 20 July tropical depressions have formed east of the Lesser Antilles, according to Weather Underground.
Forecast models released Sunday showed the storm moving across Puerto Rico, Hispaniola and perhaps Cuba later in the week. But the bulk of the models bring Chantal north through the Bahamas east of the Florida peninsula.
Intensity forecast models keep it at tropical storm strength throughout the week, with two exceptions. These models blow Chantal up into a Category 1 hurricane by Wednesday.
The National Hurricane Center announced the formation of Chantal prior to its usual 11 p.m. discussion so that forecasters could issue tropical storm warnings for the Caribbean islands of Barbados, Dominica, and Saint Lucia. Tropical storm watches were posted for Saint Vincent.
Warnings will likely be required for other Caribbean islands on Monday, forecasters said. They predicted it would top out with 65 mph winds on Tuesday night and then slowly begin to lose strength due to interaction with the large islands of the Greater Antilles.
Sunday’s computer forecast runs for Tropical Storm Chantal. (Credit: SFWMD)