4 Health Benefits of Goji Berries [Infographic]
Goji berries, which look and taste like raisins, have been consumed by humans for more than 2,000 years. Modern research has found that it helps slowing down the damage to cells caused by age-induced oxidation. As it has a slightly sweet flavor, goji berry can be easily added to tea blends for a healthy concoction.
What is goji berry?
Goji berry is considered to be one of the major herbs in traditional Chinese medicine and it was traditionally believed to promote longevity. Legend has it that the goji berry was discovered by a doctor who traveled to a remote region of the Himalayas to study. He found the people there were extraordinarily healthy, some of them living to more than 100 years. Eventually, he discovered they were drinking water from wells where goji berries fell into as they ripened. Today, goji berries and roots have a wide range of medicinal uses and are being researched for their effect against age-related degeneration.
The health benefits of goji berry according to research
In traditional Chinese medicine, goji berries were often combined with other herbs as a tonic to increase longevity due to potential anti-aging properties. Goji berry is gradually being endorsed by research due to its combined effects that protect immune, liver, cardiovascular, and brain function from deterioration. Scientists believe it may contain compounds such as polysaccharides that have anti-aging and antioxidant properties
In a study published in 2005 in the academic journal Experimental Gerontology, natural extracts from goji berries were found to have neuroprotective effects against toxins in age-related neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer’s disease. In a subsequent study published in 2007, compounds found in goji berries were found to reduce the damage to cells caused by age-induced oxidation.
2. Fitness & Strength
In a study published in the Journal of Alternative and Complementary Medicine, goji berries were reported to have numerous benefits, including increased ratings for energy levels, athletic performance, mental acuity, and significantly reduced fatigue. In another study conducted in 2009, polysaccharides found in goji berries had a noticeable anti-athletic fatigue effect in animal studies. In another study, these polysaccharides were found to significantly decrease the oxidative stress induced by strenuous exercise.
3. Immunity and Overall Health
Research conducted over the past three decades indicates that consumption of goji berries support immune function by countering the reduction of white blood cells and by inhibiting the development of infectious diseases such as influenza. The berries also appear to have anti-inflammatory, antimicrobial, and anticarcinogenic (anti-cancer) activity, with a recent study published in 2015 pointing to its potential therapeutic value against breast cancer and liver cancer.
4. Stress & Mood Support
Several studies point to the positive effects of goji berries on general health and well-being. One particular study reported that consumption of goji berries resulted in increased ratings for energy level, athletic performance, quality of sleep, ease of awakening, ability to focus on activities, mental clarity, calmness, and feelings of contentment.
* These are some of the pharmacological actions that have been observed or are under study in various evidence-based research studies. Herb may have other properties not listed here.
The statements on this page are for educational purposes only and have not been evaluated by the Food and Drug Administration. The information is not intended to diagnose, treat, cure, or prevent any disease. Please consult your healthcare practitioner prior to the use of any herbal products, especially if you are pregnant, breastfeeding, or have allergies or medical conditions.
The information has been sourced and extracted from scientific papers, academic journals, research abstracts, and other sources. While Purify Tea makes every effort to present accurate and reliable information on this website, Purify Tea does not endorse, approve, or certify such information, nor does it guarantee the accuracy, completeness, efficiency, timeliness, or correct sequencing of such information. Use of such information is voluntary, and reliance on it should only be undertaken after an independent review of its accuracy, completeness, efficiency, and timeliness. While many traditional or folkloric remedies have a long history of use, modern research has only begun to investigate and substantiate their effectiveness. Research is still ongoing in many areas therefore conclusions are subject to change.
Anna Wawruszak, Arkadiusz Czerwonka, Karolina Okła, Wojciech Rzeski. “Anticancer effect of ethanol Lycium barbarum (Goji berry) extract on human breast cancer T47D cell line.” Nat Prod Res. November 2, 2015:14. Epub November 2, 2015.
Chevallier, Andrew. Encyclopedia of Herbal Medicine. New York, NY: DK Publishing, 2016. Print.
Duke J. A. Phytochemical and Ethnobotanical Databases. Natural Agricultural Library. United States Department of Agriculture. Web. June 26, 2016.
"Goji." U.S. National Library of Medicine. U.S. Department of Health & Human Services, December 3, 2015. Web. June 7, 2016.
"Goji Berry." The University of Michigan Health System. University of Michigan, June 8, 2015. Web. June 7, 2016.
Harunobu Amagase, Dwight M Nance. A randomized, double-blind, Placebo-controlled, clinical study of the general effects of a standardized Lycium barbarum (Goji) Juice, GoChi. J Altern Complement Med. May 2008;14(4):40312.
Jane CJ Chao, Shih-Wen Chiang, Ching-Chiung Wang, Ya-Hui Tsai, Ming-Shun Wu. “Hot water-extracted Lycium barbarum and Rehmannia glutinosa inhibit proliferation and induce apoptosis of hepatocellular carcinoma cells.” Diabet Med. July 2007;24(7):75963. Epub April 19, 2007.
Natural Medicines Comprehensive Database Consumer Version. Therapeutic Research Center. Web. June 22, 2016.
Raymond Chuen-Chung Chang, Kwok-Fai So. “Use of anti-aging herbal medicine, Lycium barbarum, against aging-associated diseases. What do we know so far?” Cell Mol Neurobiol. August 2008;28(5):64352. Epub August 21, 2007.
Sue-Jing Wu, Lean-Teik Ng, Chun-Ching Lin. “Antioxidant activities of some common ingredients of traditional chinese medicine, Angelica sinensis, Lycium barbarum and Poria cocos.” Phytother Res. December 2004;18(12):100812.
United States Department of Agriculture Agricultural Research Service, Beltsville Area Germplasm Resources Information Network (GRIN). November 28, 2015, Web. June 26, 2016.
Zhang, Yifang, and Yingzhi Yao. Your Guide to Health with Foods & Herbs: Using the Wisdom of Traditional Chinese Medicine. New York, NY: Better Link, 2012. Print.
Zhihong Ren, Lixin Na, Yanmei Xu, Mitra Rozati, Junpeng Wang, Jianguo Xu, Changhao Sun, Karine Vidal, Dayong Wu, Simin Nikbin Meydani. “Dietary supplementation with lacto-wolfberry enhances the immune response and reduces pathogenesis to influenza infection in mice.” J Nutr. August 2012;142(8):1596602. Epub June 27, 2012.