Looks like you are using an old version of Internet Explorer - Please update your browser
It’s encouraging to see the increasing interest from citizens in what is taught in public school classrooms. But if creation were taught in the science classrooms, would it be taught accurately and respectfully by a qualified individual?
Answers in Genesis has never suggested teachers of any persuasion be forced to teach creationism but rather has always maintained students and teachers should have academic freedom to critically examine scientific facts and the worldviews by which they are interpreted.
A recent study of U.S. high school biology teachers yielded some surprises and rang alarm bells for evolutionists. More than one in ten biology teachers advocate teaching creation or intelligent design in a positive light.
A bizarre petition has been recently posted to a White House website that calls on President Obama to ban creation and intelligent design from schools. The reality is that creation or intelligent design (ID) is not taught as part of the formal curriculum in any public schools we know of.
What Christians face today is a choice between earning the respect of the world by accepting evolution, or being faithful to Scripture.
Would teaching creation in public schools be a good thing? Absolutely! However, mandating it through legislation is fraught with difficulties.
This frivolous petition is just another example of the intolerance spawned by the atheistic worldview.
There have been many highly controversial instances involving school boards discussing the topic of creation/evolution in the government-run school classroom.
A bizarre petition has been recently posted to a White House website that calls on President Obama to ban creation and intelligent design from schools.
The firestorm that erupted over a Christian school’s fourth grade science quiz was featured Sunday, May 19, in a South Carolina newspaper.
At least six presidents and other high government officials openly supported the right to “teach the controversy” about the topic of origins and to avoid indoctrination in Darwinism.
It’s the sad sort of story that matches up perfectly with a frequent media stereotype of fundamentalist Christians: an Ohio science teacher, already said to have been teaching creationism, has been accused of burning a cross into a student’s arm.
The results of a new poll have alarmed evolutionists by suggesting 1 in 8 high school biology teachers in the U.S. promote creationism.
This week in Sweden the centre-right coalition government decided to ban biology teachers from teaching creationism or intelligent design alongside evolution in independent schools.
Michael Reiss, head of science at the Institute of Education in London, warns that pupils could leave school with “gaps in their scientific knowledge” because of the influence of creationism.
On September 25, Lisburn City Council in Northern Ireland voted to encourage schools in their district to make pupils aware of alternatives to evolution, such as intelligent design and creation.
The Council of Europe’s Parliamentary Assembly will spend part of next week debating and voting on a resolution that opposes the teaching of creation and intelligent design in science classes, saying attacks on evolutionary theory are based on “forms of religious extremism” that attack both science and human rights.
The Council of Europe is reintroducing an inflammatory and inaccurate motion designed to vilify creationism and cover up the flimsy arguments for evolution.
It is getting to be so old now that hearing the false claim is like the proverbial water running off a duck’s back: the charge that AiG is leading the effort to get creation into schools.
Last week’s school board primaries in Kansas have generated much news—and much confusion—about the teaching of “creationism” in Kansas schools and AiG’s stance on the matter.
Recently Paul Taylor has been busy participating in media interviews concerning the newest controversy in the United Kingdom over creation/evolution in British schools.
The media in the UK have been alight in recent days, following allegations that the teaching of creationism is being introduced to state schools.
Mark Henderson of The Times of London, UK has published a provocative article entitled “Junk medicine: creationism.” His article is a mixture of half-science and pseudo-science.
After last month's ruling regarding teaching intelligent design, the door of teaching intelligent design in philosophy or religion classes appears to have been shut as well.
Paul Mirecki, chairman of the Kansas University (USA) religious studies department and member of the Society of Open-Minded Atheists and Agnostics mocks creation education.
A guest columnist for the Cincinnati Enquirer claimed there is "an infinitesimally small number of biologists" who believe in creation or intelligent design.
With the passing of the chief justice of the US Supreme Court William Rehnquist, Judge Roberts awaits being sworn in as Chief Justice.
The findings of a recent poll conducted by the Pew Research Center for the People & the Press as well as the Pew Forum on Religion & Public Life will add ammunition to the battle of origins.
A medical school professor at a secular university in Ohio invited me, a creationist, for a discussion with high school science teachers.
Here is a point-by-point response to a letter to the editor that appeared on May 3, 2005 in AiG–USA’s hometown newspaper "The Cincinnati Post".
On Saturday (April 9), The Cincinnati Post-one of AiG-USA's "hometown" newspapers*-ran another article concerning the creation/evolution issue.
Over the past few weeks, it seems that the whole town of Newton, Iowa, USA has been talking about the creation/evolution controversy.
Here is a fascinating email exchange between a Christian family (daughter and father) and a science teacher in a USA public school.
If anyone doubts there is an international plot to assassinate creation, just take a look at recent events in the “powder keg of Europe”: Serbia.
Students who are only ever exposed to evolutionary theory may assume that it is correct and might not even know how to question it.
Are creationist barbarians storming the gates of the United Kingdom? The BBC would like you to think so, but the real story is not so dramatic.