Send the link below via email or IMCopy
Present to your audienceStart remote presentation
- Invited audience members will follow you as you navigate and present
- People invited to a presentation do not need a Prezi account
- This link expires 10 minutes after you close the presentation
- A maximum of 30 users can follow your presentation
- Learn more about this feature in our knowledge base article
Do you really want to delete this prezi?
Neither you, nor the coeditors you shared it with will be able to recover it again.
Make your likes visible on Facebook?
You can change this under Settings & Account at any time.
Transcript of Untitled Prezi
By: Payton Fruge , Fatima Maldonado,Julio Cardenas
A treeless area beyond the timberline in high-latitude regions, having a permanently frozen subsoil and supporting low-growing vegetation such as lichens, mosses, and shrubs.
Tundra : Climate
Harsh cold winters (Ranging from -18 to -50 degrees Fahrenheit )
Summer weather = 35 -50 degrees Fahrenheit
Precipitation 5-15 inches per year
The melting of the permafrost as a result of global warming could radically change the landscape and what species are able to live there.
Plant and Animal Adaptions
Animals - Small mammals, insects, and plants living in the Tundra can't migrate to avoid the bitter winter conditions. Therefore they adapt by remaining beneath the snow, near and or under the ground.
Carbon & Nitrogen Cycle
When animals and plants die,microbes feed on the organic matter and release the carbon back into the cycle. However,in the tundra environment the dead matter becomes frozen and cannot be decomposed due to cold/freezing temperature.
Reason for this is extreme weather is because of it latitude creating indirect light
Plants - Their shoot system (the part that is above ground leaves flowers etc) will die each winter, meanwhile their main growth and energy storage is in their underground roots, which is sheltered by soil and snow.
Tundra Food Web ad Chain
Plants- Plants will grow in clusters to protect themselves from the wind and cold ot to conserve heat.
Plants- Plants are dark in color allowing them to absorb solar heat.
Animals- Most animals have short ears
and a short round body with a thick coat to minimize the amount of skin exposed to the extreme weather.
Animals -All of the tundra animals who do not hibernate, have very large feet, paws, or hooves for their size, to stay atop the snow
When arctic animals and plants die ammonia occurs then it goes on to nitrates, on in the cycle,goes to denitrifying bacteria,then off it goes to the atmosphere.
Plants-Plants grow in clusters to protect each other from the wind and cold as well as keeping the warmth in one area .
Thank you !!
Organisms and how they are affected
With the disruption in the enviroment it may affect the polar bears and lower thier population. Which will over feed and increase the hawk and wolf population and that will decrease the Arric Hare, Lemming, Caribou, etc. Basically everything below the Hawk and Wolf untill the Polar Bear population gets back on its feet
How has Global Warming affected the Nitrogen and Carbon Cycle
•Switch to alternative energy uses to minimize human-made global warming
How has Global Warming affected the Carbon and Nitrogen Cycle
Nitrogen Cycle: Global Warming affects this cycle in many ways but one of the ways that affects the most and upsets the nitrogen cycle is the fossil fuel burning.
Carbon Cycle:Global Warming affects the carbon cycle as the temperature rises each year,the icebergs melt and the water elevation rises and floods most of the land by bodies of water.Which drowns the plants.