S: Maya Angelou
FC: Maya Angelou by Arlette Kagaba 2010 Mrs.Lawrence
1: Maya Angelou Arlette Kagaba 5th Grade English-Room 142 Mrs.Lawrence March 24,2010
3: Can you imagine a point in US history when certain people were excluded from certain places?This point in history was segregation.Do you know who helped Martin Luther King end this disgrace?I'll give you a hint this about who she was.She was a cable car conductor in San Francisco and an important person in her community. Her name was Maya Angelou.She was born on April 4,1928 in St.Louis,Missouri.Maya Angelou also grew up in Stamps,Arkansas.She had one brother,Bailey Johnson,which was her father's name.Her mother's name was Vivian Johnson.
4: She went to Mission High School and moved to Labor School.When she was 14 years old she dropped out of school and became the first African-American Woman to become a cable car conductor.Later on,she went back to school,tried a lot of different schools but finally graduated.
5: In 1954 and 1955 she was touring Europe with a group called porgy and Bess.In 1957 she was a singer and a dancer for a company called Purple Onion.She recorded her first album called calypso lady.John Singleton,a film director,asked her to write a poem for his movie,Poetic Justice
7: Other important facts about Maya are that she took sometime off of dancing and singing to focus more on her writing.She wrote her first book called I know why the caged bird sings. After she decided to focus on her writing she went to Cairo,Egypt and took place as the editor of a local newspaper called The Arab Observer. She came back and arranged her group of writers to help Martin Luther King Jr,with segregation.
9: When President Bill Clinton was elected president he asked her to write a poem for his inauguration.That's a real honor!she always tried her best and never gave up and she is an inspiration for kids and adults too.Maya was a hard worker,she was the first African-American to become a cable car conductor and the first woman to get a job,she tried several times but finally succeed. I think Maya Angelou is a role-model for young writers.She is a great role-model because she is a woman of honesty.She always expressed herself in her poem so that readers could understand what she is feeling.That's what a real writer does.I hope you get a change to read one of her poems they are really admired and greatly written.
11: Works Consulted Harper, Judith E. Maya Angelou. Chanhassen,MN: Child’s World, 1999. Print. Laurie, Harris Lanzen. “Maya Angelou.” SIRS Discoverer July 2008: 18-24. Web. 19 Jan. 2010.