One Sunday morning in late October, Iman Masmoudi stepped onto a wooden balcony and began to sing. "I bear witness that there is no god except God,"she chanted in melodic Arabic. "I bear witness that Muhammad is the messenger of God." This was not, in itself, an especially notable event. For the past 1,400 years the call to prayer has echoed five times daily from mosques throughout the Muslim world. The novel aspect of Masmoudi's performance was that she invoked the Prophet Muhammad in the oak-paneled sanctuary of Cochran Chapel at Phillips Academy, a boarding school known commonly as Andover because its graceful Georgian campus spreads over a hilltop in Andover, Massachusetts, a leafy suburban town about 20 miles north of Boston.
Masmoudi grew up in North Carolina and graduated from Andover in 2014. The occasion was a nondenominational prayer service held during parents weekend her senior year. The chapel pews were packed with students, relatives, and faculty members, including John Gorham Palfrey VII, Andover's 15th head of school. "Iman's performance was chillingly effective and quite beautiful," Palfrey says. "I think it was the right thing for our global moment. Yet it obviously wouldn't have squared with what the Phillips family had in mind back in 1778."
The Phillipses were wealthy merchants who manufactured gunpowder for the Patriot army during the American Revolution. Three years into that conflict they founded Andover, which was followed three years later by a sister school in New Hampshire called Phillips Exeter Academy. Their powdered wigs would likely have flipped at the spectacle of a young woman proclaiming the Islamic creed anywhere near their school chapel. After all, Andover's founding constitution states that teachers must all be "professors of the Christian religion," a rule now honored in the breach. Yet the constitution also proclaims that Andover "shall be ever equally open to Youth, of requisite qualifications, from every quarter..." In that sense, the performance affirmed Andover's original gestalt.
In the late 1700s "youth from every quarter" meant white Protestant boys who hailed primarily from Andover and nearby towns. Students from prosperous families paid a few dollars a term to study Latin, Greek, and arithmetic under the baleful gaze and ready cane of Eliphalet Pearson, a learned Puritan who was Andover's first head of school. Boys of modest means received scholarships, an Andover tradition that has continued ever since. Today Andover is a coed school whose 1,130 students represent 45 U.S. states and territories, and 38 countries around the world. Nine percent of the students are international, 42 percent are of color, and nearly half receive financial aid to help cover tuition and other costs, which currently run $50,300 a year for boarders.
In 2008—long after the Andover days of Frank Stella, Humphrey Bogart, Jeb and George W. Bush, John F. Kennedy Jr., and preppy icon James Spader—it became the first American boarding school to offer "need-blind" admission, a formal pledge that the school would be financially feasible for any deserving applicant. Andover currently spends around $20 million a year honoring this commitment, which is possible thanks to a $1 billion endowment (the second-largest among American private schools, after Exeter), as well as generous alumni and parents, who pony up about $10 million every year in contributions to the school's Annual Fund. At least for now, this flood of money helps ensure that Andover bears little resemblance to the old stereotype of the New England prep school as academic playground for wealthy, privileged Caucasians. "This is the most diverse environment that most of these kids will ever live in," says Palfrey, who is now in his fourth year as head of school.
Palfrey is not exactly a poster child for the modern American melting pot. His Massachusetts roots date back to 1623, when a Puritan named Peter Palfrey arrived from England "on one of those early boats" (the Abigail) and became a founder of Salem. His family tree includes a signer of the U.S. Constitution, the founding dean of Harvard Divinity School, and great-great-grandfather Theodore Roosevelt. Palfrey grew up as a faculty brat at Harvard, where his parents are currently co-masters of Adams House. His career has been one of sustained achievement along a classic East Coast academic track. He prepped at Exeter, Andover's sister school and bitter athletic rival. As a Harvard undergraduate in the early 1990s, he studied hard enough to earn the nickname Library Man from his classmates, and he played squash well enough to co-captain a college team that was undefeated and won the national championship. He went on to study history at Cambridge and law at Harvard, where he joined the law school faculty at the ripe age of 29.
As he rose through the professorial ranks, Palfrey was mentored by future Supreme Court justice Elena Kagan and became an expert in the learning styles of so-called digital natives, meaning children who have never experienced a world without internet access. He ran a research institute called the Berkman Center for Internet & Society and helped design Harvard's open online course offerings. He also co-founded the Digital Public Library of America (DPLA), a nonprofit, open-source alternative to Google Books that has the ambitious goal of making the entire cultural heritage of the United States accessible through a single online portal. During his years at Harvard, Palfrey even found time to launch a national campaign against cyberbullying, in partnership with Lady Gaga. "He has a capacity for work that I've never seen anywhere," says Maura Marx, a former Berkman Center fellow who worked with Palfrey on the DPLA project.
At 42, Palfrey could still pass for a law student. His gray flannel suits hang loose on his lean frame and somehow convey the impression that he is dressed for a moot court appearance or a summer job interview down at the U.S. Attorney's office. If something you say amuses him, he will double over in a silent, open-mouthed laugh. And he clearly likes his job. Addressing an alumni gathering last year, Palfrey announced that he had fallen in love with the Andover class of 2013. "In an okay way," he added. "Not in a creepy way."
With deep roots in the old WASP establishment, Palfrey is not the first person you'd expect to dedicate himself to "hacking" America's oldest incorporated boarding school. Yet the word comes up often in conversation with him. When he talks about hacking, he isn't thinking of pimply teenagers or North Korean cadres breaking into corporate and government computer systems. "There's a really positive form of hacking, which is to deconstruct and then reconstruct a system," he says. "I think that's the exciting moment that we have in the digital age, to break down core democratic systems and then remake them in an image that will serve the public interest broadly."
Although Andover might not fit everyone's definition of a core democratic system, the school's early history was bound up with that of American democracy. John Hancock signed Andover's Act of Incorporation four years after he signed the Declaration of Independence. George Washington addressed the students and townspeople of Andover during his New England tour in 1789. Paul Revere designed the Andover seal, with its Masonic imagery of bees buzzing around a hive, signifying industry, and two Latin mottoes: Finis origine pendet ("The end depends on the beginning") and Non sibi ("Not for self alone"). As these slogans suggest, Andover has always thought of itself as "a private school with a public purpose," a phrase attributed to Theodore Sizer, the head of school who brought coeducation to Andover, in 1973, via a merger with a neighboring girls school called Abbot Academy.
I'm a middle-aged Andover graduate myself. I went to the school at a time before e-mail, Skype, mobile phones, or the remote helicopter parenting that these technologies now enable. Historically, teachers tended to leave students alone outside of class and mandatory athletics, assuming they kept their grades up and didn't break too many school rules in public. For Henry L. Stimson, a late-19th-century graduate who went on to order the bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki as President Truman's secretary of war, Andover represented "perfect freedom, tempered by expulsion." For me Andover was a good place to learn the habits of independent living and critical thought. During my three years there I was encouraged to read widely, reason closely, and write well.
Yet Andover could feel cold at times. Then and now, it was a school that tended to suit confident, self-motivated teenagers. In my day it did not provide an especially nurturing environment for marginal students or anyone struggling with an emotional challenge. You either swam or sank; either way, the old buildings stood, the grass stayed green, and Commons served baked ziti once a week.
I was a State Department brat who had grown up abroad and had limited understanding of American culture, let alone the folkways of an East Coast boarding school. I eventually figured Andover out well enough to make friends and get into a top college, but for the first two years I brought books to the dining hall and ate many meals alone, hoping peers would mistake my shyness for intellectual hauteur.
My Andover career coincided with the last, faint flickerings of the 1960s counterculture, filtered through a prism of social and institutional privilege. On New England prep school campuses the early 1980s were the heyday of the Trustafarian and the preppy Deadhead, subspecies of prepdom that coexisted, more or less amicably, with the popped-collar, Official Preppy Handbook culture of the era. Like no small number of my male peers, I grew my hair long and spent a lot of time flinging Frisbees on the Great Lawn, a lush expanse of manicured turf bounded by low stone walls and an allée of ancient American elms. We listened to vinyl LPs over bong hits in dorm rooms festooned with those cheap Indian print bedspreads that preppy kids called tapestries. For a while I even went to class with a red bandanna tied around my left knee, in a sincere if risible homage to the Jimi Hendrix poster on the wall of my dormitory common room.
We lived mainly in an Andover bubble, disconnected from the politics of the wider world. However, the 1960s were recent enough that we still defined cool in opposition to adult authority. As a result student-faculty relations could sometimes turn adversarial. Our dean of students was in the habit of dressing up in black leather and riding his Harley-Davidson around the campus late at night, with the goal of busting students for the crime of leaving their dormitories after evening sign-in. The same dean presided over a boys dorm whose residents were kept on their toes by his habit of removing one shoe before climbing the stairs to inspect their rooms. He would stamp his one shod foot loudly on every second tread, allowing him to reach the top twice as fast as the boys expected. In this way he could disrupt revels involving booze, drugs, and/or girls before his charges had time to hide the evidence. Faced with such tactics, Andover students rapidly learned the arts of secrecy and dissimulation. As one of my contemporaries put it recently, the school was "fantastic preparation for a life of petty crime."
And now? During the several days I spent following Palfrey around the campus and talking to administrators, faculty, and students, I found Andover happier, far more diverse, and a bit less quirky than the school I left in 1983. It now offers a wealth of academic and psychological supports for struggling students. "The percentage of kids who flunk out feels infinitesimal compared to 30 years ago," says Tony Rotundo, a recently retired faculty member who taught my 11th-grade U.S. history course and went on to write American Manhood, a well-reviewed study of masculinity from Revolutionary times up to the modern era. The school also provides support for ethnic minorities. Andover's Allianza Latina student club, for example, includes members from 11 different Latino backgrounds. Attitudes toward teenage sexual identity have evolved as well. To my knowledge there were no out gay students at Andover in the early 1980s. That started to change a few years after I graduated, and in 1989 Andover became the second U.S. private school to sanction a Gay-Straight Alliance club on campus. Among those who responded to a recent survey in the Phillipian, the weekly student newspaper, 14 percent identify as gay, bisexual, or unsure, and Andover employs an official LGBT Advisor.
Palfrey is married to his college sweetheart, Catherine Carter, who teaches at a public elementary school in Cambridge. Along with two young children and a golden retriever named Guthrie, they live in Phelps House, an imposing Federal mansion that serves as the head of school's official residence. Palfrey is a ubiquitous figure on campus, often seen speedwalking to classes, faculty meetings, rehearsals, team practices, and the dining hall. He worries that his equally driven charges spend too much time working, too much time on their devices, and not enough time sleeping. During a 10th-grade English class that we attended together, he made a point of asking how long the students had spent on their homework. "Kids work very hard here, if not too hard," he says. "They are incredibly devoted to getting the most out of the experience."
On the academic front Palfrey is implementing what he calls "connected learning," a model of education that blends traditional classroom teaching with digital tools, including a new iPad-based curriculum for science, math, and foreign languages. He is also maintaining Andover's traditional focus on preparing students for lives of public service. In partnership with the education website Khan Academy, Andover students recently helped design a new calculus curriculum that serves Khan Academy's global audience of online learners. Andover's Niswarth program (niswarth is Hindi for non sibi) has sent students to India to work in education programs that benefit children living in poverty. Closer to home, a program called Andover Bread Loaf sends students and teachers to lead creative writing workshops for public school students in the hardscrabble town of Lawrence, just down the hill.
Thanks to mobile technology, the Andover bubble is certainly more permeable than it used to be. "There was a time when these schools were about getting dropped off in the station wagon right after Labor Day," Palfrey says. "The next time you saw your parents was around the holidays, and ideally you survived, right?"
The digital revolution changed all that. As a dorm counselor in the 1990s, Rotundo remembers learning to use AOL Instant Messenger under the tutelage of his teenage daughter, who soon had to show him how to turn off the service when parents started barraging him with messages about their children at all hours. Many of the students I met seemed to communicate with their parents at least once a day, if not more often. "My mom texts me all the time," says Diana Tchadi '14, a Cameroonian-American who grew up in Iowa and captained the girls varsity track and soccer teams during her senior year.
Andover students today seem significantly more comfortable with authority figures than we were. I first met Tchadi at an afternoon soccer practice for which Palfrey showed up in full kit and scrimmaged with the varsity girls. I watched from the sidelines as he bounded up and down the field like an eager, highly coordinated antelope. Very much a team leader, Tchadi addressed her head of school as "Palf-Dog," as in "Yo, Palf-Dog, on your right!" This would have been unthinkable behavior in my day. It seemed routine around Palfrey, who has sparked a minor personality cult on campus. Walking from his office to Commons on a sunny fall day, he provoked a steady stream of frantic waves and cries of "Hi, Mr. Palfrey!" from students, one of whom wore a T-shirt emblazoned with the slogan "got palfrey?"
During his first year at Andover, Palfrey taught an elective seminar called "Hacking," in which he helped students tease out the complex ethical implications of major hacking stories, such as the Wikileaks affair, and nudged them to apply his high-minded version of the hacker ethos to their own lives. "I learned that hacking is not about breaking into somebody's computer and stealing their data," says M.J. Engel '13, who took the course in her senior year and is now a rising junior at Columbia. "It's about taking yourself out of whatever bubble you live in and thinking critically about how to change it for the better."
After taking Palfrey's Hacking course, Engel and a few other girls launched a campus group called Feminism = Equality (F=E for short), which was dedicated to raising awareness about sexism on campus. Only four girls had been elected student body president since the advent of coeducation in 1973. In an effort to remedy this imbalance, Engel persuaded the student council to replace the position of school president with two co-presidents. They hoped this would encourage boys and girls to run for president in mixed pairs, thus promoting gender diversity in student leadership. It worked. Although two boys won the presidential election in 2013, mixed pairs have triumphed in each of the past two years. "I love seeing kids learn in ways where the school itself is a lab," Palfrey says.
Compared to my generation, Andover students seem more inclined to the sophisticated activism that drove F=E and less toward old-fashioned adolescent rebellion. This isn't to say students aren't subject to the same hormonal drives and judgmental lapses as their predecessors. Rates of drinking, drugging, and sexual activity seem to track the general teenage population, according to the annual student survey published in the Phillipian. Andover has always been a "second chance" school, meaning that students aren't normally expelled until the second major offense. But the context of modern rule-breaking has changed, argues Peter Currie '74, the president of Andover's board of trustees. "There's still plenty of knuckleheaded behavior that's endemic to adolescence," says Currie, a prominent Silicon Valley investor who served as chief financial officer at Netscape and more recently as lead independent director of Twitter. "But the core proposition is not that authority figures are all jerks, and I'm going to disobey them because they're jerks."
Maybe that's because Andover students model their attitudes toward authority on the digitally mediated but nonetheless close relationships that most maintain with their parents. Maybe it's also because they understand that they live in an ever more competitive world and need adult help to get where they want to go, which is typically to one of the name brand colleges that New England prep schools were created to feed. Yet elite universities are accepting fewer Andover students than they once did, not because Andover kids are any less qualified but because the top colleges are now drawing from a global talent pool. In 2014, for example, 12 Andover graduates matriculated at Yale. That sounds impressive until you consider that in 1936, Andover men made up 10 percent of the Yale freshman class.
Meanwhile, today's high school students were weaned on recessionary horror stories of Ivy League graduates sleeping in parental basements between barista shifts. In short, an elite private education no longer provides quite the same passport to professional status and economic security it once did. Those lengthening odds can unnerve kids who have grown used to succeeding at everything they do. "Part of you thinks that you're the cream of the crop," says Stephen T. Moreland IV, a 2014 graduate who edited the Phillipian during his senior year. "And then college season rolls around and you realize that not everybody goes on to the top schools."
It's also harder to win a spot at Andover these days. Last year the school accepted only 14 percent of applicants, down from about 30 percent in the early 1980s. As with most elite private schools, however, your chances of getting in rise significantly if you have relatives who went to Andover. Last year it accepted 58 percent of "direct legacy" applicants, those with a parent who attended the school, versus 10 percent of applicants with no family connection. How does this square with the ideal of a meritocratic institution that welcomes able youth from every quarter?
Palfrey rejects the suggestion that the school's legacy preference might be related to a heavy reliance on alumni donors to fund expensive programs like need-blind admission. He points out that many legacy applicants don't come from wealthy families and argues that kids from legacy families are more likely to get in because they are more likely to arrive at the admissions office with the academic chops and cultural capital you need to thrive at Andover. "There's no legacy preference here if there's not a fit for the kid," he says.
So what is the point of prep schools like Andover, if not to perpetuate a dynastic elite? Ultimately, Palfrey seems called to meld the old Andover ethic of public service with the modern hacker ethos of reinventing civic institutions. "I'm trying to tell students that they can be actors on the public stage right now by virtue of what digital technologies allow," he says. "You can create the problems that millions of people will use to learn mathematics. You can reinvent libraries, because we know that they aren't going to be warehouses for books, but they are going to be core to the engagement of communities in intellectual and civic life. You can figure out what the next version of a great journalistic enterprise is going to be." The headmaster smiles, then shrugs: "Go do it."
During my last night at Andover, Palfrey and I attended an editorial board meeting of the Phillipian, down in the basement of Morse Hall, a sturdy pile of red bricks where I struggled through geometry and algebra classes back in the day. There is no censorship at Andover, so Phillipian editors are free to print what they like. In recent months the editors had politely derided the administration's ban on grinding at school dances and featured an opinion piece by a senior from the United Arab Emirates who argued that the recent U.S.-Russia deal to destroy Syria's chemical weapons represented a Western conspiracy against a legitimate Arab government. However, two faculty advisers attend editorial meetings, where they critique the most recent edition of the paper and offer journalistic tips.
The previous week's Phillipian led with a front page story about a chemistry instructor, Kevin Cardozo, who had just moved Andover's entire chemistry curriculum online so that students at other schools could use it to help prepare for the AP chemistry exam. One of the advisers suggested that the top story should have been the school's decision to hold separate fall dances for ninth graders and upperclassmen. "That's your lead," she said, stabbing the paper emphatically. Most of the student editors nodded in agreement, suggesting that the Andover bubble remains at least partly unpunctured.