Going to college means a lot of big changes in a short time. That’s exciting — and challenging. The more prepared students are for college before arriving, the better off they (and their parents) will be. Being prepared is especially important for students with disabilities.
WinAhead transition presentations and materials for high school educators are found below. For other materials of interest to students and parents, check out the topical pages in the menus “For Students” and “For Parents”
WinAhead Transition Resources
2015 WINAHEAD Transition Presentation (11-24-15): This WinAhead presentation discusses the differences between high school and college settings The presentation highlights the information students, parents and teachers must know for students to be successful in their educational college experience.
Transitions to College for Students with Disabilities : This publication compares the differences between high school and college settings and looks at the information students, parents and teachers should know as a student makes plans to attend college. (Updated 10-2016) (This publication is also available upon request in Text-only format. To request this format, e-mail email@example.com)
NUTSHELL Transition Presentation: A condensed version of the (2015) Transitions to College presentation suitable for use in poster sessions or for presentation sessions of 30 minutes or less.
For High School Educators
Transition of Students with Disabilities to Postsecondary Education: A Guide for High School Educators: For students with disabilities, a big factor in their successful transition from high school to post-secondary education is accurate knowledge about their civil rights. The purpose of this guide is to provide high school educators with answers to questions students with disabilities may have as they get ready to move to the post secondary education environment.
Are There IEP’s and 504 Plans in College?: There are many misconceptions about the differences between high school and college when it comes to students with disabilities. This short piece by Jim Rein, Former Dean, Vocational Independence Program, New York Institute of Technology answers the question whether IEP’s and 504 Plans are used in post-secondary education.
Do Colleges Look Less Favorably on Students With IEPs Than 504 Plans?: Educational consultant Elizabeth Hamblet debunks the myth that some colleges look less favorably on on applicants with IEPs than they do on applicants with 504 plans. This is a useful read because colleges don’t ask about disabilities or IEP’s or 504 Plans.
The National Center for College Students with Disabilities (NCCSD): The NCCSD has three purposes:
- Provide technical assistance and information to anyone needing information about disability and higher education, including college students, their families, faculty, college administrators and staff, disability services professionals, researchers, and policymakers.
- Collect information and do research about disability services at campuses in the United States, sharing findings with the public.
- Report to the U.S. Department of Education about the current status of college students with disabilities in the U.S.
Transition Assessments and Activities: The South Bend (IN) Community Schools Corporation has some useful and practical resources for transition assessments. Resources include a transition matrix his which allows users to choose the Transition Domain (Employment, Education/Training, Independent Living) that they wish to explore transition assessments for. In addition there are lists of downloadable assessments for each of the domains. A site worth exploring.
Auxiliary Aids and Services for Postsecondary Students with Disabilities Higher Education’s Obligations Under Section 504 and Title II of the ADA: Prepared by the U.S. Department of Education Office for Civil Rights, this publication discusses the rights and responsibilities of the student with disabilities and the postsecondary institution with respect to providing auxiliary aids and services.
Iowa Teacher Resources: From the Keystone AEA for Iowa teachers, this site contains resources for IEP assistance, a toolkit, numerous factsheets and other resources