go to start of menu
Technology is the cornerstone of Distance Learning and the future of
education in the coming years. Instructors and administrators are responsible
for not only the content of their courses but also for the method of presenting
that content on the Internet. The emergence of educational websites offering
instructional material has been growing steadily. What Distance Learning
now lacks is the element of accessibility for all students. In order to be
accessible, a website must meet strict guidelines and adhere to standardized
code. If it does not, it becomes nothing more than an attractive building that
lacks wheelchair access for the disabled. Itís a building with beautifully
designed, automatically opening doors but, the controls have been placed out
of reach to the student with a disability who is trying to enter.
This booklet will take you step-by-step through the process of designing a course that will meet the guidelines and restrictions for California Community Colleges1. The information will provide you with the tools necessary to design a fully accessible website or repair an existing one. You will be provided with information on where to go to solve specific problems and what resources are available within the Community College system to help you. Clarification is provided for the sometimes confusing State and Federal laws regarding accessibility and how those laws apply to public education websites within the State of California. This handbook is not intended as a replacement for the Distance Education: Access Guidelines for Students with Disabilities (1999), but it is your starting point.
Itís time for educators to make the commitment to improve accessibility in Distance Learning while utilizing media rich technology. Itís time for administrators to encourage compliance with the guidelines and provide assistance in the development of accessible websites for education.
1. Distance Education: Access Guidelines for Students with Disabilities August 1999, and available in PDF format at: Distance Education: Access Guidelines for Students with Disabilities, August 1999 (PDF format)