[an error occurred while processing this directive]
Despite a widely held belief among women that they suffer from memory loss during menopause, a major new study of women in the U.S. has found no evidence for it.
Dr Peter Meyer, of the Rush-Presbyterian - St. Luke's Medical Centre in Chicago and colleagues report on the first ever study to track cognitive performance over time through the menopausal transition, in today's issue of the journal Neurology.
Despite beginning the study with the hypothesis that a decline in brain function occurs as women progress through the menopausal transition - independent of age, educational level, family income, ethnicity and self-perceived health, the researchers found no such deterioration.
"These findings are in contrast the reports of perceived increasing forgetfulness during menopause, which led us to anticipate a decline," the team reports.
The results conflict not only with what women themselves say, but also with the known role that the female hormone oestrogen plays in healthy brain functioning. Other studies have shown that oestrogen plays an active part in the brain's signalling system, helping to direct blood supply to active regions of the brain. Oestrogen levels decline sharply in women during menopause as their ovaries shut down production of the hormone.
The new study tracked more than 800 randomly selected black and white women from two adjoining Chicago communities, and from a wide range of socio-economic backgrounds over six years, as they went through the transition of menopause.
The criteria for inclusion in the study specified that the women were aged 42 to 52 years, had an intact uterus and at least one ovary, were not currently pregnant or breastfeeding, had not used hormone preparations affecting ovarian or pituitary function in the previous 3 months, and had menstrual bleeding in the past 3 months. Women who began using hormone replacement therapy (HRT) or had a hysterectomy during the study were subsequently excluded as well.
Every year, the subjects were interviewed and had their brain function checked through their performance on standardised tests that measure working memory and perceptual speed, with comparisons being made over time with the aim of observing any changes that took place. The tests involved monitoring how fast the subjects could match figures and reverse a string of numbers from memory, both of which are commonly used to discover problems with brain function.
Test scores were compared for women before, during and after menopause: if the study hypothesis had been correct, test scores should not have declined at all in the pre-menopausal group and should have declined most in the post-menopausal group.
If anything, the pattern was for most groups to slightly improve their scores over time, although the authors caution that the subjects might simply have become better at performing the tests as they became familiar with them. Any declines measured were so minor that they could not be linked to menopause.
The authors also caution that their study had several limitations, including that the tests may not have detected changes in specific kinds of memory that might be more affected by hormonal changes. Memory of words, for example, has been shown by some studies to be affected by changes in hormone levels, although other studies have found no such link.
As well, it is possible that if menopausal memory loss does occur, it may not happen gradually over the transition but more rapidly towards the end of that period, or soon afterwards - only further research would resolve that unanswered question, the researchers say.
The subjects were recruited as part of the larger Study of Women's Health Across the Nation (SWAN), which is sponsored by the U.S. National Institute of Ageing with the aim of assessing the natural history of the menopausal transition in 3,300 women from five ethnic groups.[an error occurred while processing this directive]