The Psychological Impact of Interactive Media on Society
In today's society, computers and interactive media products have become one of the main needed and necessary products children have wanted, due to the quick passed, very exciting graphics and story lines in games have become a everyday activity in the child's life. Although the computer has been one of human kinds greatest technological advancements, the bright flashy screens and story lines in exciting new games have overtaken the minds of young children and have also become a main exercise for people today. Each interactive media products have had a great impacts on societies, socially and psychologically.
In spite of video games entertaining value, the contents and the use of it has been quite an issue for some people. Many blame video games for its violent contents and claim that video games interfere with children’s process of growing up. The reasons of that is, of course, children’s exhibition of violence. It is interesting to find that actually video games assist children a lot in their education as to introduce the first stage of computers and expand their ability on spatial subjects. It is also interesting to find that video games also assist children in improving their hand-eye co-ordination, causing their reflex to be sharpened. As for an opinion saying that playing video games will make a kid’s social life poor, there is also an argument stating that video game culture has formed a little community, in which the players teach each other and co-operate as one encounters difficulties. In other word, video game culture here plays a big role in expanding gamers’ social life.
As the technological era continues through time, daily life has become more reliant on technology (computers). The daily life of a persons interaction with other people has greatly decreased. With simply sending an e-mail to a friend or family member, the interaction has become less face-to-face, but more face-to-screen. Although this change is happening it is not all bad. With the use of this product, the time used planning arrangements and parties would be minimized, the time you have would be more effective such as things like playing sports and other interactions.
Although we all look up to today's technology as a great advancement, many others look at it as a negative asset in today's society. Being a computer user quite regularly the need for a computer has become a compulsory need. The uses of the PC and technology has been outstanding. The new internet refrigerators and telephone operated air conditioners, life has become more and more simpler.
Although life has become a dream with technology, the plain reality has kept use down to earth. With the life of a human on average, we use something technological at least 50 times or more per day. With a break though in technology everyday man has been unable to keep up. Computers, Car Stereos, Cars, Mobiles, Refrigerators, Air conditions, Printers, cameras, the list goes on and on. We have been around technology everyday in our life time. From the first automobile to the first television set, we have loved and adored technology.
Interactive and communication technologies are transforming the way we communicate, work, learn, and play. As today's society grow, we develop an understanding of our self in relationship with other people. Our increasing cognitive abilities allow us to take the perspective of others and to understand how our actions produce consequences that can be harmful or beneficial to others. Specifically young people grow in an ever-expanding social environment that includes family, school, and other community organizations. As they interact with others within their social environment, young people gain an understanding of the expectations that are expected for their behavior. Parents, teachers, and other important adults are actively involved in the molding of norms and values that are considered acceptable in the social environment today. Through this process, young people develop a sense of personal identity and values that guide their decision-making and behavior.
On September 17 and 18, 1999, a group of researchers and practitioners met in a 2-day workshop to frame a research agenda around issues of the social dimensions of the use of interactive technologies by young people. The results from the experiment where as to be expected, people mostly young people have found it easier to communicate with other people over the internet because it is not a face to face experience. This form of communication has allowed the user to become alias to the real world but make a anonymous identification. Although not much information or answers were gathered from the experiment the information supplied was sufficient to gain the point of view that information technology has had a effect on the child's interaction development.
Parents, educators, policy-makers, technology designers, and others require greater understanding of the social dimensions of the use of interactive technologies by people. This understanding will allow for the establishment of policies, strategies, and technology-based environments that will foster the safe, responsible, and beneficial use of interactive technologies by today's society.
In conclusion, the philosophical and psychological facts of technology cannot be ignored in relation to technology and society. Here, we are dealing with a second order effect arising from technological determinism. Not only does the current state of technology determine our choices for the future but it also influences our intellectual and emotional responses (the way we think/feel) to technology and to socio-economic problems generally. Despite the difficulties in assessing technology's impact, we have no choice but to try. Failure to address the impact of the new information technology may well result in increasing control of information by a powerful few, and in further erosion of the rights and choices of individuals regarding the application of new technology.
Article name: The Psychological Impact of Interactive Media on Society essay, research paper, dissertation