Gray Hair, Causes and treatment options
At some point in people's lives their hair turns gray, which could be normal or cause feeling of anxiousness or frustration if it is experienced at a young age. Many people with gray hair frequently ask if gray hair is normal or it could be prevented.
Normally hair gets its color from pigment called melanin that is produced by specialized cells called melanocytes in the hair follicle. What melanins are produced, and in what quantity is determined by genes inherited from one's parents. At some point in a person's life, the melanocytes may begin to produce less melanin, or stop producing melanin altogether. when melanin production slows or stops, hair begins to lose its color and the result is decreased pigmentation in gray hair or total absence of pigmentation in white hair.
Many people with graying hair wonder if there is any treatment to prevent the hair from turning gray. The answer is that there is no specific treatment available to prevent this from happening. However, it is believed that biotin and folic acid which are B complex vitamins may help in keeping the hair from turning gray.
The gray has has the same genetic disposition as other hairs in a person's body, which means that if it is predisposed to genetic androgenic alopecia, it could eventually be lost. When a person with graying hair or gray hair begins to experience hair loss due to androgenic alopecia, a condition commonly called male pattern or female pattern hair loss, many people wonder if it can be transplanted. The gray hair can be transplanted as safely and successfully as hair of any color. A misconception about gray hair is that when hair turns gray it is no longer healthy hair. If this was true then gray hair would not be suitable for hair transplantation. The rational for transplantation is to remove healthy hair follicles to an area of hair loss where they take root and continue to produce healthy hair. Transplantation of gray hair is successful because gray hair has healthy hair follicles