George III was the British monarch who, in the words of one eminent historian, has gone down in history as a “tyrannical nincompoop”.
But his legacy has been reappraised after Buckingham Palace granted researchers access to 350,000 pages from The Royal Archives. The first tranche of documents from the mammoth project, known as the Georgian Papers Programme, will be put online later this month.
“The stereotypical view of George III is that he was mad and that he lost America. In the States they have an even more extreme view of him, as their last king and a total incompetent. But what the papers really show is the sheer variety of things he was interested in,” said Oliver Urquhart Irvine, Royal Librarian and Assistant Keeper of the Queen’s Archive.
“There is correspondence with prime ministers on political and economic matters. There are letters to the astronomer William Herschel about the building of his telescope, holding him to account over the cost. He’s not just dallying in a subject and half understanding it, he’s really getting to grips with it.”
Rick Atkinson, military historian and one of the US research fellows, said the papers set out “the extent to which the King is closely involved in all aspects of logistics, politics, strategy, diplomacy, naval affairs, and intelligence collection during the Revolution. His appetite for information is enormous.
“The American stereotype of a tyrannical nincompoop quickly dissolves with a little exposure to the Georgian papers.”
The project involves academics from King’s College London and the Omohundro Institute of Early American History and Culture in the US. Members of the public can visit by appointment to look through the archive, although they must have a specific research question in mind.
The entire archive will be digitised and available to view online by 2020.
For many, the abiding image of George III is not a contemporary portrait but Nigel Hawthorne’s portrayal in 1994 film The Madness of King George, scripted by Alan Bennett.
Mr Urquhart Irvine said: “The film was definitely accurate. But they were periods of illness within a life that was otherwise very intellectually active.”
There is one other event this year that will revise George III’s image. The hit Broadway musical, Hamilton, opens in the West End in November.
The young king has only nine minutes of stage time in the tale of America’s founding fathers, but has become one of the most beloved characters in a show. It is a comic role, with George singing a song called You’ll Be Back which the show’s creator, Lin-Manuel Miranda, described as “a breakup letter from King George to the colonies”.
Karin Wulf, director of the Omohundro Institute, said the musical would introduce a new generation to the much-maligned monarch. “This is a King George that American millennials - and maybe their British counterparts too - can love,” she said.