Rats are one of the most common pests that infest the human household. No other pest can evoke a sense of dread than rats. These pests can cause severe damage to your property by spoiling food materials, chewing on your clothes, furniture, electrical wires. Moreover, these are carriers of deadly diseases. Here are a few weird facts about rats:
1. According to the Integrated Taxonomic Information System or ITIS, there are over 60 different species of rats all over the world. They usually measure around 5 inches and more. The largest species of rat is Bosavi WoollyRat which measures 32.2 inches.
2. Rats are found in every continent of the earth. For instance, the rice-field rats are common in Southeast Asia while there is an abundance of Australian swamp rat in Eastern Australia.Among all species of rats the Norway rat or brown rats are found in each and every continent of the earth except the Antarctica. The house rats and the brown rats are one of the most common species of rats in the world. While the House rats are found in warm climate, the Norway rats are found in a temperate climate.
3. Rats tend to stick together in packs. The brown rats are led by the largest rats in their pack; however, in other species of rats, there can be several dominant male and female rats.
4. Rats are omnivores. In other words, they eat anything. The house rats and the brown rats are dependent on humans for their food source. They tend to scavenge the trash or any food item that is left unprotected in the home. In case your household is infested with rats and if you are looking for mice control services, then get in touch with us. Our team of experts ensure a thorough and personalized pest removal service based on your needs. Get in touch with us today at citypest.ca/contact.
5. Before giving birth,the rats build nests. They use almost anything they find including grass, branches, trash, papers and so on. They usually build their nests in rotting trees or buildings.
6. A female rat can mate about 500 times in six- hours. The Brown rats can produce 2,000 babies in a year. At one go, a female brown rat can give birth to 22 babies. Tropical rats give birth to 6 babies at a time.
7. The gestation period of brown rats is usually between 21 to 26 days. When the babies are born, they weigh up to 6 to 8 grams. By the time a brown rat is 3 months old, they are ready to mate and reproduce.
8. Rats usually live for 2 to 3 years and a majority (approximately 91-97%) of the house rats die during the first year of their life. Rats have an excellent memory. If rats learn a direction finding route , they never forget it.
We hope you will find these pointers interesting and helpful in gaining more idea about rats.