Gene loss creates anorexia-related behaviors in mice
By: Jennifer Brown | 2015.04.08 | 04:44 pm
Building on their discovery of a gene linked to eating disorders in humans, a team of researchers at the University of Iowa has now shown that loss of the gene in mice leads to several behavioral abnormalities that resemble behaviors seen in people with anorexia nervosa.
University of Iowa study finds teenagers are far more sensitive than adults to the immediate effect or reward of their behaviors
By: Sara Agnew | 2014.09.10 | 03:20 pm
A University of Iowa study finds teenagers are far more sensitive than adults to the immediate effect or reward of their behaviors. Even when a behavior is no longer in a teenager’s best interest to continue, they will because the effect of the reward is still there and lasts much longer in adolescents than in adults.
Study suggests fewer gamblers in Iowa despite casino growth in state
By: Richard C. Lewis | 2012.12.14 | 08:24 am
While the number of casinos in Iowa has doubled since 1995, there are fewer gamblers overall, and fewer gambling addicts as well, according to a new study from the University of Iowa. The results suggest the market for gaming facilities, in Iowa and other states, reaches a saturation point. Findings published in the journal “Annals of Clinical Psychiatry.”
Model explains crucial links among looking, learning, and memory
By: Richard C. Lewis | 2012.12.04 | 09:03 am
Researchers at the University of Iowa have explained how infants learn by looking, and the crucial role these activities play in how infants gain knowledge. Their computer model of babies aged 6 weeks to one year shows how infants use looking to create knowledge and to sear that knowledge into memory. The model also explains how infants’ looking and learning changes as they develop. Results appear in the journal “Cognitive Science.”
Study finds that closeness with either parent has behavioral, emotional benefits
By: Richard C. Lewis | 2012.10.11 | 09:40 am
Infants who have a close, intimate relationship with at least one parent are less likely to experience emotional or behavioral problems in childhood, according to a University of Iowa study. The researchers found that a child can be close to either the mother or the father to reap the emotional dividend, and that closeness with both parents conferred no additional advantage. Results published in the journal “Child Development.”