Your Pet Parakeet’s Nutritional Needs
One of the most energetic small type of birds are parakeets, which are known to be the agile ones too. Apart from being agile, these birds are very smart, thus they require lots of stimulation and playtime than what most people think. These are the reasons why they require the best and the most balanced diet. These birds would also love to have veggies and fruits as part of their diet. From time to time, it would be great for your to have these pets indulge in nuts and seeds.
In fact, parakeets enjoy the same fruits that humans also enjoy. Pears, apples and oranges are just a few examples. If it is your first time to give them fruits, start giving them a slice and watch them ask for more. Feeding your lovely budgie fruits can be a great bonding time. Not only are you giving the little pet its much-needed nourishment, but you are also establishing trust. The idea is the same with feeding nuts or seeds. Don’t forget that these budgies love vegetables to. So, why not give the little budgie a vegetable leaf such as a lettuce.
Your pet’s diet could use a lot of green vegetables. Many parakeets love the taste of cabbage leaves or broccoli leaves. These birds can easily get used to the taste of veggies, so adding vegetables to the bird’s daily diet plan would not be an issue. It should be noted that there are leafy vegetables that may not be good for your winged pet. Certain leafy vegetables can cause liver or calcium deficiency problems. Consult with a veterinarian first before loading a parakeet’s diet with vegetables.
A good diet is also very important when breeding parakeets. During this period, cuttlebone or a mineral block may be given to a female parakeet, in its cage, as a supplement. If you want very healthy chicks, you need to give the right supplements to the female birds.
Moving on, as far as seeds and nuts are considered, a few parakeet-favorites are sesame seeds, beans and almonds among others. These nuts are good sources of protein and healthy fats. Be sure to give these birdsa good mix of these fruits, vegetables seeds and nuts to ensure that they live a healthy life. live a good life, feeds them with a variation of these foods.
So the next time you head out to buy some bird food, think about starting your bird on a nut, seed, fruits and vegetable diet instead. There are so many of these foods to choose from and make part of your pet’s nutritional plan. Your very energetic and colorful pet will be so glad with the various flavors and food types incorporated in his or her well-balanced diet.
Partner post: Where To Start with Products and More