Kwanzaa Holiday Information
“Kwanzaa yenu iwe na heri”
Welcome to A Celebration of Kwanzaa
Kwanzaa is a 7 day festival celebrating the African American people, their culture and their history. It is a time of celebration, community gathering, and reflection. A time of endings and beginnings. Kwanzaa begins on December 26th and continues until New Years Day, January 1st.
Come learn the story of Kwanzaa, a relatively new holiday that started in the 1960s and today is celebrated by 18 million Americans. Read about the Seven Principles of Kwanzaa and learn how these principles are evoked in African American homes during the week of Kwanzaa. Discover the meaning of the Kinara, a seven-branched candelabra lit throughout the week of Kwanzaa.
Do you know which Swahili expression the name Kwanzaa comes from? Learn the answer to this and many other Kwanzaa tidbits at our article entitled Did You Know? The Kwanzaa Edition.
Finally, be sure to check out our extensive collection of Kwanzaa crafts, recipes and other holiday goodies. We also hope you will send a free Kwanzaa e-card to friends and family.
We look forward to sharing our feast of Kwanzaa festivities with you.
Happy Kwanzaa from our family to yours!
Facts, Figures & Folklore About Kwanzaa
Here are the dates for Kwanzaa 2009-2020
Kwanzaa is a 7 day festival celebrating the African American people, their culture and their history.
Each of the seven days of Kwanzaa represents a different principle of the Nguzo Saba (Seven Principles). When a new candle is lit each day it represents one of these principles.
The foundation of Kwanzaa are the Seven Principles, or Nguzo Saba.
The Symbols of Kwanzaa
Along with the Seven Principles (Nguzo Saba) and the seven days of Kwanzaa, there are seven symbols or implements that are used in the celebration of the holiday.
During Kwanzaa candles are placed in a special candleholder called the Kinara.
Each of the seven days of Kwanzaa represents a different principle of the Nguzo Saba and a new candle is lit each day to represent one of thes principles.
Since Kwanzaa is a relatively new holiday, you, your family and your community can use your creativity and imagination in the way the holiday is observed.
Healthy, Wholesome, Vegan-friendly Recipes For Kwanzaa
Easy and fun craft projects for Kwanzaa
Just print out our holdiay pictueres. All you’ll need to bring are the crayons!
Send your friends and family FREE Kwanzaa eGreeting cards