About this quiz
As we make the transition from our teenage years into adulthood, we begin to define who we are in relation to our friends, relatives and cultural influences. Your identity — an understanding of who you are — gives meaning to your daily life, provides a sense of personal control, and helps you successfully navigate the demands of living in today’s complicated society.
Financial identity is a person’s understanding and expression of who he or she is in relation to managing and practicing personal finance. The goal of this quiz is to help you understand the process through which you come to your financial identity, as well as how your identity shifts and changes over time.
Your financial identity (Pathfinder, Trooper, Nomad or Tenderfoot) is determined by your answers to 12 questions about your behaviors and beliefs when it comes to money.
Financial identity is not necessarily fixed — you may move from one identity to another at different stages in life. Knowing your financial identity may provide insights into what you need to become fully financially self-sufficient, an important goal in the transition to adulthood. Learning about your current financial identity gives you a great starting point for improving your financial skills and achieving your money goals.
Are you ready? Let’s do this.
About this research
Funded by the
National Endowment for Financial Education, the Financial Identity Quiz is derived from the landmark study, Arizona Pathways to Life Success for University Students (APLUS). The APLUS study examines financial attitudes and behaviors — and the forces that drive them — in youth ages 18 to 25. The University of Arizona launched APLUS in the spring of 2008, collecting information from more than 2,000 students whom researchers have followed and surveyed about their financial knowledge and practices over the past several years. For more information, visit www.aplus.arizona.edu.
About the researchers
Soyeon Shim, Ph.D.
Soyeon Shim serves as the principal investigator and founder of Arizona Pathways to Life Success for University Students (APLUS), from which research for the Financial Identity Quiz was derived. APLUS investigates how young adults develop financial capability into adulthood. Shim began APLUS research at the University of Arizona, where she served as a professor and director of the Norton School for more than two decades. She currently is the dean of the School of Human Ecology at the University of Wisconsin-Madison.
Joyce Serido, Ph.D.
Joyce Serido is an associate professor of family social sciences in the College of Education and Human Development at the University of Minnesota,Twin Cities. She is the principal investigator of the Arizona Pathways to Life Success for University Students (APLUS) project, a unique longitudinal study on the formation of young adults’ financial behaviors, and the relation of early financial behaviors with quality of adult life. Her research focuses on resilience and adaptation to adverse circumstances, with particular emphasis on financial coping behaviors of young adults.
Bonnie L. Barber, PH.D.
Bonnie Barber is a professor and Director of Behavioral Basis of Health, Griffith Health Institute and head of research at Griffith University, Queensland Australia who conceived of the idea to adapt the research on identity formation to the financial domain and developed the measure of financial identity.
About the funders
National Endowment for Financial Education
The National Endowment for Financial Education (NEFE) is an independent, nonprofit and noncommercial foundation that inspires all Americans to make informed financial decisions in every stage of life. NEFE is grounded in the belief that, regardless of background or income level, financially informed individuals are better able to take control of their circumstances, improve their quality of life and ensure a more stable future for themselves and their families. We envision a world where people make informed, thoughtful and beneficial financial decisions that are aligned with their values so that they can enjoy better, more secure and more satisfying lives. For more information, visit
The Citi Foundation
The Citi Foundation works to promote economic progress in communities around the world and focuses on initiatives that expand financial inclusion. We collaborate with best-in-class partners to create measurable economic improvements that strengthen low-income families and communities. Through a “More than Philanthropy” approach, Citi's business resources and human capital enhance our philanthropic investments and impact. For more information, visit