Book by Danny Faulkner
The universe was created with purpose and reason; and modern science with all of its experiments, exploration, and sophistication has never proven otherwise. In fact, as author Dr. Danny Faulkner makes plain, advanced science argues more for a created cosmology than a big bang. Written for the upper-level student through the well-read layman, Universe by Design explores the universe, explaining its origins and discussing the historical development of cosmology from a creationist viewpoint.
Some astronomers look at the stars and planets through a telescope. Author Danny Faulkner views them through a biblical perspective in this unique book. Written for the well-read layman from high school through adult, Universe by Design explores and explains the historical development of this science, including current ideas in the field. From a creationist standpoint, Faulkner also addresses common misconceptions, difficulties, and critiques about relativity and cosmology. This book would be an excellent supplement to any home school curriculum.
Recent developments in cosmology
Explanatory diagrams and illustrations
Theories and facts on the origin and expansion of the universe
The contributions of Ptolemy, Galileo, Brahe, Newton, Hubble, Einstein, and other famous scientists to the field
Thorough discussion and problems with the big bang theory
Many examples and analogies to help understand concepts of cosmology
Difficulties and critiques of modern cosmology
Chapter questions and answers for homeschool study
And God said, Let there be lights in the firmament of the heaven to divide the day from the night; and let them be for signs, and for seasons, and for days, and years:
and God saw that it was good. -Gen. 1:14-18
160 page paperback
Retail Price: $14.99
About the Author
Dr. Danny R. Faulkner has a B.S. (Math), M.S. (Physics), M.A. and Ph.D. (Astronomy, Indiana University). He was the Full Professor at the University of South Carolina Lancaster, where he taught physics and astronomy for 25 years. He has published about two dozen papers in various astronomy and astrophysics journals, and has published two books, Universe by Design and The New Astronomy Book. Dr. Faulkner retired as a full professor and now holds the title of Distinguished Professor Emeritus. In January 2013 he joined Answers in Genesis and its Creation Museum full-time.