The most important and sensitive muscle of the human body is the heart. The quality of life largely depends upon proper functioning of the heart. A little abnormality in the pumping of the blood to different parts of the body may lead to serious health issues and even death. So,it is very important to take care of your heart as you take care of your physical appearance and weight. It is the responsibility of the heart to supply oxygen to all parts of the body through blood. Even the proper development of the immune system depends upon the normal circulation of blood for which the heart has to work real hard. There are several reasons that contribute to malfunctioning of your heart. In order to stay fit and lead a healthy life you have to make sure that your heart is provided with all the reasons to work in perfect order.
EAT HEART HEALTHY FOOD
Right choice of food plays quite a significant role in our lives. According to the heart health experts the food you eat has a great impact on not only your heart but your overall health too. You should always stay away from food that has a high fat content. Anything that can easily increase your cholesterol is dangerous for the heart. Saturated and trans fats are very dangerous for your health if they are overused. In order to have a healthy heart you should avoid fattening food and add all the whole grains and fruits and vegetables to your daily diet. One more thing the use of which risks one’s health is salt it does not only increases the blood pressure it also does not let the fat burn,so in order to stay fit it is always advisable to cut down on your salt intake. The best food that you can eat in order to improve your heart health is avocados,nuts and fatty fish.
MONITOR YOU WEIGHT
Majority of people who are mostly educated do not pay much attention to their weight unless there is some major health issue that needs special care. It is a known fact that obesity is one of the main causes of several health issues like high blood pressure,diabetes high cholesterol and several other problems. In order to live a heart healthy life you need to be in shape and lose as much of your extra weight as soon as possible.Chance of heart problems are higher in obese people than in people who have normal weight.
Along with all other efforts regular exercise is the key to a healthy heart. All the exercises that helps raise the heart rate are needed to keep the heart in good pumping condition. The more exercise you do the better it is for your health. According to some of the most successful heart health experts, brisk walk is the best thing a person can do to stay fit.
LOOK AFTER YOURSELF
God has provided the human beings with a strong and healthy heart,but it does get affected over time due to other health issues that one has to face throughout his life. To keep your heart healthy you need to take good care of yourself and make sure that even the minor ailments are treated in time so that no complications are faced. There are thousands of people who are fond of eating protein and especially the red meat that is very high in its fat content. There is no problem in eating proteins but it should be lean meat like that of fish and chicken with the least amount of unhealthy fat. The trans fats found in red meat directly affect the level of cholesterol, and high cholesterol is one of the main reason of heart attack as the fat deposits in the arteries of the heart and constricts the passage in which the blood has to flow.in this situation the heart has to work too hard and this stress on the heart leads to different types of heart diseases. If you are a diabetic you need some extra care as a little negligence at your part may lead to severe damage to your heart.
In short,if you take your life seriously and want to excel in every field you need perfect health and for perfect health a healthy heart is a must. So,act wisely and eating the right things do regular workouts to stay fit for long.