This ePilot Flight Training Edition is sponsored by
Do not reply to this e-mail. Got news? Contact ePilot. Having difficulty using this service? Visit the ePilot Frequently Asked Questions now at AOPA Online or write to [email protected].
Aircraft Owners and Pilots Association
421 Aviation Way
Frederick, MD 21701
Tel: 800/USA-AOPA or
Copyright © 2006 AOPA.
| Training Tips |
LARGE AIRPORT OPERATIONS
What issues come to mind when you think about flying in and out of airports that serve large aircraft? Size and complexity, for one. Knowing how to taxi from runways to ramps and back-taking care to avoid a runway incursion-is of paramount importance. Studying the airport diagram in AOPA's Airport Directory Online is a great way to prepare.
Wake turbulence-it's a concern for general aviation pilots operating in proximity to larger aircraft. When landing behind a large aircraft, or taking off after it, visualize its wake generation and the wake's likely drift under existing wind conditions. Stay above the other aircraft's flight path; this means getting airborne during takeoff before the other aircraft's rotation point and landing beyond its touchdown point, especially if you have been cleared to follow a large aircraft on approach. In such cases, the air traffic controller's instructions include the phrase "Caution, wake turbulence." Consider hazards originating on nearby runways, such as wingtip vortices that could drift into your path from a parallel runway. See the January 24, 2003, Training Tips article "Staying Clear of the Wake."
Large aircraft also present hazards on the ground. Give wide berth to any large aircraft that seems active. Keep a sharp lookout for nearby aircraft movements while you perform checklists. "Prop and jet blast forces generated by large aircraft have overturned or damaged several smaller aircraft taxiing behind them. To avoid similar results, and in the interest of preventing upsets and injuries to ground personnel from such forces, the FAA recommends that air carriers and commercial operators turn on their rotating beacons anytime their aircraft engines are in operation. General aviation pilots using rotating-beacon-equipped aircraft are also encouraged to participate in this program, which is designed to alert others to the potential hazard," recommends Chapter 4 of the Aeronautical Information Manual.
Tower controllers at busy airports may use "taxi into position and hold" clearances to save time. Just after one aircraft takes off or lands, another is cleared onto the runway but must hold for takeoff clearance until the preceding aircraft is safely off. An effective method is explored in "Accident Analysis: Surface Operation Smarts" in the October 2002 AOPA Flight Training. But be sure to understand the pitfalls of this method, and remember, as pilot in command you have the authority to decline a taxi-into-position-and-hold clearance if you feel uncomfortable. For more information about towered airports, download the AOPA Air Safety Foundation's Operations at Towered Airports Safety Advisor. Know the flow, and reap the rewards of large airport ops!
| Your Partner in Training |
On those days when you'd like to be in the cockpit but can't, how can you keep your focus on flying? Take one of the AOPA Air Safety Foundation's free online courses. The full-length courses can be completed in 45 minutes to an hour, and there are shorter minicourses ranging in length from 5 to 15 minutes. Topics include weather avoidance, special-use airspace, runway safety, and GPS usage. See AOPA Online for the complete list.
Do you have a question? Call the experienced pilots in AOPA's Pilot Information Center at 800/USA-AOPA. They're available to take your calls weekdays 8:30 a.m. to 6 p.m. Eastern. As an AOPA Flight Training member, you have access to all of the features within AOPA Online and AOPA Flight Training Online. Login information is available online.
| Flight Training News |
COAST GUARD TAKES OVER WASHINGTON, D.C., ADIZ PATROL
If you should inadvertently fly into the Washington, D.C., Air Defense Identification Zone (ADIZ), you're now likely to have a different aircraft off your wing-an orange Coast Guard HH-65C Dolphin instead of a black Customs and Border Patrol Blackhawk. That's because the Coast Guard's air station in Atlantic City, New Jersey, is taking over responsibility for intercepting aircraft violating the ADIZ without the proper flight plan and clearance. The Dolphins will be equipped with civilian-frequency VHF radios plus electronic signboards so that they can communicate with other pilots who might be having radio problems. For complete details, see the story on AOPA Online.
FLORIDA FLIGHT SCHOOL LEADS CESSNA'S G1000 FITS INSTRUCTION
SunState Aviation Flight School, located at Kissimmee Gateway Airport in Orlando, Florida, has trained more pilots on the Garmin G1000 glass cockpit using Cessna's designated training for technically advanced aircraft than any other flight school in the country, according to Cessna Aircraft Company. SunState has completed 37 transitions utilizing Cessna's FAA and Industry Training Standards (FITS) training since launching the program approximately one year ago. Transition training is divided into classroom sessions and flight training, with the goal of having pilots train the way they fly from the start by providing scenario-based challenges that improve a pilot's decision-making skills. SunState operates a fleet of 18 aircraft, half of which are equipped with G1000 glass-cockpit technology. For more information, see the Web site.
CAE WINS SIMULATOR ORDERS FROM CONTINENTAL, UPS
CAE, a developer of simulator and modeling technologies, said it has won full-flight simulator orders from Continental Airlines and UPS. Continental's purchase of a Boeing 737NG marks CAE's first simulator order from a U.S. legacy airline since 2001. UPS is a first-time customer with CAE, ordering a Boeing 747. "We are beginning to see the U.S. legacy carriers address fleet renewal initiatives, so we anticipate this will provide CAE with opportunities as the commercial aerospace cycle continues a strong run," said Marc Parent, CAE's group president of simulation products and military training and services. For more information, see the Web site.
WHAT CAN ATC DO FOR YOU?
If you find yourself in an emergency, what can air traffic control (ATC) do for you? What is flight following, and how do you ask for it? Find the answers in the AOPA Air Safety Foundation's Say Intentions: When You Need ATC's Help Safety Advisor. You'll learn about flight assists; discover the terminology you should use when describing an abnormal or emergency situation to ATC; and what you should do if communications with ATC are lost or you inadvertently fly into IMC or other unexpected conditions. Download the Safety Advisor from AOPA Online.
ROCKY MOUNTAIN COLLEGE ACQUIRES GLASS-COCKPIT PIPER ARCHERS
Rocky Mountain College in Billings, Montana, has begun operating two new Piper Archers equipped with Avidyne Flightmax Entegra avionics. The college also has acquired a Frasca Mentor flight training device equipped with the same glass cockpit. The Bachelor of Science aviation program trains students in traditional steam-gauge and glass-cockpit aircraft in preparation for aviation careers. "Some of our graduates are flying glass-cockpit regional jets just months after graduation, while others will choose a path that keeps them in traditional cockpits," said Dan Hargrove, director of aviation. "The addition of glass-cockpit planes and sim will give them great options, no matter what career path they follow."
MARYLAND STATE POLICE LAUNCH AVIATION CADET PROGRAM
The Maryland State Police is looking for young men and women between the ages of 18 and 20 to join flight crews aboard its medical evacuation helicopters. Qualified applicants must meet a series of requirements, including possession of a high school diploma and a Maryland EMT-B certification before the date of hire. If appointed to the program, which pays $22,871 per year, cadets will join three-person flight crews consisting of a pilot, a trooper/paramedic, and a cadet. Crews perform medevac, search and rescue, law enforcement, and homeland security missions utilizing a fleet of Eurocopter AS365N Dauphin II helicopters.
| Inside AOPA |
AOPA EXPO PARADE OF PLANES LARGEST EVER
On Wednesday, November 8, AOPA will host the Parade of Planes in Palm Springs, California. More than 100 aircraft will taxi from Palm Springs International Airport through the streets of Palm Springs to the Palm Springs Convention Center. Then, for the next three days, they'll form the biggest aircraft display to ever grace an AOPA event. "We're going to have everything from light sport aircraft to the new very light jets," said AOPA President Phil Boyer. "And you'll be able to stand on the curb and see them pass by almost an arm's length away." AOPA Expo takes place from November 9 through 11. To register, or for more information, visit AOPA Online.
HAVE YOU UPDATED YOUR AOPA MEMBER PROFILE?
To make the most of your membership and allow us to serve you better, please visit AOPA Online and update your personal member profile.
| Training Products |
AIRCRAFT SPRUCE INTRODUCES HOLDING PATTERN AID
Holding procedures are an integral part of training for the instrument rating, and learning how to correctly enter and maintain a holding pattern is an important concept. Aircraft Spruce has introduced an aid designed to help you visualize a holding pattern and determine how to enter it correctly. The Holding Pattern Aid is a transparent gyro overlay that has a printout of teardrop and direct entry patterns. Place the arrow on the radial that you were instructed to hold, and the holding pattern is overlaid on your heading indicator. The package of four overlays includes two right-hand and two left-hand peel-and-stick entry diagrams that you can affix to the window when you're not using them. The package sells for $8.96 and can be ordered online or by calling 877/4-SPRUCE.
Note: Products listed have not been evaluated by ePilot editors unless otherwise noted. AOPA assumes no responsibility for products or services listed or for claims or actions by manufacturers or vendors.
| Final Exam |
| Question: What is a P-lead? |
Answer: A P-lead is a wire that grounds a magneto to prevent it from working. When performing a magneto check during your runup prior to takeoff, one of the items you are testing is the P-lead. A disconnected P-lead on either magneto means that the ignition cannot be shut off in flight or on the ground. No drop in rpm during your magneto check could be an indication of a broken P-lead. To learn more about P-leads, magnetos, and the entire ignition system, read "The Magneto Check: What are you looking for?" from AOPA Flight Training.
Got a question for our technical services staff? E-mail to [email protected] or call the Pilot Information Center, 800/872-2672. Don't forget the online archive of "Final Exam" questions and answers, searchable by keyword or topic.
| Picture Perfect |
|Looking for some really fabulous aviation photography? All the air-to-air photos and beautifully detailed ground images used by AOPA Pilot magazine over the years are yours at the click of a mouse button. Download your favorite images to use for wallpaper, send an e-postcard, or order prints online. For more details, see AOPA Online. |
| Weekend Weather |
|See the current weather on AOPA Online, provided by Meteorlogix. |
| ePilot Calendar |
| UPCOMING FLYING DESTINATIONS: |
Petersburg, Virginia. The Virginia Regional EAA Fly-In takes place September 30 and October 1 at Dinwiddie County (PTB). Event features forums, vendors, aircraft and kit companies, judging, pancake breakfasts, youth tent, and more. Contact Dee Whittington, 804/358-4333, or Judy Sparks, 703/590-9112, or visit the Web site.
Alva, Oklahoma. The Oklahoma Festival of Flight takes place September 30 and October 1 at Alva Regional (AVK). Free breakfast and discounted fuel for those who fly in, Saturday and Sunday airshows! Check Web site for pre-registration and prizes. Contact Tyson Tucker, 580/327-1565, or visit the Web site.
Dayton, Ohio. A Liaison Aircraft Fly-In takes place October 7 and 8 at the National Museum of the U.S. Air Force. Liaison aircraft will participate in a variety of activities, including flybys and static displays. These aircraft were used by all branches of the military from the 1930s to the 1970s and performed a variety of missions. Contact Sarah Greiner, 937/255-3286, or visit the Web site.
Jackson, Tennessee. Skyfest Tennessee takes place October 7 and 8 at McKellar-Sipes Regional (MKL). Featuring the Air Force A-10A Thunderbolt II demonstration team, Air Force Heritage Flight, aerobatics performers Skip Stewart and Greg Koontz, and more! Contact Kathie Cothern, 731/664-4233, or visit the Web site.
El Paso, Texas. The Amigo Airshow and Fly-In takes place October 6 through 9 at Biggs Army Airfield (BIF). For the first time a fly-in will be held in conjunction with the airshow. Performers include the Canadian Snowbirds, U.S. Army Golden Knight parachute team, Jim Weber, Shockwave Jet Truck, F-15 Strike Eagle demonstration team, F-117A demonstration, F-16 West Coast demonstration team, and much more! Contact JP Moseley, 915/562 6446, or visit the Web site.
To submit an event to the calendar or to search all events visit AOPA Online. For airport details, see AOPA's Airport Directory Online.
FLIGHT INSTRUCTOR REFRESHER CLINICS
The next AOPA Air Safety Foundation Flight Instructor Refresher Clinics are scheduled in San Jose, California, and Columbia, South Carolina, October 14 and 15. A clinic is also scheduled in Windsor, Connecticut, October 21 and 22. For a complete schedule, see AOPA Online. Can't make it in person? Sign up for the CFI Refresher Online.
AOPA AIR SAFETY FOUNDATION SAFETY SEMINARS
AOPA Air Safety Foundation Safety Seminars are scheduled in Colorado Springs, Colorado, Deerfield, Illinois, Richmond, Virginia, and Madison, Wisconsin, October 2; Northglenn, Colorado, Batavia, Illinois, Danville, Virginia, and Milwaukee, October 3; Greeley, Colorado, Rockford, Illinois, Hammond, Indiana, and Blacksburg, Virginia, October 4; and Peoria, Illinois, Manassas, Virginia, and Cheyenne, Wyoming, October 5. Topics vary-for details and a complete schedule, see AOPA Online.