A history of the North East Arnhem Land community of Gapuwiyak
The history of Gapuwiyak is told from a community perspective through photographs and oral histories that tell of the struggles and satisfaction in establishing Gapuwiyak community. Compiled by assistant teachers from Gapuwiyak school.
A group of Borroloola women produced this book to share their knowledge of Karrwa bush foods and the Karrwa language with others. The book is bilingual in Karrwa and English and includes an audio CD of plant names in Karrwa.
Aboriginal knowledge of flora and fauna from the Moyle River and Neninh areas, north Australia
Marri Ngarr & Magati Ke plants and animals is the largest ethnobiology ever published in the Northern Territory. It is the result of extensive work by over 40 people and contains the Marri Ngarr and Magati Ke traditional names and ecological knowledge for over 660 plants and animals. It also includes the scientific names, English common names and the Murrinhpatha names.
................................................................................................ Djerap is an amazing resource that has been a couple of years in the making. Djerap is a very significant publication because it is the first Noongar book to include the three contemporary Noongar dialects in one book.
Flora and fauna knowledge of the Wadjiginy, Emmiyangal and Mendheyangal people of the north-west Top End, Australia.
The results of a study of Wadjiginy, Emmiyangal and Mendheyangal planta nd animal knowledge conducted by biocultural knowldege custodians with scientific support are presented. Batjamalh, Emmi and Mendhe names and uses of plants and animals, scientif names and common English names for 213 plants and 390 animals are included.
The Gurindji fish poster provides cultural information in Gurindji and English about local fish. It was produced by Erika Charola and Felicity Meakins With the Murnkurrumurnkurru Ranger group at Kalkaringi as a part of the Central Land Council (CLC) ranger program.
Jirigi Jinda Ardangarri, Burnarri Anja, Diigu Aagala – Birds: tells us the names of birds in Ngarinyin, Worrorra and Wunambal Gaambara languages. The bird’s moiety, and the spiritual and seasonal knowledge associated with some birds gives an insight into the cultural importance of some birds for Ngarinyin, Worrorra and Wunambal Gaambara people.
Aboriginal biocultural knowledge from the Moyle river, plains and coast, north Australia
This book is a species rich and a culturally detailed account of the biocultural knowledge of the Marri Amu and Marri Tjevin people. It is a powerful testament to the knowledge of the senior authors, and a wonderful legacy for all future generations. The book
The Gurindji bird poster provides information in Gurindji and English about local birds which signal information, birds that can be dangerous, and birds which have favourite foods. It was produced by Felicity Meakins with the Murnkurrumurnkurru ranger group at Kalkaringi as a part of the Central Land Council (CLC) ranger program.