There are plenty of benefits of preschool - it can be a great
place for kids to interact with peers and to learn valuable life
lessons such as how to share, take turns, and follow rules.
Preschool can also prepare kids for kindergarten and beyond.
But going to preschool does come with its fair share of
emotions, for both the parent and the child. For a kid, entering a
new preschool environment filled with unfamiliar teachers and
children can cause both
and anticipation. For parents, there may be mixed emotions over
whether the child is ready for preschool. The more comfortable you
are about your decision to place your child in preschool and the
more familiar the setting can be made for your child, the fewer
problems you - and your little one - will encounter.
Easing Your Child's Fears
Spend time talking with your child about preschool even before
it starts. Before the first day, gradually introduce your child to
activities that often take place in a classroom. A child accustomed
to scribbling with paper and crayons at home, for example, will
find it comforting to discover the same crayons and paper in his or
her preschool classroom.
Visiting your child's first preschool classroom a few times
before school starts can also ease the entrance into unfamiliar
territory. This offers the opportunity to not only meet
your child's teacher
and ask about routines and common activities, but to then introduce
some of those routines and activities to the child at home. While
you're in the classroom, let your child explore and observe the
class in his or her own way and choose whether to interact with
other children. The idea is to familiarize your child with the
classroom and to let him or her get comfortable.
You can also use this time to ask your child's new teacher
how he or she handles the first tear-filled days. How will the
first week be structured to make the transition smooth for your
Although it's necessary for you to acknowledge the important
step your child is taking and to provide support, too much emphasis
on the change may just make your child's
worse. Young kids can pick up on their parents' nonverbal cues.
If you feel guilty or worried about leaving your child at school,
he or she will probably sense that. The more calm and assured you
are about your choice to send your child to preschool, the more
confident your child will be.
The First Day
When you enter the classroom on the first day, calmly
reintroduce the teacher to your child, then step back and let him
or her set the tone. This will allow the teacher to begin forming a
relationship with your child. Your endorsement of the teacher will
show your child that he or she will be happy and safe in the
If your child clings to you or refuses to participate in the
class, don't get upset - this may only upset your child more.
Follow the guidelines described by the teacher beforehand, and go
at your child's pace.
Suggestions for leaving your child at preschool are simple but
can be hard on a parent. Always say a loving good-bye to your
child, but once you do, you should leave promptly. Never sneak out.
As tempting as it may be, leaving without saying good-bye may make
your child feel abandoned, whereas a long farewell scene might only
serve to reinforce a child's sense that preschool is a bad
A consistent and predictable farewell ritual can make leaving
easier. Some parents wave from outside a certain classroom window
or make a funny good-bye face, whereas others read a short book
before parting. Transitional objects - a family picture, a special
doll, or a favorite blanket - can also help comfort your child.
Also, keep in mind that most children do well once their parents
Regardless of whether your child is eager or reluctant to go to
preschool, make sure that a school staff member is ready to help
with the transfer from your care to the classroom when you arrive
in the morning. Some kids may jump right in with their classmates,
whereas others might want a private cuddle and a story from a
caregiver before joining the group.
Many preschools begin with a daily ritual, such as circle time
(when teachers and children talk about what they did the day before
and the activities that are ahead for the day). Preschoolers tend
to respond to this kind of predictability and following a routine
will help ease the move from home to school.
Updated and reviewed by:
Mary L. Gavin, MD
Date reviewed: September 2007
Note: All information is for educational purposes only. For specific medical advice,
diagnoses, and treatment, consult your doctor.
© 1995-2009 The Nemours Foundation/KidsHealth. All rights reserved.