1. Thanksgiving traditions and history.
Thanksgiving is celebrated on the fourth Thursday in November. It started in 1621. Learn the truth about the colonists being saved by the Wampanoag. Compare the first “Thanksgiving” to the holiday we have today.
2. What are your traditions?
Each family has a tradition for the holiday. The steps in this badge program reflect ours. Document your own traditions so you can reflect on them. You might also want to add or adjust to what you normally do.
Each year, my family volunteers to deliver food for the Salvation Army to individuals and families in need. Look at your own community. What can you do to help others?
4. Macy’s Thanksgiving Day Parade.
Broadcast live from New York City, this parade is viewed by millions. You may also have a local parade to celebrate the holiday. Watch or participate in a Thanksgiving holiday parade.
Football has become part of the holiday as fans get to relax and enjoy one or more games. Providing blankets for those who tend to doze off during the game is a good call, especially if they’ve already eaten enough to pop. Check out the games and see which you are interested in watching.
6. The feast.
We’re Polish. We cook for more people than will ever be at our table. Of course, our kids like vastly different foods, so we each share in the responsibilities of providing dishes. To help alleviate the insane amount of leftovers, we now plan the meal at least three weeks in advance so everyone knows what they are bringing and can slowly purchase items they need to make without a huge expense the week before the holiday. Does one person in the family do all the cooking for your Thanksgiving? Do you share the responsibilities? Is this a tradition you might want to adjust?
7. Be thankful.
The holiday centers around being thankful. What are you thankful for? Share your thoughts with family and friends during the holiday.
8. Black Friday.
The biggest shopping day of the year is after Thanksgiving. Personally, I avoid it. My sister and mother spend hours pouring over the newspapers, flyers and anything online they’ve managed to collect. By the time they’re done, they have a shopping game plan. How does your family plan to start their Christmas shopping?
9. Other activities.
Board or card games, movies, walking, visiting . . . after the big meal, everyone is stuffed but not really motivated to do much. Find activities you enjoy that you normally don’t have time to participate in or those you can do as a group.
10. Looking for additional traditions?
Check out the supplement “Thanksgiving Traditions” to find more ideas that you can use / adapt with your own family.
- Additional ideas for traditions to add to your holiday celebration
Sites to Explore
To download a PDF of this badge program, click here: EP_Thanksgiving Traditions