Animals in danger in Greece Panagiotis Salomidis& Dimitris Moustakis General Information There are many animals like: Audouin's Gull, Cretan Frog, Blunt-Nosed Viper, Mediterranean Monk Seal, Saker Falcon, Salmo peristericus and Luschan's SalamanderLoggerheads begin their life as embryos in eggs laid by females on sandy beaches. The temperature of the sand determines the gender of the hatchlings in each nest. One of the seven existing species of sea turtles, the Caretta caretta lives for over 80 years and feeds mainly on marine plants and invertebrates, showing special preference for jellyfish.The hatchlings are black, five centimeters in length and weigh seventeen grams.
Attica Zoo Kitsos Orfanopoulos General Information
In the Attica Zoo Park are housed 1.100 birds and the 300 of these are different. This part of the Zoo is working since 2000, i.e. the year when it opened as Ornithological Park. The collection of birds of the Attica Zoo Park is the third largest in the world.
The Brown Bear Sofia Noti & Lucia Sklavounou General Information The brown bear is a large bear distributed across much of northern Eurasia and North America. It can weigh from 300 to 780 kilograms.The brown bear is the largest member of the bear family. In North America, two types are generally recognized, the coastal brown bear and the inland grizzly and the two types could broadly define all brown bear subspecies. Grizzlies weigh159 kg while a brown bear, living on a steady, nutritious diet of spawning salmon, from coastal Alaska and Russia can weigh 682 kg,with a total population of approximately 200,000.Brown bear claws are longer and less curved than those of black bears Brown bears have long, thick fur, with a moderately long mane at the back of the neck. In India, brown bears can be reddish with silver tips, while in China, brown bears are bicolored with a yellow-brown or whitish cape across the shoulders Behavior & Dietary Habits The brown bear is primarily nocturnal They are omnivores and feed on a variety of plant products, including berries, roots , and sprouts , and fungi , as well as meat products such as fish , insects , and small mammals.
Rare Bird Species Vagelis Flariotis Panagiotis Michalopoulos GeneraL Infromation Species of birds sympatric on islands frequently differ from each other in bill length by a larger amount than do their mainland relatives. Differences between similar species in body size, as indicated by wing length, are smaller than differences in bill length. This suggests that a major adaptation of island birds to potential competitors is a change in feeding habitats. An alternative explanation of the bill features of island birds, that they have been selected for a species recognition function, may be applicable in some instances. But since pairs of species are usually different in plumage features, as well as song and behavior, species recognition is probably achieved most frequently by these means and not by bill size or shape. Some data show that homocentric species differ in numbers by a greater amount on islands than on the mainland. Differences in numbers and bill characteristics support the suggestion that for sustained coexistence the requirement of mutual ecological independence of closely related species is often greater on islands than on a mainland. This results from the res
Endangered animals in the world Chara Makaroglou Ioanna Mitsika Katerina Machou Anastasia Machou General Information It is really only during the last 300 years that the rate of extinction has speeded up and this has coincided with the enormous increase in the world's human population during this time. By 1650 the world population was 500 million. Today it is over 6000 million (6 billion)! Today around 5 000 species of animals and over 25 000 species of plants are endangered. Some species are killed purely for human profit or enjoyment. Animals are killed for meat, clothing, oil, feathers, eggs, trophies and ornaments. Of course, humans have always hunted and killed wildlife but in the distant past it had been mainly for essential food and clothing. It is only relatively recently that animals and plants have been killed or collected in large.
The London Zoo John Mantoukas Kostas Katsikadakos General Information Opened in 1847, the London Zoo is the world's oldest scientific zoo. Today it houses over 720 different species of animal and is the only zoo in London where you can experience big animals such as gorillas and giraffes. Explore the “Into Africa” exhibit where you can come face to face with some of Africa's most unusual animals including zebras and hunting dogs, or try “Meet The Monkeys” an exciting walk-through experience. Other top exhibits include the Butterfly Paradise, where you can enjoy myriad species of butterfly as they fly around you. Make sure you don't miss feeding time at the Penguin enclosure and find out more about these popular creatures from the zoo's experienced keepers. New for 2011 is Penguin Beach, with a significantly larger pool complete with underwater viewing areas visitors will be able to close to the Penguins like never before. With over 12,000 animals to see and incredible animal displays taking place throughout the day (including feeds and keeper talks) no visitor leaves disappointed. Rainforest Life is London’s only living rainforest, where visitors can meet a variety of beautiful rainforest species including marmosets, tamarins and sloths. In the all-new ‘Night Life’ area you will discover the bats, rats and nocturnal wonders like the Slender Loris, armadillos and Potto the live in these murky conditions.