Galapagos Ecology is very important because it hosts a wide array of life unmatched anywhere else on the planet!
When you visit Galapagos you will have the opportunity to examine, explore, learn and above all, wonder.
This group of Islands had flat shorelines and mountainous interiors, but despite its equatorial location, the habitat of several of the Islands was desert-like.
Thirteen major Islands, eight smaller ones, and around forty islets now comprise the entire Archipelago known officially as Archipelago de Colon. Also known as the Galapagos Archipelago or simply the Galapagos Islands.
Ecuador has taken many steps to protect Galapagos ecology and attract economy-sustaining tourists. For tourists, Santa Cruz Island is home to most of the Archipelago's giant tortoises.
The famous tortoise, Lonesome George, resides at Santa Cruz and it's the sole survivor of the Santa Pinta Island sub-species.
The work at Fundacion Galapagos & Ecuador throughout 2008 has been truly a successful one amidst all current world issues and financial needs.
Since their mission focuses in generating sustainability in the Galapagos Islands, they have to permanently find the most efficient ways of continuing with their work.
In 2008 they reached the 3 million-pound mark at recycling solid waste, and while this gives them new challenges, they also took 48 students on Galapagos ecology expeditions throughout the Islands.
But other results are out there too, over the years they have enhanced their relationships with the local Municipal Government of Santa Cruz Island and their work has solidified their presence with the local community.
They are also working hand in hand with the highland farmers who provide them with fresh and great vegetable products. Naturally, they are sharing their ecology work consistently with wholesalers, clients and of course Galapagos visitors.
Click Here to See the Best Galapagos Cruises Available to Visit These Islands
We must remember the issue of human impact in the Galapagos Islands is a reality, and such impact is generated by both residents and visitors.
Although visitor numbers to the Islands have increased in the last two decades, and so that of the local population, everybody appreciates the intimate contact with Galapagos ecology its wildlife and the nature that Galapagos fosters.
These Islands are home to the only tropical penguin on Earth, as well as the only flightless cormorant.
Additionally, the only tropical albatross, Darwin's finches, giant tortoises and flamingos live here right next to prickly-pear cactus.
From any angle you look at these Islands, whether scientific or laymen, there's one thing in common: uniqueness!
From a more philosophical approach, it seems mankind has little to do with how life takes shape on these Islands. Nothing around here suits mankind in terms of survival.
Yet, humans visit these Islands, while others have decided to reside here. That alone brings another question: the issue of balance in Galapagos ecology.
How much do these Islands benefit from humans and how much do humans benefit from these Islands? Finding balance in such an isolated world is not easy.
The challenges faced by tour operators in order to provide good service, facilities, etc, next to the Galapagos Islands ecology that needs to be fully protected, is not an easy task.
This same dilemma was addressed in 1998 and the Galapagos & Ecuador Foundation was establish, it is a non-profit organization committed with Galapagos ecosystems, generating sustainability for the Islands environmental and social components.
Its mission started as, and continues to be, waste management of the Islands, particularly Santa Cruz Island where most inhabitants reside.
If we think of a sensible way of acting upon current realities of the Galapagos Islands, it is the presence of humans that need the most actions and awareness.
A clean and well-managed environment, can assure a better handling of the present situation, allowing future generations to enjoy the Galapagos Islands.
Visit the Galapagos Islands and follow the Galapagos National Park Rules in order to help maintain Galapagos ecology the best possible.
Ecuador & Galapagos (Insight Guides)
Birds, Mammals, and Reptiles of the Galapagos Islands
Galapagos: The Islands That Changed the World
Moon Spotlight Galapagos Islands
Galapagos: Islands Born of Fire