Arcadia Management Area
Arcadia covers a total land area of 13,817 acres and is the largest of the state’s management areas. The area is dominated by forest cover (11,576 acres) in mixed species deciduous forest (64 percent) and evergreen (36 percent), principally white pine. Fresh water wetlands include swamps, shrub wetlands, marshes and open water bodies.
The area attracts a wide variety of non-game species providing opportunity for wildlife observation of songbirds and raptors. Typical game birds include ruffed grouse, wild turkey, ring-necked pheasant and bobwhite. Both pheasants and bobwhite are stocked by the state during the hunting season. West Greenwich, Exeter, Hopkinton and Richmond, 401-539-2356, www.riparks.com
Kettle Pond Visitor Center
The National Wildlife Refuges of Rhode Island is devoted to the conservation and development of healthy habitat for flora and fauna at the NWRRI, and the provision of a safe, accessible ecological experience for visitors. The association promotes the benefits of the refuges and the National Wildlife Refuge System to the community through public education and interpretation and supports the refuge staff through projects designed to accomplish the goals of the Comprehensive Conservation Plan for all the refuges in Rhode Island. U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Kettle Pond Visitor Center, 50 Bend Rd., Charlestown, www.friendsnwr-ri.org
Trustom Pond Refuge
Trustom Pond Refuge encompasses more than 640 acres of varied wildlife habitat, including fields, shrub lands, woodlands, freshwater ponds and swamps. The 160-acre Trustom Pond, Rhode Island's only coastal pond free from shoreline development, is a highlight of the refuge.
Approximately 300 bird species seasonally inhabit the refuge along with 60 species of varied wildlife. The refuge remains one of the few East Coast nesting sites for the least tern and the endangered piping plover. The refuge’s beach is closed during the nesting season (April–August) to reduce human disturbance to the birds.
Different seasons bring different species to Trustom Pond Refuge throughout the year including the osprey, bobolink, monarch butterfly, hawk and many more. Contact the refuge for more information. 3679 D Old Post Rd., Charlestown, 401-364-9124, www.fws.gov/refuges/profiles/index.cfm?id=53545
The Norman Bird Sanctuary
Norman Bird Sanctuary’s land is known throughout New England for the beauty of its geographical features and for the diversity of its natural habitats. The sanctuary's 450 acres are maintained to support an abundance of species including pheasant, nesting songbirds, rabbit and fox. Four craggy ridges made of erosion-resistant rock break the sanctuary’s woodlands into isolated valleys. Beyond the ridges, the land slopes down to brackish marsh. The refuge also maintains a trail system for public use and offer programs in nature study. 583 Third Beach Rd., Middletown, 401-846-2577, www.normanbirdsanctuary.org
Sachuset Point serves as an important stopover and wintering area for migratory birds. The refuge consists of approximately 250 acres of various habitats from salt and freshwater marshes, to grasslands, sandy beaches and dunes. Three miles of trails wind their way through upland areas and along the rocky shore. The observation platforms offer visitors panoramic views of refuge lands and abundant wildlife. The refuge is a great place to watch wildlife with more than 200 bird species including harlequin ducks, scoters and eiders. Sachuset Point Dr., Middletown, 401-364-9124, www.fws.gov/refuges/
Block Island National Wildlife Refuge
Block Island is internationally recognized as one of the most important migratory bird habitats on the East Coast, attracting hundreds of "birders" to the island each year.
Refuge lands on Block Island are most notable for the large concentration (more than 70 species) of migratory songbirds. Located in the Atlantic flyway, many young, inexperienced songbirds "overfly" the mainland and stop over on Block Island before continuing their migration. The refuge also provides habitat for the endangered American burying beetle, supporting the only population of this species known east of the Mississippi River. Piping plover (a threatened species) appear on the island as do four other state species of concern. The refuge is also home to the largest gull colony in New England. Corn Neck Rd., Block Island, 401-364-9124, www.fws.gov/refuges/
The Audubon Environmental Education Center
The Audubon Environmental Education Center is a state-of-the art natural history museum and aquarium offering many natural wonders to explore. Look inside a 33-foot life-size right whale, discover life in a tide pool, observe Narragansett Bay's marine life, visit a rare blue lobster or even explore a cornfield at night. The center's interactive exhibits feature local habitats and offer many fun ways to enjoy nature.
Situated on the 28-acre McIntosh Wildlife Refuge, the Environmental Education Center has walking trails with a quarter-mile boardwalk that winds through fresh and saltwater marshes leading to a majestic view of Narragansett Bay. The refuge is along the East Bay Bike Path allowing bikers and walkers access to the refuge's natural beauty.
The center offers guided tours, nature walks, special family programs and much more throughout the year. The facility and trails are handicapped accessible. 1401 Hope St., Bristol, 401-245-7500, www.asri.org/environmental-education-center/environmental-education-center.html
Audubon Society of Rhode Island
An independent state environmental organization lets you walk, snowshoe or cross-country ski on a beautiful refuge, borrow a book, video or DVD, arrange a classroom program, learn about bird feeding, how animals survive the winter, vernal pools and more, host a child's birthday party, buy a nature-related gift, sign your child up for summer day camp or participate in a wide range of programs. 12 Sanderson Rd., Smithfield, 401-949-5454, www.asri.org
Powder Hill Sanctuary
120-acre refuge harbors ASRI's headquarters. The refuge has fine stands of pines, a pond and a brook. The headquarters has a library, gift shop, teacher's resource center and bird-feeding station. Read about the refuge's rich history. Sanderson Rd., Smithfield, 401-949-5454, www.asri.org
Roger William Park and Zoo
Nestled within 430 acres of the beautifully landscaped grounds of Roger Willliams Park is the award-winning Roger Williams Park Zoo with more than 100 species of animals. The zoo is home to rare and fascinating animals from around the world including elephants, giraffes, giant anteaters, a snow leopard, kangaroos, moon bears, gibbons and others all in naturalistic settings. Roger Williams Park Zoo is open every day except Thanksgiving, Christmas Eve and Christmas Day. Closes at 2 p.m. on the last Saturday of June. The zoo is the site of Hasbro's Our Big Backyard, a unique outdoor play area, and the acclaimed Jack-o-Lantern Spectacular, held annually on most evenings in October. 1000 Elmwood Avenue, Providence, 401-785-3510, www.rwpzoo.org
Rhode Island Rare Bird Alert
- Hotline: 401-949-3870
- Report: 401-949-7301
Great side trips for outdoor fun:
Enjoy tours and wine tastings at Newport Vineyards and Winery, Greenvale Vineyards and Carolyn's Sakonnet Vineyards, all located within a 20-minute drive of each other and close to many bird-watching sites in Newport County.
Stop by Rhode Island’s newest winery, Langworthy Farm Winery in Westerly, after a day of bird watching in South County.
Try the fine Pinot Noir at Diamond Hill Vineyards, where they grow 10 acres of the classic French grape.
Here are some tips on shopping along the trail.
Pick up a selection of field guides, educational toys, postcards and more at the Barn Owl Gift Shop. Norman Bird Sanctuary Visitor’s Center, 583 Third Beach Rd., Middletown, 401-846-2577, www.normanbirdsanctuary.org
Whether you’re in the East Bay or Blackstone Valley, the Audubon Society of Rhode Island's Nature Shops carry birding, nature and hiking guides, binoculars, bird seed, birdhouses, feeders and more. Powder Mill Ledges, 12 Sanderson Rd., Smithfield,
401-949-5454; Environmental Education Center, 1401 Hope St., Bristol, 401-245-7500
Did you know?
The Rhode Island Red Hen became the state’s official bird on May 3, 1954.
Owls cannot rotate their eyes, but they have very flexible necks that allow their heads to rotate up to 270 degrees.
More than 150 bird species have been recorded on Block Island alone, many of them passing through during their first fall and spring migrations.
Peregrine falcons can reach flight speeds of up to 200 mph.
ASRI’s Environmental Education Center, a state-of-the-art natural history museum and aquarium, offers family and school programs, guided tours, nature walks and more. The center's interactive exhibits feature local habitats and offers many fun ways to enjoy nature. 1401 Hope St., Bristol, www.asri.org
Hathaway Library at the Audubon Society of Rhode Island has a CD-ROM detailing many North American birds and other birding reference materials including natural history and environmental books, video and audio tapes, magazines, journals and a knowledgeable volunteer staff. 12 Saunderson Rd., Smithfield, www.asri.org
The Norman Bird Sanctuary presents numerous educational birding programs including nature day camps, family exhibits, guided bird walks, build-your-own birdhouse and even gentle yoga and tai chi classes. Their website has local bird information, bird and geology quizzes and much more. 583 Third Beach Rd., Middletown, 401-846-2577, www.normanbirdsanctuary.org