Technology is moving very fast as we can see change in products every year with new features or new products with new technologies. What did you do nowadays? Did you chat on phones? Did you use Wifi to access the internet free? Did you use small versions of computers like- laptops, ipads, tablets, notebooks etc.? If you did any of these things, then it means that you made use of latest technologies of the IT world. In some or the other way, we all make use of technologies whether be at home, office or any other place.
What is Web?
The web or the World Wide Web is basically a container of information from all over the world and linked together. The WWW was started by CERN (the European Laboratory for Particle Physics)which aimed at creating a system to handle various distributed resources which were important for research work.
The web is a combination of three main features that differentiate it from the other services being provided by the Internet:
The WWW is generally a distributed client-server service, in which a large number of clients using the web browser can get the information from all over the world through the server and the service provided is distributed over many locations or areas called the web sites.
Semantic Web or Web 3.0
Semantic Web-the word "Semantic" means "study of meaning". So the "Semantic Web" means "a Web with meaning". It is a little bit confusing but very interesting to know about that. Semantic Web, in simple words, is a web of data which helps the machines to understand the data or the information written over the world wide web. This Web 3.0 is providing new features to the users which are very helpful for them. Mostly, users find it difficult to search something by using the search engines but the Semantic web makes it easy and even interesting to search about anything.
Earlier versions of Web
Earlier, we used to have Web 1.0, in which there was only one producer and one consumer. It means that the web pages just give the information to the users but the users cannot change or search for anything which they requires at the moment. This happens in the case of Televisions in which the program is broadcasted on the screens and the user just see it and do not have the power to search for a particular program on it. This was the major disadvantage of Web 1.0 which becomes the downfall of this web.
Then comes the Web 2.0 which overcomes the problem of Web 1.0 in which there are a number of consumers and a number of producers. This means the Web 2.0 gives the information to the users and even the user can search for some topic and then the web will provide the information according to the user's choice. This is the web which we all are using nowadays. Web 1.0 was static in behavior whereas Web 2.0 was dynamic in behavior. In Web 2.0, the search engines use the keywords in the Web pages to show the results of the search query.
if we type the word " Semantic", then the search engine will provide the words related to it like-"Semantic Web", "Semantic meaning","Semantic space" etc.
Now Web 3.0 has come, which is also known as the Semantic Web. It basically provides a better efficient searching of the web using the semantics of the content in the pages. That means the search engines work not with the keywords we use to search, but with the meaning of the search query we gave. That is the main reason the Web 3.0 is known as the "Semantic Web" as the search is based on the meaning of the word or the keyword.
Let us suppose that the person is going to USA for the first time and he wants to know about the hotels and the tourist spots over there, if in the present web that is Web 2.0, the person writes "I am going to USA" then the Web 2.0 will produce the results based on the keywords "I", "am", "going", "to", "USA" which has no meaning for the person and then he will find using the other keywords and will keep on trying until he get the result but in Semantic Web the search engine understands the semantics, that is the meaning of the search query and give results based on the semantics of the query. I think that might be more useful for that person.
So Web 3.0 has many advantages which has attracted many users to itself. In the end, I would just like to conclude that Technology has affected society and its surroundings in a number of ways. In many societies, technology has helped develop more advanced economies (including today's global economy) and has allowed the rise of a leisure class. All these technologies have made our lives much more easier and even entertaining.
Very nice article explaining the Web 1.0, 2.0 and the Semantic Web. Good to know this new technology. I would like to know more about the graph search that Facebook is featuring nowadays, please share the bits of it if you could find it.