Not all salts are created equal. The differences between traditional table salts and Dead Sea salts are substantial.
Through industrial processing, table salt is extracted from various sources, bleached and stripped of all of the natural elements until all that remains is sodium and chloride. The new structure is non-bioavailable, making it difficult for the body to absorb even those two elements. The table salt is further processed with the additional of an anti-caking agent to prevent the salt from sticking to one another and absorbing moisture. The body has to work very hard to break down this salt into usable minerals for the body. We end up using more resources than we gain, resulting in a net loss for the body and a negative impact on our health. The table salt causes the body to retain water. The increased volume raises blood pressure that in turn adds stress on the brain, kidneys, arteries, and heart.
Dead Sea salt has a vastly different composition. About 15% of Dead Sea Salt is sodium chloride, the rest is a blend of magnesium, potassium, sulfur, bromide, iodine, zinc, calcium, and a variety of other minerals. The salt is extracted by moving some of the water from the sea to a smaller pool where it naturally evaporates leaving only the salt. It is then hand harvested and sent around the world to be added to various therapeutic hair and skin care products. Unlike the table salt, the absorption of Dead Sea salt has many positive effects on the body. The magnesium is important for cell metabolism and promotes healing of the skin. Bromide calms the nerves to provide soothing benefits for irritated skin. Sulfur is detoxifying. Potassium helps to regulate water levels in the body. Calcium is a great cleanser and helps to strengthen cell membranes. Zinc is another prominent mineral that protects the skin from the sun and is also known for its immune boosting benefits.
Research has shown that regular soaking in baths with the Dead Sea salts has a positive effect on many skin conditions such as acne, eczema, psoriasis, scabies, and dermatitis, with no negative effects reported. The Dead Sea salts have also been reported to reduce the appearance of cellulite, moisturize skin, reduce the pain and symptoms of Rheumatoid Arthritis, decrease stress related issues, promote hair growth and increase circulation, and works as a great detoxifying agent.