A 2 by 3 rectangle contains 8 squares and a 3 by 4 rectangle contains 20 squares. What size rectangle(s) contain(s) exactly 100 squares? Can you find them all?
Have a go at creating these images based on circles. What do you notice about the areas of the different sections?
Different combinations of the weights available allow you to make different totals. Which totals can you make?
Can you maximise the area available to a grazing goat?
Is it always possible to combine two paints made up in the ratios 1:x and 1:y and turn them into paint made up in the ratio a:b ? Can you find an efficent way of doing this?
Which has the greatest area, a circle or a square inscribed in an isosceles, right angle triangle?
Can you find an efficient method to work out how many handshakes there would be if hundreds of people met?
A decorator can buy pink paint from two manufacturers. What is the least number he would need of each type in order to produce different shades of pink.
Four bags contain a large number of 1s, 3s, 5s and 7s. Pick any ten numbers from the bags above so that their total is 37.
Many numbers can be expressed as the sum of two or more consecutive integers. For example, 15=7+8 and 10=1+2+3+4. Can you say which numbers can be expressed in this way?
A square of area 40 square cms is inscribed in a semicircle. Find the area of the square that could be inscribed in a circle of the same radius.
An investigation involving adding and subtracting sets of consecutive numbers. Lots to find out, lots to explore.
On the graph there are 28 marked points. These points all mark the vertices (corners) of eight hidden squares. Can you find the eight hidden squares?
Can you describe this route to infinity? Where will the arrows take you next?
A spider is sitting in the middle of one of the smallest walls in a room and a fly is resting beside the window. What is the shortest distance the spider would have to crawl to catch the fly?
If you move the tiles around, can you make squares with different coloured edges?
Can you find rectangles where the value of the area is the same as the value of the perimeter?
How many winning lines can you make in a three-dimensional version of noughts and crosses?
What size square corners should be cut from a square piece of paper to make a box with the largest possible volume?
Square numbers can be represented as the sum of consecutive odd numbers. What is the sum of 1 + 3 + ..... + 149 + 151 + 153?
If you have only 40 metres of fencing available, what is the maximum area of land you can fence off?
Imagine a large cube made from small red cubes being dropped into a pot of yellow paint. How many of the small cubes will have yellow paint on their faces?
Do you notice anything about the solutions when you add and/or subtract consecutive negative numbers?
A napkin is folded so that a corner coincides with the midpoint of an opposite edge . Investigate the three triangles formed .
Explore when it is possible to construct a circle which just touches all four sides of a quadrilateral.
Can you find the area of a parallelogram defined by two vectors?
Investigate how you can work out what day of the week your birthday will be on next year, and the year after...
If the hypotenuse (base) length is 100cm and if an extra line splits the base into 36cm and 64cm parts, what were the side lengths for the original right-angled triangle?
What is the same and what is different about these circle questions? What connections can you make?
Can you work out the dimensions of the three cubes?
Imagine you have a large supply of 3kg and 8kg weights. How many of each weight would you need for the average (mean) of the weights to be 6kg? What other averages could you have?
This shape comprises four semi-circles. What is the relationship between the area of the shaded region and the area of the circle on AB as diameter?
Start with two numbers and generate a sequence where the next number is the mean of the last two numbers...
What is the greatest volume you can get for a rectangular (cuboid) parcel if the maximum combined length and girth are 2 metres?
An aluminium can contains 330 ml of cola. If the can's diameter is 6 cm what is the can's height?
Two motorboats travelling up and down a lake at constant speeds leave opposite ends A and B at the same instant, passing each other, for the first time 600 metres from A, and on their return, 400. . . .
Explore the effect of reflecting in two parallel mirror lines.
A game for 2 or more people, based on the traditional card game Rummy. Players aim to make two `tricks', where each trick has to consist of a picture of a shape, a name that describes that shape, and. . . .
Five children went into the sweet shop after school. There were choco bars, chews, mini eggs and lollypops, all costing under 50p. Suggest a way in which Nathan could spend all his money.
How many different symmetrical shapes can you make by shading triangles or squares?
Explore the effect of combining enlargements.
The area of a square inscribed in a circle with a unit radius is, satisfyingly, 2. What is the area of a regular hexagon inscribed in a circle with a unit radius?
There are four children in a family, two girls, Kate and Sally, and two boys, Tom and Ben. How old are the children?
Can you find six numbers to go in the Daisy from which you can make all the numbers from 1 to a number bigger than 25?
A country has decided to have just two different coins, 3z and 5z coins. Which totals can be made? Is there a largest total that cannot be made? How do you know?
Sissa cleverly asked the King for a reward that sounded quite modest but turned out to be rather large...
My two digit number is special because adding the sum of its digits to the product of its digits gives me my original number. What could my number be?
If it takes four men one day to build a wall, how long does it take 60,000 men to build a similar wall?
How many solutions can you find to this sum? Each of the different letters stands for a different number.
Can all unit fractions be written as the sum of two unit fractions?