Texturing 101: How to Create a Bake in Blender
Whether it's Sims 3 or Sims 4, creating a bake is an essential part of the object creation process. The bake uses your UV map information to approximate real-world shadows onto your mesh. This texture will give depth and realism to your mesh in Sims 3 or to your texture in Sims 4. Blender is a program that can easily do this for you once you figure out a few basics.
What this tutorial will show you:
How to import your mesh into Blender.
How to get Blender to use your UV map data to create a bake (multiplier in Sims 3).
What you will need:
**If you are opening a Blender mesh exported from Sims4Studio, you can skip to step 6. The screen will already be split for you. (HT Orangemittens)
2. Hover your mouse cursor over the bottom of the grey, horizontal menu bar at the top of the screen until it turns into an up/down arrow - right click- and choose "split area."
It will show up in both halves of the screen at this point.
Now your UV map will show up on a black background.
a. On the large vertical menu on the right of the screen, click on the small icon that looks like a globe.
b. You will see boxes for "Ambient Occlusion" "Environment Lighting" and "Indirect Lighting" that are all set at 1.00. Check each of those boxes and change the values to:
Ambient Occlusion - 1.75
Environment Lighting - .75
Indirect Lighting - 1.75
c. You will also see a menu box for "Gather" with an oval button for "Samples." The default is set to 5. You need to up this as much as your computer will tolerate for best results. The higher the value, the more time it will take to create the bake. I usually use 12 as the starting sample number, but you can go higher if you want.
all the way down in the new menu that appears. The "Bake" portion of the menu is at the bottom,
and you will have to open it by clicking on the triangle next to the word Bake.
21. For Sims 3, you will need to open your file in your video editing program and then save it as .dds with DXT5 Interpolated Alpha selected. Then import it into your object creation program as the multiplier texture.
For Sims 4, you can use the bake as the base for your recolor textures. I explain how to do this in my
Using a Bake for Texturing in Sims 4 tutorial.