Moving on with how to draw oceans we will be learning how to draw a dolphin with the help of this step by step drawing tutorial (and a free guided drawing printable).
As with our previous tutorials, this one is super simple so it’s perfect for kids and beginners. You’ll have a cute looking dolphin drawn in no time!
*this post contains affiliate links*
We love that you love our how to draw tutorials for kids! With temperatures here being summer like, we decided to make a series of ocean animal drawing tutorials (did you check out our
Next in line is the dolphin, the silly mammal of the ocean. And a super smart one too. You might think this animal is tricky to draw, but you’ll soon see it’s easy peasy.
Once your kids or you master this “standard pose” (at least judging by all the dolphin pendants I see around) you will be drawing this animal in all kind of different poses too. Or add see waves and sun to the background to make your drawing even cooler.
Ready to give it a try? I just know you’ll make a wonderful drawing!
Be sure to also grab our printable guided drawing template.
Learn How to Draw a Dolphin (Jumping out of Water Pose) Tutorial and Printable
As this is one of the easiest dolphin drawing tutorials ever it is perfect to use in preschool and kindergarten. Print copies of our printable drawing template with guided drawing and have the kids build their drawing confidence.
What you need:
- our printable template (you can grab it at the end of this drawing tutorial)
- sheet of paper
- black marker (or pencil, crayon,…)
Optional: coloring medium to color your finished creations.
Watch the Video Tutorial
Or Follow These Step by Step Drawing Instructions
You can find our directed drawing printable template at the end of this drawing tutorial.
The first step is actually the trickiest, it will all become really easy moving forward. We’ll start by drawing a rostum. Start at the top, making sort of a “laying down” U shape and stretching the line a bit further on the bottom end.
Now to make the curve for the back. Start on the right and finish one the left.
Draw a pectoral fin.
Draw the belly.
Now to draw all other fins, another pectoral fin then dorsal fin. Also draw the tail.
Last but not least draw a mouth (we drew a nice smile on our little dolphin) and an eye.
You’ve just learned how to draw a dolphin! See it wasn’t all that hard. Now you can add in some waves in the background to make the dolphin look like he or she is jumping out of water (some water drops and splash will look good too). You can also draw a sun in the background.
Get the How to Draw a Fish step by step Printable PDF Template Here
Don’t see the form to get the template? Try refreshing the page.
Click to open and save here –>
If the file did not open hover your mouse over the link, right click and choose Save as to save the file to your computer.