For years now, we've been slathering on the sunscreen. What's in those containers and are they really good for you?
First off, let's look at skin cancer. Actually, skin cancers have always existed; however, there has been an increase in the lifetime risk of developing invasive melanoma - in 1935, the risk was 1 in 500; it is now 1 in 55. Processed, acidic food is a major contributor as is the level of pollutants and toxins in today's world.
INGREDIENTS. Active ingredients in sunscreens come in two forms, mineral and chemical filters. Each uses a different mechanism for protecting skin and maintaining stability in sunlight. The most common sunscreens on the market contain chemical filters. These products typically include a combination of two to six of the following active ingredients: oxybenzone, avobenzone, octisalate, octocrylene, homosalate and octinoxate. Mineral sunscreens use zinc oxide and/or titanium dioxide. A handful of products combine zinc oxide with chemical filters. Unfortunately, most of the chemical filters are carcinogens and can cause cancer! Those toxic ingredients are also poisoning our oceans, lakes, and rivers.
THERE'S YOUR SIGN! Chemical filter sunscreens ruin bikinis. They destroy the elastic, fade the colors, and even oxidize the metal clasps. Imagine what they're doing to your skin...
SKIN is the largest organ of the body which detoxifies just like your liver, kidneys, and lymph system. When sunscreen is applied, we are basically basting in a chemical bath as the sun bakes those carcinogens deep into the tissue.
WHAT'S THE SOLUTION? We need sunshine for vitamin D absorption. Get some sun (20 minutes) before 9 a.m. or after 4 p.m. Use organic, reef-safe, mineral based sunscreen to protect skin. A great local brand is LittleHandsHawaii.com Consider doing some research and making your own - it's Google-able!
FUN FACT: Coconut oil has an SPF of 4, which blocks 75% of UV radiation. 75% protection is about 45 minutes of sun exposure.
Stay healthy and be happy - mahalo for being a Pualani Hawai'i Mermaid!