Study title and authors:
Considerations about dietary fat restrictions for children.
Lifshitz F, Tarim O.
Maimonides Medical Center, Brooklyn, NY, USA.
This paper can be accessed at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8642428
The paper examined the evidence regarding the appropriateness of low fat diets for children.
The review found:
(e) Low fat diets may lower total cholesterol levels. However low total cholesterol levels may be associated with increased mortality, including deaths due to accidents, which is most important in children.
(f) Problems of associated psychological consequences, family conflicts and cost should not be ignored while implementing a low fat diet.
Lifshitz notes many qualities of dietary fat and that it is an essential component of a well-balanced diet:
(i) In addition to being an efficient energy source, fat, compared with other macronutrients, has the advantage of carrying more energy in a smaller volume. This is of vital importance for children who have limited intake capacity but extraordinary energy needs.
(ii) Fat and cholesterol constitute an essential structural element of the cellular membranes.
(iii) Essential fats are vital for the central nervous system including visual development and intelligence.
(iv) High blood pressure and clogged arteries may be among the consequences of insufficient essential fats. Therefore, low fat diets that could lead to essential fat deficiencies could be detrimental rather than beneficial.
(v) Fat is also necessary as a vehicle to carry the fatsoluble vitamins (A,D,E,K). Numerous studies have shown that low fat diets lead to vitamin and mineral deficiencies either because they are not consumed in adequate amounts in restricted diets or their absorption is decreased when fat intake is inadequate.
(vi) Low cholesterol diets may lead to hormonal problems as all adrenocortical hormones (such as aldosterone and cortisol) are synthesized from cholesterol.
To conclude: Low fat diets may be detrimental to childrens health.
More information on this subject: Books : Scientific Studies : Other Websites : Videos : Food Mall
Recipe of the day
Steak and eggs
•1 good quality large steak (filet, surloin, ribeye, …);
•2-3 tbsp of your favorite cooking fat (tallow, butter or ghee are excellent here);
|Food Mall: Rib Eye Steak|
•Salt and pepper to taste;
1.Note: Let stand your steak for about 40 minutes at room temperature for a perfectly cooked and juicy result.
2.Heat a pan over medium-high heat and add 2 tbsp of your chosen cooking fat.
3.Season your steak with sea salt and freshly ground black pepper and add to the hot pan.
4.Cook the steak to your likings. About 3 minutes of each side will usually give you a nice and medium rare steak.
5.Remove the steak from the pan, set aside and lower the temperature to medium-low. Add the rest of the cooking fat.
6.Crack open the eggs in the hot pan, cover, season to taste with some paprika, salt and pepper and cook until the whites are just set.
7.Serve the steak with the eggs either on top or on the side and make sure to dip the juicy hot meat in the runny yolk for complete satisfaction.
|Steak and Eggs|