Low Carbon Lifestyles
A brief guide to cost-effective climate friendly choices we can make in the use of electrical appliances, transport, paper, water, etc.
Mother Earth is the only planet we have. Global warming can lead to irreversible changes in the delicate balance that exists in the planet’s climate and life systems. It is a growing crisis with large scale implications on mortality, health, economics and security.
The importance of action at all levels to tackle this problem cannot be overemphasized. All of us will be affected, irrespective of economic status or nationality and it is up to each one of us to apply our creative knowledge to move towards the common goal and also save money. We have still not reached a point of no return and the most dangerous climate changes can still be avoided. It is action on the ground, which makes all the difference in achieving our goals ! In this each one of us has a role to play as a symbol of a responsible society.
This ‘Training toolkit on low carbon lifestyles’ is a set of materials in an easy to understand language, based on up to date science and policy inputs. It aims to arm a trainer with facts and figures on how small changes in everyday actions can help reduce an individual’s contribution to greenhouse gas emissions in the atmosphere and also save money. It focuses on climate friendly choices we all can make in the use of electrical appliances, transport, paper, water, etc. All data is relevant to the Indian context and the choices presented are practical and easy to adopt. The toolkit consists of:
1. A trainer's guide with practical climate friendly actions that can be adopted in our daily life and a quantitative estimation of reduction of greenhouse gas emissions by individual actions
2. An excel sheet with necessary calculations, which can be used by trainers to quantify energy and cost savings, and carbon dioxide emissions reduction
3. A powerpoint presentation on climate change basics, how we are responsible, and the impacts on India
Our vision is to create a prosperous, but not a wasteful society, and an economy that is self sustaining. Individual efforts may seem like drops in the ocean. However, the impacts from the positive changes from these efforts in lifestyles and consumption patterns by millions of people will make significant contributions towards a more climate friendly Mother Earth. Let us do our bit now for our city, country and our environment. As Mahatma Gandhi once said, “Whatever you do may seem insignificant to you, but it is most important you do it.”