SHE-LOGY: Women in History
Celebrate women who made history, but also women who pushed for including more women in history.
ELIZABETH I OF ENGLAND. Queen of England who accomplished many things during her reign (1558-1603). The Elizabethan era is often portrayed as the Golden Age in English history. She wasn’t just a monarch, she was a leader who had so many successes under her
There are countless sources of information about her from history books to plays to films. I consider her the most recognized, most powerful woman in world history. I call her to mind whenever I was given a tough leadership role. She was fearless.
“I know I have the body of a weak and feeble woman,
but I have the heart and stomach of a king.”
MARGARET THATCHER. Margaret Hilda (née Roberts). First woman prime minister in Europe. Still the only woman prime minister of the United Kingdom.
I grew up to the influence of Margaret Thatcher, or my impression of her. I had this magazine I kept in grade school. The cover photo was of a group of men including President Reagan and the Japanese PM. And what stood out to me and made a lasting image in my mind –the only woman, who I found out was British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher. It was likely a photo at a G7 Summit. She made me dream of becoming President. Not supermodel, not famous celebrity, but world leader! I felt lucky to know of a woman with that caliber growing up.
“If you want something said, ask a man.
If you want something done, ask a woman.”
GERDA LERNER. Considered a godmother of women’s history. She was a historian, author and teacher.
Lerner was one of the founders of the field of women’s history, and was a former president of the Organization of American Historians. She played a key role in the development of women’s history curricula. She taught what is considered to be the first women’s history course in the world at the New School for Social Research in 1963. [Source: Wikipedia]
“Men develop ideas and systems of explanation by absorbing past knowledge and critiquing and superseding it.
Women, ignorant of their own history [do] not know what women before them had thought and taught.
So generation after generation, they [struggle] for insights others had already had before them, [resulting in] the constant inventing of the wheel.”
Gerda may not be as world-renowned as the other two women. But she represents the women who pushed to have more women included and recognized in world history texts. And in my personal experience, growing up learning about strong female role models before me, had been profoundly empowering. The women in my history books have my eternal thanks for all the leadership awards I have received. It is my wish that my daughter grows up to her own set of powerful female role models.
Allow me to highlight: National Women’s History Project– Writing Women Back into History. Check it out!
SHE-LOGY is a blog project open to everyone who is interested to celebrate women this whole month of March. If you’re reading this, I extend that invitation to you to contribute post/s about the women you’d like to honor. You can email me at firstname.lastname@example.org. Thank you for reading this.