On this page:
Definition of the noun actitis
What does actitis mean as a name of something?
noun - plural: -
- a genus of Scolopacidae
- lexical domain: Animals - nouns denoting animals
- synonym of Actitis: genus Actitis
- more generic term: bird genus = a genus of birds
- member of: family Scolopacidae / Scolopacidae = sandpiper family: sandpipers; woodcocks; snipes; tattlers; curlews; godwits
Phrases with Actitis
Phrases starting with the word Actitis:
Phrases ending with the word Actitis:
Other phrases containing the word Actitis:
Printed dictionaries and other books with definitions for Actitis
Click on a title to look inside that book (if available):
by James A. Jobling
From genus Actitis Illiger, 1811, sandpiper; Gr. oura tail. Actinodura Gr . aktis, aktinos brightness, splendour; odouros watcher, guardian (cf. “The generic name is derived from the Greek noun actis meaning a ray (feminine), which is ...
(Actitis pars., III.) ; Recurvirostra, Linn.
by Brent Douglas Galloway
['Actitis macularia'], literally (probably) /' characteristically (goes) weeth'/, ASM ['the call of the spotted sandpiper is described ...
by Maurice Burton, Robert Burton
Its North American counterpart is the similar, but slightly smaller, spotted sandpiper, Actitis macularia. The curlew sandpiper, Calidris ferruginea, nests on the ground in ...
by Newton Bateman, Paul Selby, Howard F. Dyson
Spotted sandpiper (Actitis macularia), commonly called Tip-up or River Snipe. Long-billed curlew (Numenius longirostis). American coot (Fulica americana), or mud ben. Florida gallinule (Gallinula galeata). Virginia rail (Rallus virginianus).
by Daniel Coit Gilman, Frank Moore Colby, Harry Thurston Peck
The commonest and best known species of this group in the Eastern United States is the spotted sandpiper or 'tip-up' (Actitis macularia). It is over seven inches long, green-gray above and white below, marked and spotted with black. It is not ...
Mongolian English Dictionary (2013)
nebularia, Хайргын ~ Common Sandpiper,Actitis hypoleucos, Шугуйн ~ Wood Sandpiper, T. gloreolo ...
The Birdwatcher's Dictionary (2010)
by Peter Weaver
glareola Terek Sandpiper Xenus cinereus Common Sandpiper Actitis hypoleucos Spotted Sandpiper A. macularia Turnstone Arenaria interpret Wilson's Phalarope Phalaropus tricolor Red-necked Phalarope P.
by D. S. Mills, Jeremy N. Marchant-Forde
Sandpiper, spotted [Actitis macularia] 148 Seahorse [Hippocampus spp.] ...
Wintu Dictionary (1985)
by Harvey Pitkin
Actitis macularia family Motacilladae, Anthus rubescens yudekyudeka to sneak around on tiptoe (yuk) enemy, Indians, lurk, Wintu - English 763.
by Edna MacLean
iksriktaayuuq spotted sandpiper (Actitis macularia), ...
by Robert Hendrickson
peep A nickname for any sandpiper (Actitis macu- laria), especially the least sandpiper; after the sound this shore bird makes. peep of day Dawn. “'Home, or we'll set you in ...
Water Birds, Game Birds and Birds of Prey by Chester Albert Reed
Actitis nlaculayia. 7% in. Olive-gray above and white below, adultsin summer having the breast and sides boldly spotted with blackish. Almost constantly teeters its body when standing. Note.—A clear peet-weet. Nest.—Of grass on the ground.
Online dictionaries and encyclopedias with entries for Actitis
Click on a label to prioritize search results according to that topic:
Photos about Actitis
Click on an item to view that photo:
Photo credit: Ale Mercado Canales
If you need related images for an article or a report, you can download stock photos:
Scrabble value of A1C3T1I1T1I1S1
The value of this 7-letter word is 9 points, but it's not an accepted word in the Official Scrabble Players Dictionary.
Anagrams of ACTITIS
What do you get if you rearrange the letters?
See also the blanagrams of Actitis!
Share this page
Go to the thesaurus of Actitis to find many related words and phrases!