Learning numbers and counting could be really fun. There are so many things that we can count with kids no matter where we go. But how to count with a preschool or kindergarten kids? How to make the counting activities different and interesting? Today’s app Numbers and Counting with Teacher Tilly will show you 5 different ways to learn numbers.
Numbers and Counting is a math app for kids age 2 to 6, helping them learn and practice numbers and counting. There are 5 activities in the app. Before each activity, kids can decide the range of numbers they want to learn or practice: 1 to 5, 1 to 10, 11 to 15, or 1 to 20.
In the first game, kids are asked to identify the number on one of 5 the buildings, like “what number is the candy shop?” Kids will pick the corresponding number from 5 available choices at the bottom of the screen.
The 2nd game is a little advanced than the first one, asking kids to identify the building with a given number without any given choices.
The 3rd game requires knowledge of the order of the numbers. One of the building’s number is missing, kids are asked to pick the number for the building that follows the sequence of the numbers of all the buildings.
The 4th game is about counting. Kids are asked to count the number of fruits on the shelf, and pick the correct number at the bottom of screen, so kids practice counting as well as recognizing written numbers.
The last game is to practice written number reorganization. Kids are asked to tap all the gumballs with a given number, like “Can you touch all the gumballs with the number 8”?
I love this fun number activities. You can also easily replicate these games with off screen activities. For example, you can make circle shaped cards and put random numbers on them, and ask kids to pick out the cards with certain numbers.
Numbers and Counting is available for iPhone, iPod and iPad. It is $2.99 on App Store.
If you would like to check it out or purchase it, please use the App Store link provided below. The cost is the same to you, but iGameMom gets a small percentage. Thanks for your support! Note: The link works for all countries.