If MSG isn't harmful,
why is it hidden?
(table of contents)
I. Are you sensitive to MSG?
>Understanding brain damage and endocrine disorders caused by MSG
Brain>Recognizing and/or diagnosing MSG adverse reactions
Retinal degenerationAn abstract of the Ohguro et al. study wherein researchers found that ingestion of monosodium glutamate daily for three months caused damage to the retinas of laboratory animals.Neuroendocrine disorders
A review of the Ohguro et al. study by NewScientist
A look at the glutamate industry's immediate response (damage control) along with our evaluation of it.ObesityAddiction, stroke, epilepsy, degenerative disorders, brain trauma, neuropathic pain, schizophrenia, anxiety, and depression -- all associated with the "glutamate cascade."
Learning and memory disorders
Pinpointing MSG as a reaction trigger>Understanding the unknowns of neurodegenerative disease
A list of reactions that might be MSG-induced adverse reactions
A list of ingredient names used to hide MSG in food
Letters from MSG-sensitive friends which may be helpful in recognizing MSG-induced adverse reactions.
>Understanding "slow neurotoxins"
II. Where is MSG hidden?
>>MSG is hidden in a great number of ingredients used in processed food:
English names of ingredients known to contain and/or produce MSG during manufacture.
E-numbers are numerical designations which have been developed within the European Community (EC) for declaration of "foodstuff additives." The E-numbers list does not include all of the ingredients that contain MSG.>>MSG is being sprayed on growing fruits, nuts, grains, and vegetables -- not all, just some.
>>MSG can be hidden in:
Infant formula>>MSG is hidden in:
Vaccines--including vaccines that are injected into children. Like so many other live virus vaccines, the new (2003) nasal spray flu vaccine called FluMist contains MSG in the form of monosodium glutamate --
Protein drinks often recommended for seniors
Protein bars and protein powders
Enteral feeding products (tube feeding products)
Fertilizers, pesticides, fungicides, and plant growth enhancers
Protein powders sold in health food stores
Food that is labeled "organic"
Agricultural products that can be sprayed on wine grapes, including California wine grapes
Most food with labels that say "No Added MSG," "No MSG Added," and "No MSG"III. What is MSG? How is it manufactured? How do we know it causes brain damage and neuroendocrine disorders? How do we know it causes unwanted observable reactions?
Food that is falsely advertised as containing no MSG
Food whose manufacturers falsely claim, in response to questions, that their products contain no MSG
Food served in restaurateurs that falsely claim that the food they serve contains no MSG
>>>What Is MSG? It's a product manufactured in food and/or chemical plants.
Truly natural glutamic acid does not contain contaminants. Processed free glutamic acid (MSG) does.>>>How is MSG manufactured? See: How is MSG manufactured?
It appears that genetically engineered bacteria are being used to make some forms of MSG.
In September 2000, the Indonesian Ulemas Council uncovered the fact that pork enzymes were being used in the production of Ajinomoto's monosodium glutamate.
>>>How do we know that MSG causes brain damage and neuroendocrine disorders? See: How do we know that MSG causes brain damage and neuroendocrine disorders?
Research (sound science) says that use of MSG places every human at risk: Animal studies.>>>How do we know that MSG causes adverse reactions?How many people are sensitive to MSG? See: How do we know that MSG causes adverse reactions?
Addiction, stroke, epilepsy, degenerative disorders, brain trauma, neuropathic pain, schizophrenia, anxiety, and depression -- all associated with the "glutamate cascade."
Behavior, memory, and learning disorders
IV. History of use of MSG
V. Regulatory history
Review of Current Regulations for Labeling MSGVI. Why isn't MSG labeled? (Could it possibly be power, politics, and greed?)
FDA Commissioner Refuses to Name Ingredients that Contain MSG
The FDA's Next Move
Hidden Sources of MSG
Some European countries have limits on the amounts of MSG that can be used in processed foods. Restrictions are largely related to levels of carcinogenic mono and dichloro propanols found in MSG produced through acid hydrolysis.
Australia/New Zealand proposed declaring "monosodium glutamate" in restaurant food
These are the people who propagate the fiction that MSG is "safe"VII. Dealing with MSG sensitivity. What's an MSG-sensitive person to do?
This is how the "MSG is safe" game is played
These are the politics essential to promoting the unregulated use of MSG
The glutamate industry has been able to influence the American public
These are the "glutes" basic lies
These are some of the things the "glutes" don't want any of us to know
VIII. Effecting change one step at a time
>Anything you do to help others understand the toxic effects of processed free glutamic acid (MSG) and where it is hidden in pharmaceuticals, cosmetics, food, dietary supplements, and the environment will have value.
>Let your thoughts about use and abuse of MSG be heard.
>About the Truth in Labeling Campaign
The Truth in Labeling Campaign -- a totally volunteer organization>Answers to a few of the questions that people have asked
The Truth in Labeling Campaign has protested the U.S. government's unwarranted approval of spraying MSG on crops
The Formal Objection of the Truth in Labeling Campaign was filed on August 16, 2001 with the EPA.
The Truth in Labeling Campaign has responded to the proposed Australia/New Zealand declaration of monosodium glutamate in restaurant food
The Truth in Labeling Campaign has protested use of MSG in agricultural products in the state of California.
Thinking of suing?IX. For additional information
Just the facts: things the glutes don't want you to know
The glutamate industry's basic lies
Other Web sites with information about MSG and aspartame
Government resources on the Internet
KEEP THIS WEB PAGE ONLINE with YOUR TAX-DEDUCTIBLE CONTRIBUTION To the TRUTH IN LABELING CAMPAIGN
Truth in Labeling Campaign, 850 DeWitt Place, Suite 20B, Chicago, IL 60611
firstname.lastname@example.org 858/481-9333 http://www.truthinlabeling.org
This page was last updated on June 6, 2005
IF MSG ISN'T HARMFUL, WHY IS IT HIDDEN?