"This map shows the position of the coastline during the height of the last ice age about 18,000 years ago. Seafloor topography clearly reveals the island of Atlantis in the Mid Atlantic. This area was pushed up to the ocean surface during the height of the last ice age as a reaction to the weight of over 3 km of ice on the poles, which depressed the crust in the Polar regions and caused weak areas of the the crust in mid lattitudes to distend outwards to find an equilibrium." - Robert Sepehr
Robert Sepehr is owner of the Facebook Atlantis page which previously posted the map and his caption for it.
I'll go with the statement-but it is not the standard statement scientists usually make. The landmas on both maps DOES coincide with a map on the Mid-Atlantic Ridge in the Scientific American a while back, indicating the area of a possible earlier large island including the Azores, now sunk into the sea. And Robert Sepehr's statement seems to be correct-the corresponding removal of those icecaps also caused the continental land area to go up and the area of Atlantis to go down (presumably to a matching degree, about 3 kms, although not the same everywhere in the areas affected)
I think pretty strongly that the "Great Plain of Atlantis" is now the bottom of a basin South of the present-day Azores, much lower than the highlands, and would be part of the area ringed with seamounts (then mountains) on both maps, but indicated to have been sea at the time on both maps, This area is geologically peculiar, the bedrock has the characteristics of continental rocks and the sediment upon it has the characteristics of subareal (land) deposits laid down by freshwater. The Azores are East and West from Iberia, the Atlantis and Meteor Seamount groups areSouth of them and looking like they are making an island chain to lik up to the Canary Islands off the Sahara, and this flat plain would have been betwen the two. The geologic survey information published on this blog earlier lends itself to that interpretation.
Best Wishes, Dale D.