S: A Trip to the Albany Institute of History and Art
BC: This mixbook was created especially for The Albany Institute of History and Art and the Summer 2012 Exploring Museum Professions Course Intended for the use of adolescents and school groups visiting The Albany Institute by Nicole Totaro July 2012 | Albany Institute of History & Art. (n.d.). albanyinstitute.org. Retrieved June 17, 2012, from http://www.albanyinstitute.org Schlatter, N. E. (2008). Museum careers: A practical guide for students and novices. Walnut Creek, CA: Left Coast Press.
FC: A Trip to the Albany Institute of History and Art | Let's Learn About Museum Jobs
1: This building looks so nice outside! We can thank the Director of Facilities Operations for that. I am sure the inside will look just as great. As we walk through the doors what do you think we will find?
2: Only a few steps in the building and we already get to see some of what is in their collection! | Can we see what is under here?
3: The items under here are sensitive to light, but let's take a quick look! | What do you see?
4: As we walk up the stairs who do you think will greet us? Let's get closer and pay our admission fee.
5: Can you find the people behind the desk? You have to look close, but they will answer your questions and take your money for admissions. These people may be visitor service volunteers or visitor assistants.
6: I think we should look at the Directory to see where we visit next! A directory is like a map. It shows where the galleries are located in the museum.
7: Why does this Directory look different than the one on the other page? This directory shows the current exhibits on each floor. It is easy to look at this and decide what gallery to enter. Where do you want to go?
8: There are lots of people involved in the creation of an exhibit. Can you name a few?
9: A Curator researches the collections, comes up with the exhibit idea, and writes the text that is on the walls and labels. An Exhibit Designer takes the curator's ideas and designs the exhibit. They choose wall color, font, and layout of the artifacts. The Director of Education comes up with creative ways to engage the visitor by creating interactive units, pamphlets, and programs. We will learn more about this job as we wander the museum.
10: Another way to incorporate interactives is to allow visitors to touch objects. Do you like to interact with objects in museums?
11: I'm sure you know only objects that are labeled touchable can be touched. For most objects touching is not allowed. If you have any doubts ask a docent (also known as a guide or gallery attendant) or security officer.
12: There are offices in the museum that you won't normally see. Who do you think works in them? The main boss is the Executive Director. This person is definitely working busily in their office.
13: Welcome to the Office of the... | Development Director Oversees fundraising efforts at the museum | Director of Finance and Human Resources Manages money and hiring of employees | Digitization Specialist Transfers collections to a digital database
14: Can you think of all the different ways you can learn at a museum in and out of the galleries? There are classes, programs, games, and interactives. The Director of Education is in charge of creating informal programming and supervising the education team.
15: The people that report to the Director of Education are the: Education Coordinator and Education Program Manager All of whom create and facilitate these activities
16: The museum's library is comprised of books, photographs, maps, and other items that compliment the museum's collections. This is a great resource for research and learning. The Digitization Specialist does a lot of work for the library.
17: This room is for meetings and events that take place in the museum. Did you know this is one of the most technologically advanced rooms in the Capital District? You better talk to the Development Coordinator to schedule a meeting here.
18: I think we have one last stop to make before leaving the museum... Let's take a peek around the Museum Shop and say hello to the Museum Shop Manager.
19: Generally, the museum shop sells items that relate to their collection or exhibits that are being shown. What do you think they should include in the shop?
20: I hope you enjoyed visiting The Albany Institute! People can leave donations if they really enjoyed themselves.
21: Thanks for taking a look around!