It’s important to identify different types of obesity so that we can combat this very serious health issue which is responsible for heart disease, diabetes and many more physical issues.
Knowing where your fat develops will help you discover the adjustment that you need to do to fight obesity.
1. Food Obesity
A diet high in sugar is typically associated with this over-eating behaviour. To control food obesity, it would help to lessen food amounts especially sugar intakes and implement daily exercises.
2. Nervous Stomach Obesity
When you’re stressed or depressed, you’re more likely to take in “comfort foods” to boost your mood. These foods are naturally high in sugar. Dealing with emotional stress and mental illnesses are key to combat this kind of obesity.
3. Gluten Obesity
Major hormonal changes eg., menopausal or adolescent stage play a big role in gluten obesity. Being active counters this so does the elimination of drinking and smoking in your lifestyle.
4. Atherogenic Metabolic Obesity.
A big gut is a sign of this obesity type. Those who carry most of the fat around the gut area (some call it “cannonball gut” or a pot belly where all other areas of the body are relative lean). Alcohol is the main thing to get rid of your system in order to avoid this kind of obesity and the breathing problems that comes with it.
5. Venous Circulation Obesity.
Pregnant women or those with swollen legs usually suffer from this kind of obesity. Exercise will promote good blood circulation and will help in controlling your weight gain.
6. Inactivity obesity
A classic form which is pretty self-explanatory. If you don’t regularly move, fats will develop in your body. You can speed up You can speed up the metabolism by eating smaller meals at regular intervals which will help.
While there may not be a universal foolproof plan for fat loss that will work with every individual, there are some common themes that do need to be applied such as lowering sugar intake, as well as cutting down on alcohol, tobacco and highly fatty non-nutritious foods.
In addition, getting active is also key. Lastly, reducing portion size during meals, and avoid eating at intervals could help you manage your fitness.