Football coaches develop the knowledge, techniques, understanding and motivation of groups or individuals through planned training sessions and programmes. They provide feedback and offer advice on players' performance, fitness, technical skills and team working, and will be able to develop and discuss strategies and tactics for both individual and team play. Coaches can work at an amateur or a professional level, and may work in the community with children or youth teams, or with young people in academies and league clubs.
Some coaches of competitive teams may give guidance on nutrition, and injury recognition and prevention. They may also advise on maintaining a positive mental attitude and discipline. At a higher level, coaches may have to analyse matches, design innovative training methods and programmes, and deal with the media.
Community football coaches work with clubs, schools and the local authority. These coaches will encourage people to improve their range of life skills, by using football as a means of personal and social development. They work closely with leaders in the community and local community organisations in developing and providing opportunities for young people to get involved in sport and activities.
Football coaches who work with competitive teams or
players have to be present at training sessions and
competitions, resulting in long and often unsociable
working hours. Travel may be required to and from
training and events, and time outside of actual face-to-
face contact will be required to plan activities, sessions
and programmes, and research into current good
practice and innovative examples.
Most football coaches spend their time outside, and will be required to work in all weather conditions. This may often require long periods of time standing and watching others participate, mixed with periods of activity when the coach is required to demonstrate and/or trains with participants. The majority of coaches will combine their coaching with other full-time jobs, and be present for two evenings during the week and either a Saturday or Sunday for games or tournaments.
To be a football coach you should:
If you would like to know anything about Football Coach that does not appear on Hotcourses, further information can be found below.