Individual differences |
Methods | Statistics | Clinical | Educational | Industrial | Professional items | World psychology |
Auditory learning is a type of learning in which a person will benefit the most from listening to lectures, speeches, and oral sessions. There is a type of learning style called Auditory/Verbal learning. Auditory/Verbal learners comprehend information best when the information is presented aurally. Benefits from this style of learning would be that these select people can listen to lectures and almost memorize what has been said from just one time heard. There aren’t many of this type of person. They make up only about 10% of the worlds population. To most people they can come off rude. Because auditory/verbal learners understand information when it has been spoken to them, often they will have a hard time staring another person in the eye when they are being spoken to. They don’t need to see where the voice is coming from; they comprehend the information when they can stare at an object. To some people it might seem that they are ignoring others by “staring into blank space” when actually their brain is carefully comprehending and storing the information given in a much more efficient manner than non- auditory/verbal learners. This “storing” of information challenges their brain, so the person often disregards the use of vision to help the brain work easier. From studies, when an auditory/verbal learner is reading; it is almost impossible for the person to comprehend a thing without sound in the background. This results in the auditory/verbal learner needing to listen to music when reading. These people that have such a useful “skill” often seem have social flaws. Not all but many seem to be quiet because they absorbed all the audio information that is occurring around them, they don’t find it necessary to have input on many topics. “They seem to go into a trance when there is noise present”.
|This page uses Creative Commons Licensed content from Wikipedia (view authors).|