The aspect of management and leadership are very crucial in the success of any organization as long as they are practiced in the right manner and leadership as well as management tenets are put into proper use. These two principles cannot do without each other and they have a kind of symbiotic relationship where one cannot efficiently operate without the presence or influence of the other.
A leader is noted to be that person who has the ability to influence others in order to achieve a common goal that has been agreed upon. A true leader for that matter is one who does not have selfish interests but the interests of those whom he or she relates with and leads in the process of achieving a required goal (Woodroffe Noel, 2012).
The issue of leadership has for long been the subject of discussion in several quarters of the society. It is not just confined in the business world but even in the religious sectors and as low as the family setting. Drew Stevens (2003), views a leader as one who uses his talent or any other qualities of leadership to play a direct role, commands an influence and has a vast following in a particular area of engagement. It is the peculiar thing that makes people to follow him or her that makes him a god leader.
On the other hand the aspect of management has also drawn equal amount of attention with many scholars trying to juggle between leadership and management, which could be the better in running organizations. As George Ambler (2008) indicates the idea of managing or management depends upon bringing to completion and have the responsibility and to conduct to conclusion.
The organization under study here is Boeing since it is one of the organizations I have worked with and had a positive experience as far as leadership and the management structure and daily operations is concerned.
The managers and leaders in an organization have equally significant roles in ensuring that Boeing as an organization develops and maintains a healthy culture. The two play vital parts some of which are exclusive to each, yet others are complementary to each other. The roles of the organizational leaders are as follows;
The Boeing leadership will help envision the future and have the strong believe that each individual can make a difference in achieving the future. This it does by bringing together leaders from across the enterprise to what the organization calls the Boeing Leadership Center (BLC). This BLC works in close collaboration with the business units across the globe to provide the essential leadership development opportunities which ends up being on-the-job success for the Boeing team.
The leader, as Vadim Kotelnikov (2001) should mould a group of people into a team which will be a strong business advantage through their visions that are inspiring. They must be able to consolidate the individual efforts into a synergy that will ensure the organizational culture is upheld and perfected each day. He will share the dreams about the organizational culture with others and cause them to willingly participate in achieving them. This is exactly what is happening at Boeing as an enterprise, BLC gives an opportunity to leaders, from first line managers to senior executives to share with the rest of the members of the Boeing team what they are doing and learning as they exchange best practices and techniques.
Another peculiar fact about the Boeing leadership is that they constantly re-examine their capabilities and process in a bid to ensure that the company remains as strong and as vital as the heritage that they posses. It is apparent that the culture of Boeing mirrors the heritage of aviation itself and the culture of innovation, aspiration and imagination is vital to retain in the Boeing Company.
In the process of ensuring the organizational culture is upheld, the leader should be able to inspire people to achieve more than they may ever have imagined and get them to be emotionally engaged in the organization and committed.
The managers also have a duty in ensuring that the organizational culture has been upheld and respected and this they achieve through the following;
The managers are direct participants in the maintaining of the organizational culture through supervising and taking charge of the activities and productivity of their staff. They are central in managing the daily performance of their staff hence maintaining the organizational culture.
Managers also play a key role in the selection of the employees, career development management, succession arrangements and apt employee compensations.
The managers are as well charged with the financial development of the organization and through meeting these they play a central part in maintaining the organizational culture.
Any leader must posses some degree of charisma, enthusiasm and dedication in order to effectively lead a group of people. The leadership positions come in from of managers, CEOs, coaches, teachers and even world leaders. It is evident that every effective leadership starts with vision, mentorship and concern for the people that are under the leader.
There is always the question then of the significance of leadership (managers, leaders etc.). Why is it emphasized upon in every organization that one walks into? Why is it that organizations ultimately invest so much in terms of training their leadership to become the most effective leadership? The reason is simple; the organization takes up the personality displayed by the leadership. It is also apparent that good leadership maximizes productivity and nurtures positive cultures within the organization as well as enhancing harmony within and between the organization and external organizations (Leadership Training Tutorials & Articles, 2011).
Leadership is exemplified in various ways and comes with a myriad of challenges depending on the situation that one is in and the type of organization.
Leadership in a multicultural setting and a big organization like Boeing will therefore need a number of skills in order to bring any significant changes and significant development and these were displayed by the leadership at Boeing as noted by Larry C. Spears, (2010).
An effective leader should be listening intently to what other people are trying to communicate to them. It is through listening carefully that the leader will be able to identify the needs and the will of the people or a group. He needs to listen in a receptive manner to the overt and the covert messages and voices. These are the aspects that will enhance the communication as well as the decision making skills of the leader. At Boeing this was a quality that was exemplified by the leaders and managers within the organization.
Larry further indicates that an effective leader must have empathy in his service to the people. He understands what others are going through and makes deliberate efforts to do so. This is based on the peculiar nature of man needing understanding the way they are as each person is unique the way they are. The leader will assume good intentions of others and must be a skilled empathetic listener.
Healing is yet another characteristic of an effective leader. The leader will always use the aspect of healing to enhance transformation as well as integration. The leader will constantly strive to heal his relationship with others as well as healing the relationship of other people.
An effective leader will also display the virtue of awareness especially of self as this helps him understand the issues dealing with the ethics, values, power system and societal norms. Awareness will enable the leader to be in a position to have a more holistic view of ideas and happenings.
An effective leader is also noted to be foresighted in all the things that he does. This is the ability to understand the past lessons and use them to come up with decisions for the future of the organization. It is in this line that Merkel made decisions that helped Germany survive the recession without major incidences.
Types of leadership and management
Though there is no clear prescription of the leadership style that is to be followed by a given industry or type of organization, it is worth noting that leadership styles can be combined in order to have a system that runs smoothly and each system is peculiar to itself hence the variation in the mix of the leadership and management styles. Some of the most effective leadership styles that I noticed being used at Boeing are democratic leadership, laissez-faire and participative leadership. One could be used at a time or a combination of two at the same time depending on the situation and the particular manager or leader handling a given situation.
a). Democratic leadership; is where the leader welcomes the input of the team members and gives room and ample atmosphere for participation and contribution of each individual in the team. It allows for the multiple points-of-view from the team members and encourages members to work hand in hand with each other…