The science of numbers; the art of computation by figures.
A book containing the principles of this science.
The mathematics of solving addition, multiplication, subtraction, and division.
Method of computing using addition, subtraction, multiplication, or division.
A branch of mathematics usually concerned with the four operations (adding, subtracting, multiplication and division) of positive numbers.
a subcategory of mathematics that includes the study of number, concepts, and basic operations. Arithmetic is the foundation of elementary-level mathematics programs.
"the art of computing using addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division"
The science of addition and multiplication (subtraction and division are included, since they are the inverse operations of addition and multiplication). Proof by Contrapositive
the branch of pure mathematics dealing with the theory of numerical calculations
A general area of math dealing with addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division.
The simplest part of mathematics. When you study arithmetic you learn about addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division (called operations). Some more advanced ideas are included in arithmetic, but those are the big four. They are the foundation for all higher mathematics.
A branch of mathematics that involves combining numbers by addition, subtraction, multiplication and division.
The mathematics of integers, rational numbers, real numbers, or complex numbers under addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division.
Mathematics: Arithmetic is the first kind of mathematics normally studied by beginners. It is essentially the art of numeric computation according to rules pertaining to the combination of two or more numbers and applications of that art. The operations involved are addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division. The results obtained are, respectively, a sum, a difference, a product and a quotient.
The four fundamental operations of addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division. Sometimes the operation of taking the square root is included. The arithmetic unit of a computer is usually fitted with the capability of performing only those operations. All other "computing" must be built up of combinations of them, plus storing and retrieving numbers from the memory.
Arithmetic is the study of addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division.
Arithmetic or arithmetics (from the Greek word Î±ÏÎ¹Î¸Î¼ÏŒÏ‚ = number) is the oldest and most elementary branch of mathematics, used by almost everyone, for tasks ranging from simple daily counting to advanced science and business calculations. In common usage, the word refers to a branch of (or the forerunner of) mathematics which records elementary properties of certain operations on numbers. Professional mathematicians sometimes use the term arithmeticDavenport, Harold (1999).