EXT. PARK - DAY

We see a man face down on the ground, surrounded by hundreds of rakes. The man begins to wake up, and we zoom out to see another man on a bench watching in anticipation.

Man near rakes: Ugh, my head. Where am I?

The man stands up, rubbing his head in pain, and begins to walk forwards. The man on the bench smirks and pulls out a box of popcorn from under his seat, and starts eating. 

Still unaware he is surrounded by rakes, the man takes a step forward, landing directly on a rake's head, shooting it up to hit his face immediately.

Man near rakes: OW, what the hell? Who left that there? Jeez.

The man on the bench laughs aloud and takes another handful of popcorn when a busy worker with headphones on passes him. The worker sees the man surrounded by rakes and takes his headphones off, clearly confused as to what is going on.

Worker: Hey, man, what's that guy doing over there? Looks like he got hit pretty hard in the head, shouldn't we help him?

The man on the bench, slowly stopping laughing, responds.

Benchman: Nah, man, he's a jerk. He got drunk and tried to rob me, so I figured I'd leave him a present. Wanna watch it with me?

As the worker ponders the question, we see the man surrounded by rakes step backward, triggering another rake to strike him in the back of the head.

Worker: I dunno, I've got to get to work soon, my boss'll chew me out.

Benchman: C'mon, I've got popcorn!

Worker: Ah, screw it. Five minutes couldn't hurt.

We see the worker take a seat, he starts to laugh and take a handful of popcorn, as the man surrounded by rakes continues to stumble into rake after rake. Eventually, the worker stands up to leave.

Worker: Alright, man, that was funny, I'll give you that.

Benchman: See? Told you. Same time tomorrow?

Worker: Tomorrow?

Benchman: Yeah, this is how I spend my lunch break.

The man on the bench and the worker share a handshake and their numbers, while we see the man surrounded by rakes take a final hit to the head, passing out. The worker leaves, and the remaining man readjusts the rakes to prepare for the next day.
