2Focus: What are some reasons why countries go to war?
3Imperialism and America Imperialism - the policy in which stronger nations extend their economic, political, or military control over weaker territories.
4Reasons for American Imperialism 1. Thirst for new marketsAmericans are producing surplusNeed somewhere else to sell and trade
52. Desire for military strength Stay competitive with other nationsSet up strategic locations for refueling and protection
63. Belief in Anglo-Saxon Superiority U.S. has a responsibility to spread Christianity to “inferior” people
7Anti-ImperialismU.S. should not dominate other countriesLarge Cost
8Factors of Imperialism Monroe Doctrine – In 1823 President James Monroe declared that European powers were to no longer colonize in the Western Hemisphere
9Roosevelt Corollary – Allowed the United States to get involved with countries in the Western Hemisphere that could not pay their debts.The alternative would have allowed European powers to get involved.
10Roosevelt’s Policy“Speak softly and carry a big stick and you will go far”Wanted U.S. to dominate Central America (not Europe)
11Discussion Questions1. What governments acts helped to protect countries of the Western Hemisphere from European conquest?2. How did American businesses promote Imperialism?
13White Man’s Burden – The justification of imperialism as a noble solution to the problems of the worldKnown as the “white man’s” burden because European and American governments were getting involved in countries in Latin America and Africa.
14Frontier Thesis – The idea that the American frontier was gone and that the United States should expand overseas
15Multi-National Corporations – A company that manages production and delivers services to more than one country.With the American government expanding its role overseas, many American companies expanded their workforce into foreign countries
16Global Markets – When companies are able to sell their goods to markets around the world, instead of just the country where they are based.
17Spread of Christianity – Use of religion to justify involvement in foreign countries.
18Types of ImperialismProtectorate – A free country that is protected by a stronger nation and gives benefits to that nationColony – A territory under the immediate control of a stronger nation.
19Sphere of Influence – When multiple countries have an influence over the government or economic decisions of a weaker country.The area that they control is their “sphere.”
20Open Door Policy – The United States asked that other European countries not interfere with the business of fellow imperializing nations.It was a failure
21Discussion QuestionsWhat is the difference between a colony and a protectorate?What are some examples of multi-national companies today?
22Focus: What parts of the world does the United States control outside of the continental United States?
23Key EventsSeward’s Folly – In 1867 the US gov’t purchased land from Russia for $7.2 million. A newspaper writer thought this a bad decision, thus the name Seward’s FollySeward was Sec. of StateThe land was Alaska
24Hawaii In 1800’s American companies own sugar plantations in Hawaii 1887 – The US Gov’t builds an American Navel Base (Pearl Harbor)
251887- Voting rights in Hawaii go only to wealthy bus 1887- Voting rights in Hawaii go only to wealthy bus. Owners (Americans)Revolution against Hawaiian QueenHawaii is annexed by U.S.
27Boxer Rebellion:An uprising of Chinese against American and European involvement in China.American newspapers referred to the rebels as boxers because of their use of martial arts.Over 20,000 were murdered and foreign influence in China was limited.
28Panama CanalRoosevelt wants a shortcut between Atlantic and Pacific OceanThe best route through was found in Panama