The work environment for a baby nurse depends on her specialty. Some work in high-pressure situations where they must vigilantly monitor their patients' conditions, while others provide routine care for healthy patients. Regardles of the work environment, all baby nurses must be adept in communicating with patients and with fellow health care professionals, and must have the compassion to work with patients during an emotional time in their lives.
Where They Work
While many nurses work in a community setting, as Nurses for a Healthier Tomorrow points out, baby nurses work primarily in traditional hospitals and clinics. Typical work environments include hospital maternity wards, physician's offices, birthing centers, maternity centers and medical clinics. Neonatal nurses usually care for premature newborns and those with birth defects, critical illnesses or other needs, and work in nurseries and neonatal intensive care units. Labor and delivery nurses assist with the birthing process and work primarily in the delivery room, helping doctors monitor vital signs for mother and child. Postpartum nurses care for mothers and newborns until they are discharged from the hospital, and provide care in the mother's hospital room. They offer everything from breastfeeding instruction to assistance in coping with stress.
Who They Work With
How demanding a baby nurse's work environment is also depends on her specialty. Labor and delivery nurses may face high-pressure situations, for example if the mother encounters difficulty during childbirth or if the baby is in distress. They must think quickly on their feet and perform well under pressure, and must have excellent communication skills. If mother or baby is in trouble and the nurse cannot effectively communicate this to the doctor, she could put patients at risk. Neonatal nurses also face stressful work environments, because they often care for babies with significant medical problems. They must watch patients closely and act quickly if a baby takes a turn for the worse. Postpartum nurses often face a less urgent work environment, because they care for mothers and children who are healthy and expected to go home soon. They play an often supportive role, helping the woman prepare for life as a mother.
Labor and delivery nurses primarily have contact with doctors and other nurses, while assisting with delivery. While they help monitor the mother during childbirth, most of their communication is with other health care professionals, for example taking direction from the doctor or informing the doctor of changes in the mother's or baby's vital signs. Neonatal nurses spend most of their day in the nursery caring for sick newborns, and interact primarily with doctors and other nurses. However, they also update the parents on the baby's condition. Postpartum nurses have the most contact with both mother and child. Much of their job involves counseling and advising the mother and answering her questions.
All nursing specialties related to childbirth can be physically and emotionally demanding. Nurses are on their feet much of the day, whether standing in the delivery room or making rounds. They may also work long hours, especially when dealing with a complicated or high-risk birth or very ill patient. Their work is sometimes emotionally draining and stressful as well. Nurses who care for ill newborns must be able to cope with their patients' severe and sometimes deteriorating conditions, as well as interacting with distraught parents.
- Jupiterimages/Photos.com/Getty Images