WHICH VOICE DO YOU HEAR?
Self-esteem is defined as being “Confident in one’s own worth or abilities; self-respect.”
Confidence is defined as “The feeling or belief that one can have faith in or rely on someone or something.”
So what’s the difference?
The difference between SELF ESTEEM and CONFIDENCE is actually in the voice you listen to.
Have you ever heard that voice that rises up to tell you how awful you look in that dress, how you should be working out more, earning more, moving up the ranks at work, or how you ‘need’ to generally be a better person.
Recognize that voice? You do? Then let’s call this voice ‘FEAR’.
On other occasions, you may have heard that voice that rises from somewhere inside of you, yelling “Go for it! You can do it!”
That voice that tells you how awesome you actually look in that dress, and praises you for your achievements, for getting that promotion, or simply for making the effort to exercise, and eat better. Let’s call this other voice ‘LOVE’.
Which voice do you hear more often? There are two voices that have the capacity to rise up within you; the loving one and the fearful one (LOVE and FEAR). LOVE gives you the belief that you can strive for things your FEARFUL self would not think possible.
Self-Efficacy and Self Respect are the two elements that make up self-esteem. Self-Efficacy is our ability to think, learn, and choose to make appropriate decisions. Self-respect is confidence in our right to be happy, and confidence that achievement, success, friendship, love and fulfillment are appropriate to us (we are deserving of love!). Don’t worry about what others think of you; what matters is what YOU think of YOU!! That’s why it’s called ‘SELF’ esteem… and how truly powerful it can be!
A positive self-esteem provides us with strength and a capacity for regeneration supported by LOVE. When our self-esteem is low, our resilience when facing life’s problems is diminished and our FEAR rises up to speak loudly! It is these voices (LOVE and FEAR), and therefore our self-esteem that directly affects the way we act and react, the values we choose, the goals we set and how we meet the challenges that confront us.
Self-esteem is the driver of our decision making. A low self-esteem (FEAR) can hold us back from realizing our true potential in life, it can stop us from having the courage to chase our dreams, and it can lead us to a life unfulfilled. A positive self-esteem (LOVE) provides us with unlimited potential, it empowers us and pushes us to believe we can do it, it energizes and motivates us, and whatever we focus our efforts on CAN BE DONE! It inspires us to achieve, and allows us to take pleasure and pride in our achievements. It helps us to be resilient, to pick ourselves up more quickly after a fall, leaving us with more energy to start again.
Self Esteem is about the power of YOU… and is not selfish but rather, it is compassionate and necessary for your wellbeing.
WOW, how powerful is that! What kind of difference would positive self-esteem make in your life?
Self-esteem is BELIEVING IN YOURSELF and making the choices that represent your belief that you deserve love and fulfillment. I often hear people say to me, “I wish I had your confidence”, my response is always the same; “confidence is something you create WITHIN yourself by believing in who you are”.
- Be Self-Accepting
- Be Responsible for Self
- Be Assertive
- Live with purpose
- Live with integrity
In an aim to increase your positive self-esteem and turn up the LOVE voice within, surround yourself with those that support and nurture your positive inner voice (LOVE), prioritize the need to nurture yourself, and be aware that FEAR, the ever present voice just waiting to rise up, will only be tuned out with the powerful weapon that is SELF ESTEEM!