There is a difference between clinical depression and just feelingdepressed, which is often a term used to describe sadness. Sadness is when you have a problem or relationship you are unhappy or concerned about but depression is when you feel thatyou are the problem.
Popular media is loaded with articles on different types of depression and it can be confusing to figure out how best to treat yours. In St Louis MO Depression Therapy Treatment options may seem more overwhelming than helpful.
The first thing is to get a diagnosis. There are multiple types of depression including:
which is otherwise known as bipolar disorder. Iit has a biological basis which means you’re probably going to want to see a psychiatrist so that you can work both with therapy and with medication to help manage the up-and-down nature of living with manic depression.
Seasonal Adjustment Disorder
is a pattern of feeling depressed during the winter months it’s most commonly treated with light therapy but there is still a point where one needs to consult a physician.
also known as postpartum depression occurs in the mother following childbirth it’s long been thought that this is due to hormonal changes however postnatal depression does not differ in any way from normal clinical depression, what they do have in common is they are both to do with the lack of ability to adapt to a new circumstance.
There are more than 400 different types of psychotherapy offered for clinical depression. This can be confusing to say the least and when you’ve been diagnosed you just want to get started on feeling better.
Studies show that there are therapies that are more and less effective than others. The most effective ones are solution focused- that means they seek to lessen the feelings of suffering and teach skills that prevent future relapse.
Terms to Know
• Cognitive Therapy
looks at how we think and interpret the events in our lives
• Behavioral therapy
which looks at changing patterns whether we’re aware or unaware of these patterns
• Interpersonal therapy
deals with how we relate to others and how well we communicate
A less effective type of therapy is the psychoanalytical therapy It delves into the past looking for reasons. This therapy is sometimes known to cause “paralysis by analysis” which describes the downward spiral into greater distress that can happen when therapy starts delving into the past.
What we do absolutely know is that a combination of medication and therapy seems to have the most successful outcome. It is most important that you have a relationship with your therapist that includes trust, confidence and some improvement within the first six months of therapy with the ultimate goals being:
- Getting out of your current depression
- Having the tools to avoid becoming depressed again.
Helpful Hint: Ask for testemonials from past clients.