rose mallow, swamp mallow, common rose mallow, swamp rose mallow, Hibiscus moscheutos(noun)
showy shrub of salt marshes of the eastern United States having large rose-colored flowers
Hibiscus moscheutos is a cold-hardy perennial wetland plant that can grow in large colonies. The hirsute leaves are of variable morphology, but commonly found as deltoidal in form and sometimes having up to three lobes. It is found in wetlands and along the riverine systems of the southeastern United States from Texas to the Atlantic states, its territory extending northward to southern Ontario. There exists in nature numerous forms and petal colors range from pure white to deep rose, and, except for one genome, all have an eye of deep maroon. Taxonomic consensus is lacking for the nomenclature of the multiple sub-species. The complete flowers are born apically, whereas the related Hibiscus laevis carries bud and bloom along the stem. In Canada it is listed as a species of special concern by the Species at Risk Act. Propagation can be accomplished by seed sown 0.6 cm below media and kept constantly moist, or by crown divisions during winter dormancy, and some success can be achieved by hard-wood stem cuttings. Numerous hybrids of the native North American Hibiscus species have been released by the commercial nursery trade. In cultivation the species or the hybrids can be an attractive addition to a bog garden or other water feature, not only adding visual appeal but also enhancing wildlife value for nectar-feeders and birds.
The numerical value of hibiscus moscheutos in Chaldean Numerology is: 8
The numerical value of hibiscus moscheutos in Pythagorean Numerology is: 3
Images & Illustrations of hibiscus moscheutos
Translations for hibiscus moscheutos
From our Multilingual Translation Dictionary
- гибискуса moscheutosRussian
Get even more translations for hibiscus moscheutos »
Find a translation for the hibiscus moscheutos definition in other languages:
Select another language:
Discuss these hibiscus moscheutos definitions with the community:
Word of the Day
Would you like us to send you a FREE new word definition delivered to your inbox daily?
Use the citation below to add this definition to your bibliography:
"hibiscus moscheutos." Definitions.net. STANDS4 LLC, 2017. Web. 27 Jun 2017. <http://www.definitions.net/definition/hibiscus moscheutos>.