The entire field of supply chain management is built on a foundation of collaboration.
Supply chain performance is improved when suppliers, manufacturers, distributors, retailers and logistics service providers work together to ensure the satisfaction for end customers. Effective supply chains allow firms to achieve the long-sought-after holy grail of operations — to maintain or even increase service levels while at the same time reducing inventory levels.
Having already exhausted many of the large, initial gains from collaborating with major suppliers and customers, many companies have begun to look for new opportunities with significant savings potential. This search has led some of them to unlikely partners: their major competitors.
One specific form of partnership between competitors has become known as collaborative distribution. A collaborative distribution network occurs when two or more companies establish a shared distribution facility and use the same transportation equipment to supply retailers. On a smaller scale, firms can also engage in collaborative distribution strictly by coordinating their delivery schedules without shared warehousing facilities.
While the companies involved in a collaborative distribution partnership do not need to be competitors, it is beneficial if the firms have similar retail customers to maximize potential benefits from transportation efficiency. The firms can also realize savings in logistics costs by spreading the fixed costs of warehousing over the combined volume of products that flow through the facility.
Retailers benefit from collaborative distribution as well because it becomes economical for them to receive smaller, more frequent shipments from each manufacturer.
Collaborative distribution has the potential to help all parties involved in the partnership, but there are two challenges to overcome:
FLOW: Information technology must be able to function across many different firms to ensure a seamless flow of information. Retailers need to be willing to coordinate their orders from several manufacturers so that the goods can be delivered together.
CULTURE: The biggest challenge is often the internal culture of the organizations. Working with competitors is a new idea for most companies, and a significant amount of trust must exist between the manufacturers, writes Mark B. Solomon in “Has Collaborative Distribution’s Time Come?”
Dr. Matthew J. Drake, associate professor of supply chain management in Duquesne University’s Palumbo-Donahue School of Business, wrote “Global Supply Chain Management” (Business Expert Press, 2012), an introduction to SCM basics within global operations.