Sulphur is a non-metallic chemical element identified by the letter S. Sulphur is a valuable commodity and integral component of the world economy used to manufacture numerous products including fertilizers and other chemicals.Sulphur also is a vital nutrient for crops, animals and people.
Single super phosphate fertilizer, sulphur 200300, sulphur rolls for sugar industry and steel industry.Manufacturers and exporters
Description: The Silicone duct made by Yeedah is different from other common type of silicone hoses in same material. It is a kind of High temperature duct, flame retardant, chemical resistance, stand for very high temperature. It is also used in different industry. Details as below: Material: â?¢ Wall: the wall of the silicone duct is 2 layers silicone coated glass fiber fabric â?¢ spiral: stainless spring steel wire is hidden between the 2 layers, hi-temperature glass fiber cord is spired around the surface of the duct. Properties: â?¢ The silicone duct has very good heat resistance â?¢ It is leak-proof; kink-proof â?¢ The long life time of this duct is around 5~10 years in normal working condition â?¢ It has smooth interior â?¢ Bending radius is quite small. â?¢ Silicone duct is normally in red & black.color. Temperature range: â?¢ -70 Â°C approx. to +260 Â°C approx. â?¢ short time to +310 Â°C approx. Applications: â?¢ as conductor of hot and cold air. â?¢ for granulate dryers in the plastics industry. â?¢ for printing machines, blowers and compressors. â?¢ for exhaust gas technique, engine construction, engine warming, aircraft construction and military construction. In one word, this Silicone duct could be used anywhere produces hot air. The performance is very good, and lifetime is quite long. In normal working environment, it could be used up to 10 years or more. See frequent questions for this product, pleaseclick here.
Portable ventilation fan. With swith and integrated plastic handle Provide plug with 2.5 metres wire Heat zinc immersion plate surfac Portable industrial fan Features 1.Large air volume 2.Low noise 3.High voltage 4.Get ce ccc Applications 1.It can be widely used in complex environment such as food , medicine, metallurgy, power plants , transportation and so on. 2.In strict accordance with the production requirements of explosion-proof electric motors, our company has produce this fan so that its insulation class up to grade f. 3.And our company has enhanced the sealing performance of electric motors through the shell and technological improvements. For this reason , under such relatively humid or high-temperature circumstance can this product be available. Characteristics This portable or moveable axial blower has a beautiful overall appearance. The size 200mm-350mm is easily to take by a handle, the size bigger than 350mm can set wheels, so that can make it easily to move. This series blowers habe high pressure, stable electrical performance, and it can be connerct for post telecommunications, and underground cable repairing tunnel poject.
Sulphur, granule sulphur, lump sulphur, sulfur, lump sulfur, granule sulfur, fine powder sulphur, fine powder sulfur.International transportation
Gilsonite, single super phosphate, azomite, herbal medicine, granular sulphur, urea 46%, natural asphalt, bitumen, sulfur.
Construction materials like, bricks, gray Portland cement in grades, 32.5, 42.5, 52.5 with ASTM C150 standard, cement clinker, sulphur, urea 46%, other chemical fertilizer.Sale, purchase, export, import and trading
Blend crude gost 51 858-2002, , export blend crude gost 9965-76, , diesel d2 n gas oil l-0.2-62 gost 305-82, d6 virgin fuel oil, diesel, d2 automotive gas oil (ago), diesel gasoil ultra-low sulphur 50 ppm, , diesel gas oil ultra-low sulphur 50 ppm, diesel gasoil ultra-low sulphur 500 ppm, mazut m100 gost 10585/75, , mazut m100 gost 10585/99, , n aviation kerosene colonial grade 54 jet fuel, , jet fuel a1.
Structural silicone sealant, neutral silicone sealant, acid silicone sealant, weatherproofing silicone sealant, whith /black silicone sealant, clear silicone sealant, anti-fungal silicone sealant, acetic silicone sealant, polyurethane (pu) sealant.
Brand: yuling Material: ss304 Diameter: 8.5mm Length: 360mm Foldback length: 300mm Voltage: 240v Power: 4.5kw Certificates: ce, rohs, iso9001:2008 Warrany: â?¥2years -