ALLERGY- THIS IS WHAT IT IS
When you have gone to a new place and suddenly you start sneezing or wheezing for no explained reason . When you go away from that place you come back to normal that is all your symptoms have disappeared. If this have happened to you then you definitely are sensitive to some particles in the environment such as pollen, dust etc. These particles are termed as allergens and the exaggerated response of your immune system to certain allergens present in the environment is termed as allergy. Hence is nothing but hypersensitive response of our immune system against the antigen.Somehow, modern lifestyle has resulted in lowering of immunity and more sensitivity to allergens – more and more children in metro cities are suffering from allergies due to sensitivity to environment. This could be because of the protected environment provided early in life.
There are so many antigens present in the environment that causes allergies. Mainly people are allergic to dust, pollens, food (egg, fish), medicine (penicillin), cold, heat, sunlight, fibres etc. Allergy is mainly due to release of chemicals such as histamine, serotonin from the mast cells. Since more is the release of histamine more will be the secretion of Ig E type of antibodies. Our immune system is sensitive to allergens and when they come in contact with our body our immune system shows response and releases antibodies which shows its effect in form of allergy. Basically for determining the cause of allergy, the patient is injected to small doses of possible allergen and the reaction is studied.
There are different types of allergy caused by different types of antigen. Bronchial asthma is the allergy of lungs when an antigen enters inside your body due to inhalation. This is generally caused due to hypersensitivity of bronchiole to the foreign substance passing through it from the air you breathe. In it the person may feel difficulty in breathing and coughing. Hay fever is another type of allergy caused due to pollen grains. When they come in contact with the mucosa of eye. Urticarial is also one kind of allergy in which pinkish itchy blisters to appear on skin. Dermatitis is the allergy in which reddening of skin and scale formation appears. Anaphylactic shock is a severe form of allergies caused by penicillin. This allergy can even lead to death of a person.
Symptoms and prevention-
Symptoms of allergic reaction includes sneezing, watery eyes, running nose, coughing, difficulty in breathing, appearance of blisters or scale formation on skin etc. But as said prevention is better than cure. One should stay away from coming in contact with the allergens that is we should stay in a clean surrounding. Hypo sensitization is another preventive measure in which small dose of antigen is subjected to your body. Daily yoga is very helpful in treating your allergies or making yourself less vulnerable to allergens. The use of drugs such as anti-histamine, adrenaline, steroids quickly reduce the symptom of allergy.