Children's Understanding of the Risks and Benefits Associated With Research
Burke, Tara M.
Journal of Medical Ethics 2005 December; 31(12): 715-720
OBJECTIVE: The objective of the current study was to maximise the amount of information children and adolescents understand about the risks and benefits associated with participation in a biomedical research study. DESIGN: Participants were presented with one of six hypothetical research protocols describing how to fix a fractured thigh using either a "standard" cast or "new" pins procedure. Risks and benefits associated with each of the treatment options were manipulated so that for each one of the six protocols there was either a correct or ambiguous choice.Participants and SETTING: Two hundred and fifty one children, ages 6-15 (53% boys), and 237 adults (30% men) were interviewed while waiting for a clinic appointment at the Hospital for Sick Children. RESULTS: Using standardised procedures and questionnaires, it was determined that most participants, regardless of age group, were able to understand the basic purpose and procedures involved in the research, and most were able to choose the "correct" operation. The younger children, however, showed an overall preference for a cast operation, whereas the older participants were more likely to choose the pins. CONCLUSIONS: By creating age appropriate modules of information, children as young as six years can understand potentially difficult and complex concepts such as the risks and benefits associated with participation in biomedical research. It appears, however, that different criteria were used for treatment preference, regardless of associated risks; older participants tended to opt for mobility (the pins procedure) whereas younger participants stayed with the more familiar cast operation.
Showing items related by title, author, creator and subject.
Children's Capacity to Agree to Psychological Research: Knowledge of Risks and Benefits and Voluntariness Abramovitch, Rona; Freedman, Jonathan L.; Henry, Kate; Van Brunschot, Michelle (1995)A series of studies investigated the capacity of children between the ages of 7 and 12 to give free and informed consent to participation in psychological research. Children were reasonably accurate in describing the purpose ...