If you have to get a root canal in Austin, you may be nervous about the procedure, but you can rest at ease. A root canal is a very common procedure that serves an important purpose in your dental care.
What Is a Root Canal?
If you have a tooth that is badly infected, a root canal is a procedure that will save the tooth. During a root canal, the fleshy pulp and nerve inside of the tooth is drawn out and replaced with permanent cement. The tooth is then capped and sealed to prevent further infection. If the infected tooth is not treated, a tooth abscess will form. This can cause the tooth to be removed and further dental work to be completed.
What Are the Signs of a Root Canal?
There are times when there are no signs that a root canal is needed, but if you have a severe toothache, you should see your dentist. Some other symptoms include prolonged sensitivity to cold or heat. That means that even after you eat something cold or hot, the tooth sensitivity will continue for an extended amount of time. You may also notice a discoloration in the tooth. The gums around the infected tooth may also swell and become uncomfortable. Finally, you may notice a reoccurring pimple on the side of your gums. This is beginning of an abscess, and you should discuss the issue with your dentist as soon as possible.
What Is the Root Canal Procedure?
The root canal procedure usually takes more than one dental visit. The first visit will require X-rays that will see the shape of the nerve and pulp. Your dentist will make sure that the infection hasn’t penetrated the bone.
Next, an access hole is drilled into the tooth and all of the pulp, nerves, and other infected areas of the tooth will be removed. To clean out the hole, the dentist uses a series of root canal files. The tooth is sanded down with the files until the decay is completely removed from the tooth.
After the decay is removed, your dentist will thoroughly clean out the area. After that, a mold will be made of your mouth so that a crown can be made for your tooth. Your dentist will make a temporary crown to keep salvia and other contaminants off of your tooth while you wait for the new crown.
It usually takes 1–2 weeks for the crown to be complete. This appointment is usually pretty quick as your dentist will simply clean the tooth and permanently cement the new crown on your tooth. With any root canal in Austin, you may find that you have some sensitivity for a few weeks, but you will not have to worry about infection spreading, and your tooth will be as good as new.