What is this course?
This course is quick course to make accounting easy and aims to make learning accounting a quick and fun process!
This course is the perfect introduction to accounting for business owners, students and professionals who want to lean about what accounting is and how to do it.
The lectures are presented in a fun, easy to understand format with quizzes to test your knowledge. You also receive a free downloadable e-book that you can use to refer to as you go through this course. The e-book also includes additional examples so that you can practice what you have learnt in the course.
What do I get from this course?
In this lecture we cover the all important categories that account codes relate to.
You will learn the key components in a transaction and are briefly introduced to the debit and credit concept.
The best way to understand how to post transactions is with a series of examples!
We go through another example to help you understand how to post a transaction
A third example of posting a transaction so you can have a better understanding of what to debit and credit.
So we have spent this chapter learning about transactions, debits, credits and categories. Let's test your knowledge to see how many facts you soaked up!
An introduction to the trial balance.
We have a deeper look at the debit and credit concept so you can understand when to post a debit and when to post a credit.
An introduction to the profit and loss account
Let's put together the profit and loss account for Clowning About Limited.
Learn how to analyse the information contained in the profit and loss account.
An introduction to the balance sheet.
Let's build the balance sheet for Clowning About Limited
What can you learn from the information contained in the balance sheet?
This e-book provides you with a further explanation of concepts taught in the course and is the perfect course companion.
To test your knowledge work through this example for Speedy Hair Limited. Print off this booklet and fill in your answers. At the back you will find the answers to check how you are doing. Good Luck!
Once you have completed this course you should have a deeper understanding of accounting transactions and be able to put together a basic trial balance, profit and loss account and balance sheet.
Emily is a chartered accountant who has ran successful accountancy practices. She is a cloud accounting expert.
Emily is currently a self-employed financial consultant and management accountant.
She has a vast breadth of experience working in a variety of industries but specialises in digital creatives and start-up companies.