The Recommended Dietary Allowance of potassium for most adults is about 4,400 mg. Since potassium is found naturally in abundance in fruits and vegetables, if you eat many servings of those a day, you will not have a hard time getting the necessary potassium. Potassium is helpful with decreasing risk of stroke, high blood pressure and osteoporosis. When you know what foods contain large quantities of potassium, you know how to fuel your body appropriately.
Fruit is full of large amounts of potassium. The richest sources are found in bananas (422 mg) and oranges (237 mg). One half cup of plums provides a bountiful 530 mg of potassium. One half cup of raisins contains nearly 600 mg of potassium. One bursting source of potassium is an entire avocado, which harbours 1,100 mg.
Vegetables are another full source of potassium. Besides green peppers and green beans, you can find plentiful amounts of potassium in asparagus, Brussels sprouts, spinach and tomatoes. The single most explosive potassium source is a potato that has been baked with its skin on. One medium one provides 926 mg of potassium. Popeye was also getting plenty of potassium because a 1/2 cup of cooked spinach provides more than 400 mg.
According to the University of Rochester Medical Center, anyone following a low-potassium diet should completely avoid chocolate. This is because cocoa and chocolate are natural sources of high potassium levels. An ounce of chocolate has about 120 mg of potassium, so an entire chocolate bar has nearly 200 mg. Other sources would include hot drinking chocolate and cakes and cookies baked with chocolate.
Nuts and Seeds
An ounce of almonds contains more than 200 mg of potassium. An ounce of Brazil nuts contains about 170 mg of potassium. An ounce of sunflower seeds contains 200 mg of potassium. Even though these items are high sources of potassium and they also contain fibre and Vitamin E, you should limit your intake of them. Nuts contain high amounts of calories and sunflower seeds have high amounts of saturated fat.
A mere tablespoon of parsley boasts nearly 16 mg of potassium. For this ratio it is considered a rich source of potassium along with dill and garlic. One teaspoon of dill seeds contain nearly 25 mg of potassium. One clove of garlic offers about 12 mg of potassium. Spices are a great and healthy way to flavour your dishes. They are a healthier alternative to salt. Other sources of potassium are celery root and garden cress.