Evolution on Other Worlds
Evolution on Other Worlds (Draft)
An article at Space.com states: “Our galaxy could be home to a whopping 50 billion planets, say scientists working on NASA's Kepler planet-hunting telescope. While Kepler hasn't found nearly that many planets — to date it's counted1,235 candidate planets — that cosmic tally is researchers' best guess, extrapolated from preliminary data. The Kepler spacecraft, which launched in March 2009, is the world's most sophisticated observatory dedicated to studying alien planets.”
“Of the 1,235 possible planets Kepler has observed so far, 54 appear to be at a Goldilocks-like "just right" distance from their stars where temperatures would be right for liquid water. This region is called the habitable zone, because for a planet to be habitable to alien life, it would probably require water.”
“Extrapolating to the Milky Way as a whole, the researchers predict that at least 500 million of the galaxy's probable 50 billion planets reside in the habitable zone. That certainly offers a hopeful sign for the existence of life beyond Earth.” http://www.space.com/10982-kepler-alien-planets-billion-galaxy.html
I have found it fascinating to discover from the many cases of extraterrestrial contact and my own observations of the natural evolutionary processes on earth that indicate the same evolutionary processes or laws also seem to apply on other planets. Species seem to evolve using the same evolutionary strategies in environments similar to earth, resulting in insects, fishes, amphibians, reptiles, mammals, primates’ even humans.
One of the major determining factors as to wither an insect, reptile or mammal develops high intelligence on a planet, are environmental catastrophes that disrupt the evolutionary process. If the asteroid on earth had not destroyed the dinosaurs except for the birds, earth may well have evolved an intelligent reptile instead of a mammal. If the hit had been even worse and only insects’ survived, earth might have evolved an intelligent insect. This is what extraterrestrial contact cases seem to be telling us.
I am not the first to think along these lines. Stevens and Steinman devote a number of pages in UFO Crash At Aztec to this subject, They state: “A considerable proportion of the extraterrestrial human-like beings reported fall into general classification quite different and distinct from Earth humanity. Walt Andrus at APRO’s UFO ’79 in San Diego gave a talk on extraterrestrial beings observed and described, in which he suggested that roughly 1/3 of the ET beings reported seem to be very similar to the contemporary humanity on this planet.
He suggested that another 1/3 of the ET beings reported could be grouped in a similar way into a different category of human-like beings distinct from the physiology of Earth humans. The remaining 1/3 was a catch-all category including other physiological morphologies quite different from Earth humans, and of sizes both considerably larger and substantially smaller.”
“What if the second largest category, which seems to have a number of similarities within the variety of the group, something like the general similarities among human species and types, sprang from a different evolution entirely? Do we have any evidence to support such a hypothesis? How different would they be? What would they look like? How does our observed evidence compare?”
“Taking a cue from Dr. Bernard E. Finch’s article “Dinosaurs… Not Humanoids?” published in Flying Saucer Review for January 1982, where Finch makes the interesting observation that an intelligent species having evolved from reptilian forbearers would develop “remarkable similarities to descriptions of the (UFO) aliens which are received from many sources”, and statements by Adrian J. Desmond in his book The Hot-Blooded Dinosaurs that, “The most intriguing Late Cretaceous inhabitants were the intelligent ‘mimics’ unearthed in recent years, wide-eyed ostrich dinosaurs, and dromaeosaurids like Deinonychus and Saurornithoides, with stereo-vision functionally mated to opposable thumbs.”
“These dinosaurs, capable of more skilled behavioral feats than any land animal hitherto, were separated from other dinosaurs by a gulf comparable to that dividing men from cows: the disparity in brain size is staggering—who know what new peaks the sophisticated ‘bird-mimics’ would have attained had they survived into the ‘Age of Mammals’.”. Erich A. Aggen, Jr., prepared an article, “Possible Reptilian Origins of Certain UFO Occupants” for the MUFON Journal. Aggen argues:”
““Had the dinosaurs not died out, they quite likely could have become the dominant form of life on Earth. Mammalian life succeeded only because the more aggressive and predatory dinosaurs were removed from the scene. On many other planets with more favorable conditions, Reptilian life could have survived and attained its full potential. An intelligent species evolved from reptiles would certainly possess many of the physiological characteristics we have come to identify in certain groups of UFO occupants.”
In order to illustrate this concept I think it best to provide several contact cases to the reader so that folks can draw their own opinion as to the validity of this idea. In later chapters I intend to build on cases such as these to roughly illustrate in much more detail, something of the motives and agendas of specific extraterrestrial races and their civilizations. I intend to concentrate more on the many human civilizations similar to our own because I think that is where our humanity has the most in common. It is the greater humanity to which we are only one small part.
On the other hand certain non-human types or humanoids with some human genetics have had major impacts on our humanity for a very long time and bring up many issues or imperatives of contact especially National Security cultural and genome issues. It is increasingly obvious that we are not the top predators on this planet as is widely believed. There are more evolved very sophisticated predators that prey on our earth human society way beyond our current range of perception. Our common defense against these ET types is limited but growing.
I would place two autocratically organized races in this category, the Greys, who have one of their bases at Nellis according to Charles Hall and the Annunaki, perhaps of reptilian ancestry, who may have a base near a NSA installation at Pine Gap Australia. Both these races while quite different do utilize very proficiently and subtly the skills of the predator, including secrecy, deception, fear, intimidation, confusion stealth, misdirection, perception management etc. to manipulate individuals and our society. Both of these races could be pulling the strings of the Global Elite to create an undemocratic and highly autocratic earth human society in which there would be little human freedom and liberty.
Both of these civilizations have the technological abilities so as to appear human or as any other animal for that matter so this can confuse the investigators ability to sort out who is really human and who is not. One can get on the internet and see that the military is making great strides in cloaking technologies so as to appear invisible or to appear as something other than what is. The radar image of a plane can be made to look like that of a bird for instance or a human being almost invisible or something else altogether by manipulating light and use of holographic projection. Enough said on this for now.
What follows are a few select cases of different types of extraterrestrials that give something of an idea of cosmic evolutionary history and a glimpse of very different agendas and motivations that will be brought up in more detail later.
Let’s start with a type of insectoid extraterrestrial that is seen during some abductions. Abductees often tell of Praying Mantis insect types of extraterrestrials. This first contact case illustrates this type of extraterrestrial Insectoid encountered in Sierakow, Poland. This article was published in UFO Digest by Dirk Vander Ploeg:
While camping near Sierakow Lake in the summer of 2001 a young 20-year old woman has a strange encounter. It was late in the evening when she began heading back to her campsite. She was walking beside the edge of a forest that led to the meadow that led to her tent. The meadow was approximately 200 meters (666 feet) in length. Suddenly, she saw a huge mantis like creature that appeared to bend over and picked up something. "When the entity heard me, it became scared and began fleeing", she said and added, "I stood there as if petrified when it crossed my path and stopped seven to eight meters a head (23 - 26.5 feet). Both we (of us) were scared."
The young woman, who wishes her identity to remain anonymous, believes the creature she encountered was also a female. It looked like a huge insect and reminded her of a praying mantis with an elongated and skinny face and oval-shaped head. It was short and fragile being only 1.5 to 1.6 meters high (5.0 - 5.3 feet). It had skin that was gray or beige in color. This creature seemed to have wings or something resembling wings that were long and narrow and attached to the creature's back. Looking into the creatures eyes was terrifying according to the young woman. The eyes were dark and emotionless.
"That thing was looking at me and I knew that it was confused as well. Our meeting wasn't intentional. It was surprised", she added. The creature then disappeared back into the field. The next day she returned to the spot where the encounter has occurred and she found small footprints on the edge of the field. It is not known if photos or casts were made of the footprints. I will try to find our more information on this unusual sighting. http://www.ufodigest.com/news/0906/insectoid.html
A word search on the Internet yielded some more cases on insect type ET encounters. Researcher Vicki Cameron reported the following: “Abduction researcher Brian Thompson claims that a nurse acquaintance of his reported that during 1957 in Cincinnati she encountered a 3-foot-tall (0.91 m) praying mantis-like entity two days after a V-shaped UFO sighting. This mantis-like creature is reminiscent of the insectoid-type entity reported in some abduction accounts. He related this report to fellow researcher Leonard Stringfield. Stringfield told him of two cases he had in his files where separate witnesses reported identical circumstances in the same place and year.
Abduction researcher Karla Turner, in Into the fringe reported that a man called David remembered an encounter with a giant mantis during an hypnosis session.
Linda Moulton Howe in Glimpses of Other Realities describes some claims of alien mantis. The book includes the cases of Linda Porter and David Huggins. In 1988 Linda Porter remembered an abduction by alien mantis which she said took place when she was a child. In the same year 1988 David Huggins remembered an encounter with alien mantis that he said took place in the 1950s, when he was a child. The book report also the case of Jeanne Robinson, which said she have received messages by an alien similar to a mantis. According to Ms Robinson, these aliens are a branch of Greys.
Vicki Cameron in UFO experience in Canada reported a case of abduction by an insectoid alien similar to a grasshopper.”
This next case experienced by the Cherry Hinkle family illustrates a type of reptilian extraterrestrial species. This does not appear to be a Reptilian Annunaki but quite another species altogether. The case is titled: Reptilian Encounter in the Nevada Desert by Cherry Hinkle. It is copyrighted and I have permission to publish it here but if somebody wants to publish it separate from this chapter they should contact Cherry Hinkle on Facebook. She says this case is deeply personal and has had trouble with people taking her words out of context to discredit her and this case. (Copyright 2010, Cherry Hinkle - All Rights Reserved) Some drawings are in the following UFO Digest article at: http://www.ufodigest.com/article/ufo-spotlight-onreptilian-encounter-nevada-desert
Henderson, Nevada: The city of Las Vegas and well-known Las Vegas Strip with is their glittering casinos, as well as the communities of North of Las Vegas and Henderson, fill this crowded desert Nevada valley. Black Mountain looms over the desert community of Henderson situated on the east slopes of the valley. That dark mountain is the home of many television towers and other towers on the top. It is the home of mines and caves that pock the sides of Black Mountain.
Today, there are businesses and homes, and a freeway that cut into the slopes of that mountain, but in the middle of the 1970’s just open desert from the middle of town to the mountain. More open undisturbed miles of desert until sparkling Las Vegas. With the building boom, homes and businesses crowd the once open desert.
In 1977, every kid in town knew the rules - do not climb or play on that mountain. All parents understood of the constant danger of the deep open mines and caves, but danger lures the younger set, and several deaths occurred on the slopes of Black Mountain.
It was on a pleasant day, and my thirteen-year-old son Marc and his friend Harry, roamed in the empty desert between my house, and the forbidden Black Mountain. Being adventurous boys, the chance to explore a cave and carry back a rock or two, and a lifetime of memories is enough to break the rules.
They hiked maybe the scant one mile across the desert and climbed the little hills in front of Black Mountain. On the backside of one of the little hills, Marc and Harry located a cave. They had to squirm into the narrow opening, and belly crawl through the cave to the larger room and turned on their small pocket flashlights. They saw a circular room roughly nine feet across. Near the back wall, they spotted a large deeper hole. They found several large branches that someone had dragged a couple large branches about a mile from closest tree, and tossed the branches into the hole creating a makeshift ladder to climb down into the lower pit.
The pit was roomy, with a short annex. Occasional debris littered the rocky floor, like a tin can or two, a battered teen magazine perched on a small outcrop of rock that served as shelf. The boys explored to main cave, then turned their attention to the short tunnel or annex.
Sounds carry in a cave, and the walls slightly vibrate if a loud voice reverberates throughout the small room. It was then, that the boys heard the sounds of a voices and maybe the distance humming of machines. Intrigued by the thought of they were mining nearby, the boys went a deeper into the tunnel. On the far end, they found a rusty metal door, and near the door a strange metal rod. The one-foot rod was lightweight and resembled aluminum, with a cap on one end and a few strange engravings on one side.
Marc weaved the rod through the belt loops of his jeans, focused the beam of his flashlight on the door, and tried the doorknob. He discovered a strong bolt secured the door from the reverse side. Harry shook the doorknob and pounded on it a few times. Startled, the boys heard the sound or guttural harsh voices talking, and the certain sound of approaching footsteps.
They suddenly felt a wave of fear, knowing they were inside a forbidden cave, weaponless, and an angry animalistic growling voice attempted to open to the door any second.
Marc, the taller of the two, pushed Harry up the makeshift ladder and scrambled up the wood branch to the upper level of the cave. They heard the metal door clank and squeak loudly as the door it opened. The boys crawled as quickly through the narrow tunnel, and outside, the stood up and ran about the distance of a city block away from the cave entrance. They laughed at their dirty hands and faces, relieved the escaped from and the unknown man with harsh voices in the cave. They looked at the strangely engraved rod, trying to figure out what language might include circles, ovals, swirls and triangles.
Without a warning, they heard a loud threatening growl. Harry and Marc looked back at the cave entrance and to their horrified eyes; they watched as a very large greenish humanoid struggled to force his big body out of narrow cave. The boys screamed and started running down the slope of the hill, running top speed! They didn’t look back until they were near my back yard. They slowed down, breathing hard and glanced back to the mountain.
To their shock and fear, the huge humanoid was trotting towards them! They started screaming again put on a burst of speed and ran into the house; Marc locked the door screaming: Mom! Mom! Help us Mom! He’s going to get us Alarmed, I ran into family room, and both boys threw their arms around me, crying. They both were shaking, not just their hands, but also their entire body shook! Wet tears left muddy tracks across their cheeks. Marc begged, “Don’t open the door Mom, he going to get us!” Meanwhile, Harry added. “He is big, and looks mean! Don’t open that door – please, please, don’t open that door!”
Instantly I was furious with the man that generated such terror these young boys! At thirteen, boys are usually trying to impress everyone how brave they can be, so I know it took a lot of nerve to admit that much fear. I told them: “Boys, you go get a drink of water and let me go talk to this man,” but they tightened their grip on me, screaming:
“No, No, No! That guy will kill you! He is not a man! Don’t go out there Mom!” I managed to coax one arm free from each boy. I looked into their worried eyes. “Boys – nobody is going to kill anybody, and you know I won’t allow anyone to hurt you! Now – what do you mean he is not a man? Is it a woman that is threatening you?” “No Mom, it’s a man, sort of, he looks like a man. But his face looks like a snake or Yeah, like a Lizard man! He’s ugly and he doesn’t wear anything. He’s naked, except a wide belt with stuff on it.”
I stared at my son, imagining some teenager wearing a Halloween costume. I laughed a little, and said, “Boys, it was just someone playing a joke on you!” Both boys started protesting again, both talking at the same time. I could hear the panic in their voices rising again, and finally Harry said, “That guy couldn’t be wear any costume, he could barely squeeze himself out of the cave, he would have ripped he costume into pieces!”
“What cave? Did you boys to up on Black Mountain even when you knew the danger?” I asked. “Mom – listen to me, it was a lizard man and he was naked. I’ve never seen a costume that shows everything, he was naked Mom, and it was not a costume! You know what I mean Mom?”
With difficulty, I untangled myself from the tight grip boys, and looked out the window. I peered carefully out the widow expecting the spectacle of a "Lizard man," but nothing moved, not a child, not a man and no lizard man. I reassured the boys the danger is in the past and the man was long gone.
It was at that point, I noticed Marc was holding a strange metal rod. “What do you have in your hand son?” Marc glanced at the rod and threw it on the floor as if it would burn his hand. I leaned to pick it up but Harry grabbed my arm, warning it was dangerous, maybe a weapon. I picked it up reminding them they carried it from the mountain safely all that time, so it couldn’t be too dangerous.
The rod was approximate one and a half inch across, maybe a foot long with a slight indentation at one end and a plain gray cap on the other. I looked at the bizarre symbols engraved in a three-inch section of the rod. It was just symbols, from spirals, circles of different sizes, a few triangles, and a few unknown symbols. There were no levers or buttons, and the cap at the end didn’t seem to move. The rod, with its professionally created symbols and smooth to the touch, I knew it was not a toy, but nothing I recognized.
It was late afternoon, and the long shadows cast ominous shapes in the yard, I knew Harry was still too nervous to walk home alone. Marc and I walked the distance of two houses and made sure he was safe inside before we walked home. That night, Marc was still nervous, peeking out the curtains often, expecting the worse. Marc played Scrabble with his sisters, anything to keep his mind busy. Near midnight, we went to bed.
It must have been around two in the morning when Marc shook me whispering harshly that someone is trying to get into his bedroom window. I hoped it was just a nightmare, or his nerves were still on edge. Quietly we slipped into his bedroom and listened to the sounds of scraping at the window edge! He was not mistaken – in the light of the moon I could make out the silhouette head and shoulders of a man.
I was alone with my four kids, no husband to protect us, so I grabbed my flashlight; suddenly tossed the curtains open to face the man. There was a glare from the flashlight on the window, but past glare that I could clearly see a large head with ridges on the top, other ridges on his cheekbones, and the glow of golden eyes. Marc and I stood still, unmoving, both fear and shock kept us frozen. The Lizard man didn’t move either, his hand still poised in his attempt pry the window open. He hand was large, with webbed rough, gnarly looking fingers, with powerful claws.
After a couple minutes, not seconds, but long agonized minutes with our hearts pounding I knew I had to do something. One hand still holding the flashlight beam on his face and my eyes still locked into those golden eyes, I fumbled around in the dark with my other hand, hoping to find something to use as a weapon, is needed. He glanced at my hand, looked back into my eyes. He turned his head a little, as if he was asking a questioning, he slightly opened his lipless lips, displaying four of his pointed teeth, and suddenly he turned and ran off into the desert.
Marc suddenly closed the curtains, grabbed my hand and led my shaking legs to the edge of his bed. We sat there for a few silent minutes. We just sat there, trying to comprehend the incredible event, with little success. We started talking at the same time, and started checking the doors and windows repeatedly. His sisters were completely awake by then, and we all talked all night, going from windows to doors until full sunlight.
Later in the morning, we decided the reason the Lizard man was breaking in the house was to reclaim that metal rod. Marc and I hiked back to the cave and placed the strange rod beside the cave entrance. The Lizard man never again attempted to enter this house, and for that, I am relieved.
After a few days, I went outside and looked at that window. It was then that I found that that bottom edge of that window is close to six feet high from the ground. It was a shock to realize the lizard man must have been very tall, over seven feet tall! Inside the windows are high, but about five feet high, from outside there is no way no one could look through this window – unless they were extremely tall.
This event is real. “Harry” is not the real name, but since I have been unable to locate him and ask permission, I used a pseudo name. Marc’s name is real, and he was my only son. Marc died in 1999. I still live in sight of Black Mountain. People living close to that mountain sometimes report underground rumbling at night when it is quiet. UFOs are often seen and photographed over Black Mountain, that shouldn’t be too surprising; we live not far from Area 51 in Nevada. (End)
While Cherry’s report is characteristic of some types of reptilian species, alien autopsy reports often describe that the skin and other characteristics on some types of Greys that seems to indicate reptilian ancestry, other autopsy reports indicate maybe even amphibian ancestry where the species has no digestive tract and may absorb nutrients through the skin. It’s clear that there are several species lumped together under the category of Grey and I don’t think this will only be cleared up over time as more information becomes available in the public domain. It also would appear that artificial biological engineering could be involved because of the lack of a digestive tract on some of these species.
I did an interview with military whistleblower and contactee Clifford Stone in April of 2011 and he told me that the skin on an alien he had communicated with since childhood had a chameleon type skin, which may or may not be the same as described below in an excerpt from Len Springfield’s Status Report 2.
The report interviews several medical doctors who did autopsies on ET bodies from UFO crash sites. “ET had large heads and were around 4 ft. tall. They have small noses and mouths with no ears or hair. The ET photo that I have was taken by an ET and has an eye diameter of an inch. He has his left hand raised in a salute. That hand has 4 fingers on it with one finger twice as long as either outside finger.
The photo was taken at a range of 3 ft. from the waist up. Brain capacity is 1800 cc versus 1300 cc for the average human. The skin is grey or ashen and under the microscope appears mesh like. This mesh like appearance gives it the reptilian texture of granular skinned lizards like iguana or chameleon. There was a colorless liquid in the body without red cells, no lymphocytes, no hemoglobin. There was no digestive system, intestinal, alimentary canal, or rectal area in the ET autopsy. "
The following case gives the reader further insight into military interactions and involvement with extraterrestrials called the Greys whose evolution may be a combination of artificial and natural evolution. I have had trouble as to where I wanted to put this in the book because it would go well in the next chapter on military interactions with extraterrestrials as well. I settled on this chapter because of such detailed clear descriptions of the species known as the Greys, Dr. Berthold E. Schwarz, M.D. is a highly regarded UFO/ET investigator and he did an interview with an American intelligence agent many years ago. This case is from Dr. Schwarz’s book, UFO Dynamics, Book 2, page, 536.
“The intelligence officer being interviewed said a conversation had come up with a fellow intelligence officer with high security clearances and his friend asked if wanted to see the aliens and their crafts. He suspected this was some sort of test because his friend drove right through several security checkpoints and down underground without being checked. He thought maybe this was prearranged because of what appeared to be very lax security and that somebody was testing a battle tested intelligence agent to see how he would react cold turkey to such evidence of extraterrestrial life. The story follows.
It was several years ago. I was with the military intelligence unit in Arizona. I met a friend of mine who shall remain nameless, and as I happened to mention the subject of UFOs–experiences I had overseas –he said. Well would you like to see some Aliens? I said he was joking, but when I saw he was not, I said OK. I did know that he was with a base in Arizona, so he drove me there, but I doubt if I could ever find that place again.
There was a highway above ground that went over the base, and after a turn at the entrance, we went underground. We violated every security code in the book. Because of this and the fact that I had a top secret clearance at the time I wondered if this was some kind of a set-up –that they wanted to put a man with combat experience in this spot and see what he does – to sow the seeds of doubt. It was too obvious. We used a staff car and not a private one. We entered a vaulted area. Now this was on a week-end and the security amazed me because it was so lax.
When we got in I observed five humanoid figures. I’ll give a description as best I can. Remember I doubted what I saw. They were very, very white. There were no ears, no nostrils. There were only openings: a very small mouth and the eyes were large. There was no facial hair, no head hair, on pubic hair. They were nude. I think the tallest one could have been about three and a half feet – maybe a little bit taller. As I recall there were three males and two females. The heads were large–not totally out of proportion–but large. Does that make sense? It wasn’t exaggerated, in other words. Slender fingers: slender legs. There was a small bone structure. Can’t think of what else?
Schwarz: Did you see the genitals? I don’t remember seeing that in the men, or the female organs in the women. No, I don’t remember seeing breasts on the women? Schwarz: How could you tell they were women? As I recall, he told me that the female of the group, the youngest female, was not there. Now he told me that they (the entities) were vegetarians. The teeth were smooth, flat and very small. When I saw the smallest female in the group I could see clear suture marks.
My friend said there had been an autopsy, opened with a Y incision. From all this they concluded that she was hundreds of years old. There was no bruising on the body. There were no signs of injuries to any of the bodies. I wanted out. I was scared. I wanted my security, and what protection did I have if I were caught? I had no right to be there. I didn’t understand anything. You get in and you don’t get out. I wanted to have a clean record.
They had a craft, and here’s how they got it. He didn’t give me a date, but it was seen on radar in this area (Arizona). The craft appeared on radar, and then it disappeared. It was slowly going from left to right in an arching, falling-leaf motion, slowly falling or descending. You could pinpoint it by crass-triangulation (on radar). There was no pattern to this descent. It just continued from left to right until it finally settled in the desert.
When they (the military) got out and they started examining the craft they found a small hole. Evidently a meteorite had hit this craft, causing rapid decompression, and the people died from that. They were in their seats which were tilted to back on a seventy degree angle. I left my finger prints all over. I still doubt everything. They do have the craft but where, I don’t know.
Schwarz asks, “You never saw it?”
I saw something, but that wasn’t that. I saw other parts that they had taken from the machine and things like that from other craft. Schwarz asks, “Other craft?” “Crashes and things like that. He told me about one particular crash. Out of somewhere there was this horrendous explosion which almost knocked a tourist’s car off the road. The tourist reported it as a meteorite strike and they went out and found a UFO half buried in the sand with absolutely no damage to it.”Schwarz asks, was this in Arizona too? No, this was in Nevada, and this craft was brought back to the site that I saw.
The types of extraterrestrials that I find myself most interested in are the many different human types. I and many other investigators believe from the evidence, that our humanity on this planet is only a small fraction of the total population of humans scattered across the universe. I don’t want to get too deep into these ET human contact cases. I would like to leave this to another chapter where I will get into human ET motives, agendas and our integration into the greater celestial humanity, but I thought the following cases would present a bit of an overview of human to human contact cases.
I think it is becoming obvious to people like myself that there is natural primate evolution on other planets, but the evidence suggests that the situation is further complicated by all the artificial genetic breeding and genetic engineering going on between species from different worlds from which we are not immune. Because our level of technology is still low, extraterrestrials can pretty much do what they want with us within limits, including mining and manipulating our genome. I am beginning to suspect that there are as many or more different breeds of humans as we have of dogs and cats.
A human alien encounter 7 years before either Roswell or Kenneth Arnold's sighting helps us to understand where some UFO's come from and why they are visiting our planet. The investigator states: “For more than two decades, Udo Wartena, a Dutch immigrant living in the Western U.S., kept what had happened to him one spring morning in May 1940 a secret, not even telling his wife. Before dying in 1989 he finally confided in two friends and then wrote the details of his experience down so it would not be lost.
Udo's incredible story remained completely unknown in UFO circles however, until the details were finally released by Australian researcher Warren Aston. Before we review what took place in this deceptively simple report we must remember that this is an unusually early case in the pre-1947 period, which has yielded only small numbers of UFO sightings worldwide, and almost no cases where the occupants of UFOs were reported.
Let us remember that in 1940, World War II still raged in Europe, the first satellite was still 17 years in the future and the sound barrier had not yet been broken. Udo Wartena’s experience not only took place in daytime, but involved intimate and open alien contact with a reluctant witness. I have assembled the following from two handwritten accounts and one typewritten account by Udo and from verbal recollections through interviews with the handful of close friends and family members whom he confided in.
Udo's encounter took place mid-morning early in May, 1940 at his mining claim in the forest near the base of Boulder Mountain, a short distance from Canyon Ferry Lake, near the small town of Townsend, southeast of Helena in Montana. Udo, a 37-year-old miner of Dutch origin was working in the area part-time for the Northwest Mining Company. During the previous month he had found a glacial deposit at the base of the mountain, which showed indications of gold-bearing ore. He began working the site in his spare time and first cleared an old and neglected ditch, which ran around the mountainside, using it to divert the water he would need in his mining from a nearby stream.
While moving some large boulders, he heard a humming or droning sound, which he first took to be aircraft, which flew over the area occasionally from Great Falls base in the north. At first Udo took little notice of the sound, but when the noise continued he thought that a vehicle had driven up so he climbed up onto higher ground. A large disc-shaped object, measuring about thirty five feet high and over a hundred feet across, was hovering a short distance away just above the meadow where he had built his dam. Udo described it as like "two soup plates, one inverted over the other" and resembling "stainless steel in color, though not as bright and shiny".
As he stood watching, thinking at first that it was an airship, a circular stairway with a solid bottom forming part of the craft's hull was let down and a man who descended began walking towards him. "As I was somewhat more than interested," Udo later wrote, "I went to meet him. He stopped when we were ten or twelve feet apart. He was a nice looking man, seemingly about my age. He wore a light gray pair of overalls, a tam (a common term in that period derived from "Tam O 'Shanter" - a circular cap) of the same material on his head and on his feet were slippers or moccasins".
The man came and shook his hand, apologizing that they had not known anyone was in the area, explaining that it was not their custom to interrupt or allow them to be seen. "He asked me if it would be alright if they took some water, and as I could not see why not, I said 'sure'. He then gave a signal and a hose or pipe was let down. His English was like mine, but he spoke slowly, as if he were a linguist and had to pick his way."
The man asked Udo what he was doing and this was explained. Udo, asked if he would be interested in coming aboard the ship, went willingly and without any sense of fear. As he got underneath the craft, Udo described the humming as "not loud, though it seemed to go through you"; once inside the ship the noise was hardly noticeable except what came up the stairwell.
"We entered into a room about twelve by sixteen feet, with a close-fitting sliding door on the farther end, indirect lighting near the ceiling and nice upholstered benches around the sides.
There was an older man already in the room, plainly dressed, but his hair was snow white. I then noticed that the younger man's hair was also white." Udo described him as being "young and strong-looking" and having clear, almost translucent skin. Perhaps this explains the curious fact that Udo seems to have asked their age, even before asking their origin; clearly there was something about their appearance to prompt such an inquiry.
The men answered that one was "about six hundred years old" as we measure time and the other was "over nine hundred years" of age. They informed him that they knew over five hundred languages and were learning ours and improving upon them all the time. When asked why they wanted to take water from the stream and not the lake, the younger man replied that, "the water was good and was free of algae (as if they had retrieved the same before) and it was convenient".
Many years later Udo indicated to a family member that hydrogen extracted from the water was in fact the fuel source for the craft. Udo then asked what caused the noise of the craft and was not only shown the mechanism that powered the disc, but also given what appears to be a full and open discussion of the key principle involved, in the following words:"...'as you noticed we are floating above the ground, and though the ground slopes the ship is level. There are in the outside rim, two flywheels, one turning one way and the other in the opposite direction'.
"He explained [that] this gives the ship its own gravitation or rather overcomes the gravitational pull of the Earth and other planets, the sun and stars; and through the pull of the stars and planets...to ride on like you do when you sail on ice.” An interesting analogy. Elsewhere Udo described the 'flywheels' or rings as being about three feet wide and several inches thick, separated by rods turned by motors and next to 'battery of transformer'-like units all around the inside perimeter of the circular ship.
Udo was told that the two revolving rings or wheels developed an electromagnetic force, a term he did not understand at the time and inferred from what he learned that the ability to develop a cheaper and more practical energy source was of the utmost importance to mankind.
He was also told that the craft was able to focus on a distant star and use its energy to draw itself through space at speeds faster than light, quote: "skipping upon the light waves". These 1940 explanations seem remarkably similar to the propulsion method Robert Lazar claimed to have learned while working on alien craft in possession of the U.S. government at 'Area 51' and also sounds very much like some of the theories now being advanced by physicists: The creation of a local distortion of space-time is expanded behind the spaceship, contracted ahead of it, yielding a hyper surfer like motion faster than the speed of light as seen by observers...
In essence, on the outgoing leg of its journey the spaceship is pushed away from Earth and pulled toward its distant destination by the engineered local expansion of space-time itself. • Commentary on practical faster-than-light travel as proposed by Miguel Alcubierre, published in Classical and Quantum Gravity, 1994.
Udo then wrote "I then asked them where they got the energy to run such a large ship? They said from the sun and other stars and would store this in batteries, though this was for emergency use only. They carried another source but did not explain this to me..." Asked where they came from, he was told they lived on a distant planet and gave its name - unfortunately not recorded by Udo - and pointed in its direction. Udo asked what their object was for coming to Earth?
"Well." he said, "as you have noticed, we look pretty much as you do, so we mingle with your people, gather information, leave instructions or give help where needed." Explaining that they were monitoring the progression and retrogression of our societies, the man claimed that they lived among us from time to time, a clear statement indicating long-term covert alien surveillance prior to 1940. Udo wrote that he did not understand what was meant by them "giving help where needed" but he did not feel it proper to ask about it further.
When Udo asked if they knew of Jesus Christ and about religion he was told that they would "like to speak of these things but are unable. We cannot interfere in any way". The area of religion and belief systems was to be the only question the aliens refused to discuss. During his time on board, Udo was invited to be examined for impurities in his system by an "X-ray like machine" which passed over him. Little was recorded about this examination however and Udo seems to have attached scant importance to it.
While talking with the two men, a light had come on which Udo believed indicated that the water had been taken care of. He mentioned that he felt it was time for him to leave. The alien's response was to ask if he was interested in going with them, to which Udo responded: " I said that I thought it would be interesting, but felt it would inconvenience too many people. Later, I wondered why I said that".
Some time later, Udo recalled an incident about two years previously where a young man had vanished nearby without a trace, despite days of searching by a sheriff's team. He wondered if the young man had met the same craft and gone with them.
As he started to leave the ship, they suggested to Udo that he "...'tell no-one, as no one would believe me at the time', but in years to come I could tell about this experience. When I walked away from the ship they raised the stairway, and when I got a couple of hundred feet away from the ship I turned around. "A number [of] more portholes had opened up and though I could not see anyone, I felt sure they could see me, anyway I waved at them. The ship then rose straight up until it cleared the trees, then while circling slightly, it practically rose straight up and in a very short while was completely out of sight.
"As I didn't have a watch, I did not know for sure how long I had been with them, but according to the sun it was around noon, or somewhat around two hours." Udo later related how some type of "energy" had permeated the area and that he lost his strength for several hours and was unable to walk. When his strength finally returned he went over to where the huge craft had hovered, finding only crushed grass where the stairway had rested. Later, still feeling overwhelmed by his unexpected experience, he walked back to his base camp. Warren P. Aston 1997
A Second Human Contact Case
This second human contact case called Humanoid Dies in Sweden, is one of my favorites in that it is a moving account that illustrates so well the humanity of other human extraterrestrials and that they are really not that different than ourselves. They are just more technologically advanced. The title of the article is, Humanoid Dies in Sweden, and the translation is by John Fontaine
One morning when several schools were visiting the stand, I noticed a distinguished gentleman, about 60 years old, who listened to the lecture several times and became extremely interested each time the slide-show came to the section about humanoids, a series of slides produced on the basis of a substantial number of interviews with witnesses. Even though the lecture was interesting, I could not understand why an ordinary listener would attend it several times, so my curiosity was aroused, and I started to talk to the man.
At the beginning he was very reserved, and did not want to go into details, but when he saw that I took him seriously, he eventually told his story. For an hour he told about his experience while I took notes, and indeed, it was a strange story: "I once saw and talked to a man like the one shown on the slides. In 1955 I was working as a lumberjack in the Gulf of Bothnia in Vestra Norrland in Sweden with two brothers who supplied timber to a sawmill in mid-Sweden. One early morning in July, about six o'clock, we were busy cutting trees, when we heard a sound like a big animal thrashing its way through the forest, or like branches breaking and rattling.
A moment later we saw a cigar-shaped object flying haphazardly in between the trees and branches as leaves were falling to the ground. My immediate thought was that it was a small airplane, which had lost its wings and was now preparing, without control, for a crash landing. Approximately 300-400 meters away flowed a river, which the aircraft evidently was heading for.
It was obvious that the aircraft would hit the ground within a few seconds, so we started to run in the direction where it had disappeared. 15-20 meters before we came out of the forest, the aircraft crashed in a clearing 30-40 meters from the river. I don't know what we had expected, maybe a deafening crash, when the impact of the aircraft with the ground caused the petrol to explode. But it did not happen. Not a sound was heard, but a gigantic flash of light engulfed the whole area like a vast flashbulb, so that the sunlight almost disappeared.
The light was so intense that we in fact could see through the trees. For a second I could see the grains of the trees and these were more than one meter in diameter, like an x-ray. Seconds later came a vacuum wave sucking everything towards the center of the light. All three of us tumbled forwards, branches and leaves flying past us. It all probably lasted only a fraction of a second, but I still remember how I crashed into a tree, time stopped, and my whole life was reviewed in my mind in flash. Even the normal sound of the forest had stopped. When we had recovered somewhat, we went out into the clearing to see what had happened. Nothing was to be seen at the point of impact, only a few piles of timber were scattered around. We looked bewildered at each other and decided to return to work.
At the entrance to the forest one of the brothers suddenly shouted: "Here's a dwarf dressed in uniform." Obviously the plane has crashed in the river and he must have been hurled out. ""For a while we stood paralyzed gazing at the lifeless body. He was small of build, about 110-120 centimeters tall. Around his body a white light vibrated like a halo. One of the brothers tried to touch the man to see whether he was still alive he retreated with a scream. He was deadly pale and said he felt as if he had received an electrical shock. At the same time the stranger opened his eyes and said in perfect Swedish: "Do not touch me, it will only bring you difficulties.
His Swedish was so perfect that the brothers who spoke a Swedish dialect could not understand very much from what was later said.” “Now you know who I am," he said. He knew it beforehand what we were going to answer and just demonstrated that his question was correctly grasped. Suddenly I became quite calm and studied him closely. He was no dwarf. He was very well-built with broad shoulders and normal features. His skin was yellowish like that of an Asian. The eyes were deep socketed and black, without any white around.
His face was badly bruised with a couple of big wounds on the chin and on the forehead. It did not bleed but the skin watered around the wounds. The top of his head was slightly downy and the hair almost white. The earlobes were one with the neck and resembled a shark's fin. The lips were wrinkled, narrow and colorless. When he smiled reassuringly, which he did a lot, he revealed a row of small teeth in the upper as well as the lower part of his mouth. I especially noticed that his canine teeth were flat and as broad as two of our front teeth. His hands were small with five slender fingers without nails and when he moved his hand it looked as if the ring finger had grown together to the little finger, if not they moved synchronized.
His uniform was of a reddish metal and appeared glued to his body closely. Head and hands were free, but at the feet the clothing continued into a couple of closed shoes, size 35-37. The foot-soles were ribbed and vibrated, and for a moment I thought of caterpillars on a tank. The stranger looked at me and nodded slightly. There was no doubt that he knew what I was thinking. With those shoes he could roll forwards and backwards without moving his feet. Around the waist he had a broad silvery metal belt with an unusually large buckle, which shone slightly in a light-blue shade, which later when he was dead, turned dark blue. In the middle of the buckle was a sign in yellow -- UV -- it looked like a V which was incorporated in a U.
He knew I was studying him, and he said; "It is because of the clothing I can stay with you a while. Internally, I am destroyed." His right hand disappeared into his clothing at the hip, where no pocket could be seen. He brought out a rectangular object. It was of the size of a box of matches with 12 small indents. With a slate pencil attached to the object, he engaged the different indents several times. When completed he tried to throw it a few yards away.
"Don't touch it," he said smilingly. "It will tell my fellow men what has happened, so that they don't come looking for me. Where I come from somebody is waiting for me.” The stranger lay for a while as if asleep. His hands were tightly clasped, and it was evident he went through great pains. Suddenly the brothers became somewhat confused, looked at each other, and then went back to the forest without a word. Later, years after when recalling the incident, I am convinced that the stranger one way or the other asked the brothers to leave, without saying a word.
I sat talking and listening to him for two hours before he died. What they talked about for those two hours I could not get the witness to reveal. I begged and urged him, but there was nothing to do, just a few fragments like these. The stranger came from a place in the vicinity of the constellation we call -The Eagle-. Several races from space have visited us, some so far advanced, that we could only see them when they materialized or dematerialized to visit a parallel universe in the orbit of earth.
Some visitors kept people on earth under surveillance and had done so for thousands of years. Others took samples of the earth, with a view to later settlements. Still others have had contact with mankind for centuries. In this context it is rather immaterial what was talked about even if it would have been interesting with further information about this conversation. I could understand from the witness that it had not been what was normally being told in connection with other encounters of this kind.
The witness continued: "Just before the stranger died, he gave me a folded bag from the invisible pocket and said: "When I am dead, the light will disappear from my body and with the help of the other two men you shall put me in this bag and carry me out into the river where I shall disappear. Then you shall rinse yourself thoroughly in the water, so that you don't get ill.
"He was now breathing heavily, and I could see the end was near. The halo around him became weaker and gradually disappeared. His light blue buckle gradually got darker. He looked at me for a moment and smiled. Then he said something in a language I have never heard before or since. Suddenly he switched into Swedish, and I got the last couple of sentences... "You have come without any wish to and depart against you own wish. Our life is like vapor.”
"He said a few more worlds, but his voice was so weak that I did not catch them. I am convinced he prayed to some deity before dying. I was very moved. With the help of the brothers we got him into the bag and carried him out into the river. The bag smelled of sulphur and burned our hands as if they were raw flesh. He was quite heavy between 90 to 100 kilos.
When the bag came into the water, it started bubbling around it and we realized that some chemical process had started. After 5 minutes nothing remained, and I thought that maybe the stranger had hoped to crash in the river to a quick death, instead of lying for a couple of hours suffering, whilst a minor in the mind asked some silly questions. He would probably have preferred to die alone, thinking of his home light years away.
"I think that was all;" said the witness and prepared to take leave. "I stayed for a couple of years with the brothers, but we seldom talked about that special day. I think, however, each of us went through it every day. The brothers are dead now, but I remember it like it had happened just yesterday. Years later I knew him immediately from your slide. It is strange; I thought I was the only one who knew this type. Over the years I have seen many pictures and drawings of visitors from space, but I've seen nobody like him until today.”
The witness produced a piece of metal and held it to my nose. "Look" he said. I looked bewildered. It resembled a bit crochet hook. "What is it?" He laughed knowingly. "A couple of days after the incident I wandered around where he had been lying. The rectangular object was gone, but the pencil slate was lying in the grass shining. I have kept it as a proof that I was not dreaming.” He left, and while I gazed astonished after him, he disappeared in the crowd. An anonymous, who with his story and pencil slate could hit the front page on the world's newspapers.
I believe that only because the story is true, it is possible to carry it alone for so many years. A psychiatrist could possibly determine that a slide picture opened up for a long subdued incident, suppressed of fear for ridicule. There are probably many stories like this which are unfortunately never known.
A Third Human Contact Case
The Villas-Boas Case (1957) sticks in my mind because it clearly shows evidence of human extraterrestrial interest in hybridization between human extraterrestrials and ourselves something of great importance to our race that I will discuss in depth in another chapter.
The case in its entirety is a 23 page report which was submitted to APRO by Dr. Olavo Fontes, Professor of Medicine at the Brazilian National School of Medicine. It includes a verbatim report given to him by Villas-Boas and recorded by journalist Joao Martins and translated by Mrs. Irene Granchi. Included below is a summary from that detailed report.
Antonio Villas-Boas was cultivating a field on a tractor when he was chased and captured by four small men that came up to about his shoulder. The first one grabbed him by the shoulder and Antonio in a state of panic gave this man a push that sent him reeling and started to run but was attacked and grabbed by three more men of slightly larger size. They lifted him up and dragged him back to their ship. He yelled and cursed and cried for help. When they got to the machine he was lifted up and shoved up a ladder which was very difficult because the ladder was flexible and was made for only one person at a time. (Note there is a lot more detail in all this and I am just giving a brief description of this case.)
He said that the little men when they talked amongst themselves, they sounded like dogs making little howls that varied in pitch and frequency. After this howling talk amongst themselves, the little men forcibly undressed poor Antonio and smeared a liquid all over his body as he struggled and screamed.
Antonio was taken to a square room where blood samples were taken with two very thick rubber like pipes that took blood but only leaved an area that itched and burned later. (Many details are omitted as to the dress and description of occupants of the craft.) He got sick, was left alone for a while in a room until a nude ET woman walked in. “She walked slowly and seemed amused at Villas-Boas’s open-mouthed amazement at seeing her. Her blonde, nearly white hair, big blue, slanted eyes and even features contributed to an unusual beauty. The hair was smooth, not very thick, less than shoulder length and was parted in the center and turned up slightly at the ends. She wore no makeup, her nose was straight and small and her face fine-boned. The contour of her face, which showed very prominent cheekbones and a severely pointed chin, as well as slit-thin lips, was the only outstandingly unusual features.
Villas-Boas noted that the prominent cheekbones made her face appear to be very wide, even wider than that of an Indio native (Brazilian). The woman’s body was well built with high, separated breasts, small waist, flat belly, well developed hips and large thighs. Her feet were small, her hands long and narrow. Villas-Boas estimated her height to be about 4 feet 6 inches, he being about 5 feet 5 ½ inches. He later deduced that she was probably the smallest of the five “men” in suits who had been the first to grapple with him in the field.
The woman’s purpose was immediately evident. She held herself close to Villas-Boas, rubbing her head against his face. She did not attempt to communicate in any way except with occasional grunts and howling noises, like the “men” had uttered. A very normal sexual act took place and after each one she breathed with difficulty. After the second act the woman began to shy away from the man and he became a little annoyed at this.
The howling noises she made during the togetherness had nearly spoiled the whole act for they reminded him of an animal. At no time would she allow him to kiss her and his overtures in this respect were met by a gentle bite on the chin. Some of the physical features noted by Villas-Boas were the woman’s very light skin, freckled arms, and deep red pubic and underarm hair which contrasted vividly with the almost white hair of her head.