“Transportation is more than just asphalt, concrete and steel; it’s about PEOPLE.”
-- Rodney E. Slater, former Secretary of Transportation
Transportation Planning Impacts Everyone
If you walk, ride a bike, drive a car, or take a bus, train or airplane, you are impacted by transportation planning. And, although most people don’t think about it, almost all of the things you buy at a store are delivered by trucks, trains or air cargo.
Transportation in our region should reflect how transportation impacts you, your neighbor, and everyone else in the region. This can only be done if you get involved, learn how transportation planning works and voice your opinion.
Why should I get involved?
You may have already been involved in supporting or opposing where a new road will be or whether bus service will be cut or added. While public participation in these projects is very important, transportation planning begins many years before these projects even get funded and are ready to go.
Once the bulldozer is on the road, there is a good chance that the project has been in the works for 10 or more years. At that point in the process, citizens can have more of an impact on HOW the project takes place rather than WHETHER it takes place. You might be able to have sidewalks added to a road project, for example.
If you want to help determine WHETHER projects get funded you must get involved in long range transportation planning!
3 Things You Can Do
- Learn– The transportation planning process can be complicated, but billions of dollars are at stake! Learn more about how transportation planning affects you, how the planning process works in our region, and what kinds of things you can do to make an impact.
- Participate – There are many opportunities for public participation. You can be involved at the regional level, the local level, or based on the kind of issues you are interested in.
- Speak Out – Tell others what you think and share the ideas you have on how we can make the transportation system and planning process even better.
We are all affected by transportation and we all have a hand in how it will work in the future. By getting involved, you help shape that future.
For more information:
Monica B. Haines Benkhedda, firstname.lastname@example.org or 410-732-0500 x1047