A project to preserve sounds of the North East's history for people around the globe has been launched.
Music manuscripts, song lyrics, photographs and classic sound recordings have been transferred to digital and put on the internet.
Traditional songs and compositions, including some of the region's rarest folk music dating back to the 1690s, have been safeguarded for music lovers for generations to come.
The Folk Archive Resource North East (FARNE) project - the first of its kind in the country - scoured the world for pieces for its unique online resource.
Spearheaded by Gateshead Council, The Sage Gateshead and the University of Newcastle, the project has involved years of painstaking detective work.
"Bringing these historical records together has given us the chance to make information available to the whole world. I would like to say thank you to all the families who contributed," said Ros Rigby, The Sage's performance programme director.
Alongside the archive, the online site offers a listening post, similar to that found in music stores, Radio FARNE, a collection of recordings available to listen to online, a resource so people can find out about instruments, how they sound and how to play them and a conferencing facility.
Alistair Anderson, Folkworks artistic director, said: "There are hundreds of musicians across the region who will find the FARNE website an invaluable source of information - enabling them to access music from previous generations. It is important to share our musical history, and this project will enable us to build networks all over the world, via the internet."
Eventually, the archive will be based in the Music Information Resource Centre at The Sage Gateshead, which will be open 16 hours a day for those who don't have a computer at home.
Funding for the internet archive has come from the New Opportunities Fund's £50m UK-wide digitisation programme, designed to enable learning materials and resources in galleries, libraries, museums and other centres to be made directly accessible to homes and communities via the internet. Contributions to the FARNE collection were made by museums, libraries and archives in the region, including the Beamish Open Air Museum and the Chantry Bagpipe Museum in Morpeth.
Folk enthusiasts including students from Newcastle University's Folk and Traditional Music degree, clog dancers from Dunston Riverside Community Primary School and The Walker Technology College ceilidh band.