It was not unlike yesterday for Finnegan. Nor would it be unlike the next day, he figured. The clouds were thick and low, spreading the same gray they always cast on the horizon where the Atlantic meets the sky. The two entities were similar, Finnegan believed: neither were as blue as the storybooks said they should be, and both seem endless. Finnegan’s boat thrust away from shore in search of amberjack fish. Finnegan’s boat was not big nor small, but it was large enough to carry his haul to the cannery and small enough to make a weaker man nervous about any storm. It would take much more than that to make Finnegan nervous, however.

Reaching his fishing spot, dropped lures off the starboard side and prayed the decorative barnacles would not cut his lines today. Before making it back into the cabin to escape the rain, one of his rods began dancing violently. Controlling the wild vibrations and manning the reel, Finnegan fought with whatever was attached to the hook. It was big, he knew that. Winning the battle, Finnegan saw an amberjack with the brightest yellow stripe he had ever seen on the silver-bodied fish. Wrestling the fish aboard, it stopped fighting and seemed to stare directly into Finnegan’s eyes. Then, it spoke.

Over the next few months, Finnegan kept the speaking fish secret from other fishermen. Unsure why he kept it to himself, maybe it was because he had little else to call his own. His boat was financed, and his catches had to be exchanged for a small shack he rented. The fish would learn things about Finnegan he thought would never be shared. As much as Finnegan wanted to hide the fish, the fish wanted to meet more people. Therefore, it was reluctantly agreed upon that Finnegan would bring the talking fish back to the docks.

Reaching the docks, Finnegan gave a nervous nod to the fish and tied off the boat. Fishermen approached to see his daily catch. Everyone knew Finnegan to be a lonely man, but he was never one to talk to himself—although he was speaking. His peers realized he was communicating with a fish and, before Finnegan could react, he was restrained, and the fish was taken from him. Apparently, the fish could fetch a great prize on the market. Finnegan never saw his friend again.
