Definition of Lichenic acid. Meaning of Lichenic acid. Synonyms of Lichenic acid
Here you will find one or more explanations in English for the word Lichenic acid. Also in the bottom left of the page several parts of wikipedia pages related to the word Lichenic acid and, of course, Lichenic acid synonyms and on the right images related to the word Lichenic acid.
Definition of Lichenic acid
Lichenic acidLichenic Li*chen"ic (l[-i]*k[e^]n"[i^]k), a.
Of, pertaining to, or obtained from, lichens.
(a) An organic acid, C14H24O3, obtained from Iceland moss.
(b) An old name of fumaric acid. lichenic acidFumaric Fu*mar"ic, a. (Chem.)
Pertaining to, or derived from, fumitory (Fumaria
Fumaric acid (Chem.), a widely occurring organic acid,
exttracted from fumitory as a white crystallline
substance, C2H2(CO2H)2, and produced artificially in
many ways, as by the distillation of malic acid; boletic
acid. It is found also in the lichen, Iceland moss, and
hence was also called lichenic acid.
Meaning of Lichenic acid from wikipedia
- trans-butenedioic acid Allomaleic
acid Lichenic acid Identifiers
110-17-8 Y 3D model
- A lichen
is a composite organism
or cyanobacteria living among filaments
of multiple fungi
in a symbiotic
relationship. The combined...
acid is a naturally occurring dibenzofuran derivative found
in several lichen species
with the formula
C18H16O7. It was first isolated
- compound, a product
of secondary metabolism
in some species
. Stictic acid
is the subject
of medical research
into cancer. Argentinian
- Wila (Bryoria fremontii) is a dark brown, hair-like lichen
that grows hanging
in western North
America, and northern Europe
and Asia. Wila grows...
acid is a naturally occurring pulvinic
acid derivative found
in several lichen
species, as well as some non-lichenized fungi. It was first
pl**** (LP) is a disease characterized
reddish-purple polygon-shaped skin lesions
on the lower
back, wrists, and ankles. It may also present...
rangiferina, also known
as reindeer lichen
(c.p. Sw. renlav), lat., is a light-colored, fruticose lichen belonging
to the Cladoniaceae
of the Sierra Nevada
have been little
studied. A lichen
is a composite organism consisting
of a fungus
(the mycobiont) and a photosynthetic
- A dicarboxylic
acid is an organic compound containing
two carboxyl functional groups
(−COOH). The general molecular formula
for dicarboxylic acids
Recent Searches ...
Related images to Lichenic acid