Think you know your kids well enough to tell if they're lying to you or not? New research from Brock University says that's probably not the case. The study discovered that parents are less able to spot fibbing children than complete strangers. In the study, parents were able to spot the lies of offspring just under 10% of the time, compared to eagle-eyed strangers who sussed out four out of 10 fibs.
A common belief is that parents are able to accurately spot when a child is lying because they have more knowledge about a child's behaviour, but the researchers say that a parent is no more likely to be able to detect their own children's lies than any other parent or adult without kids. Basically, the odds of anyone detecting a lie are about 50/50.
For the experiment, 72 parents were asked to rate video recordings of their children (aged 8-16) either lying or telling the truth. Childless participants and other sets of parents with no children in the experiment were also shown the videos.
The researchers found parents had a strong truth bias of their own children – typically believing they were telling the truth. Despite being able to spot truthful statements nine times out of 10, parents could only identify lies 8% of the time.
Angela Evans, Associate Professor in Brock's Department of Psychology says:
"They want to believe that their child isn't going to cheat on a test and, if they did, that they would tell the truth about having cheated. This means that when children lie to their parents, they are able to get away with it."
Evans says parents might not be able to pick up on lies because of previously perceived honest experiences with their children, making them less suspicious of false statements.
She adds that the lesson parents should take away from the research is the importance of developing a trusting relationship with their kids from a young age. Evans says:
"Developing open communication early is important so children are willing to share the information with us, rather than trying to catch them telling lies."
Can parents detect 8- to 16-year-olds' lies? Parental biases, confidence and accuracy was recently published by the Journal of Experimental Child Psychology.
The NetDoctor newsletter delivers the latest healthy living news straight to your inbox. Make sure you never miss out by signing up here...