Send the link below via email or IMCopy
Present to your audienceStart remote presentation
- Invited audience members will follow you as you navigate and present
- People invited to a presentation do not need a Prezi account
- This link expires 10 minutes after you close the presentation
- A maximum of 30 users can follow your presentation
- Learn more about this feature in our knowledge base article
Do you really want to delete this prezi?
Neither you, nor the coeditors you shared it with will be able to recover it again.
Make your likes visible on Facebook?
You can change this under Settings & Account at any time.
Rosa Parks Hero
Transcript of Rosa Parks Hero
The Separate but Equal segregation issue is one of the main reasons Parks had remained seated.
Although she is most widely known for her refusal to move, that had not been her first encounter with that bus driver. Beforehand, Rosa had been sent off of his bus before for getting in at the front of the bus rather than the back.
What Makes Her a Hero?
Rosa Parks is a feminine hero. Her ability to stand for what she believes in while overcoming the fear of the consequences makes her a role model and an adequate figure to lead the Montgomery Bus Boycott. With many rallied behind her, she made an enormous impact in the Civil Rights Movement.
Whenever people hear of the Montgomery Bus Boycott, they tend to think about Rosa Parks and the contributions she made.
Rosa Parks was born in Tuskeegee, AL where she was shown racial inequality early on in life. She spent her whole life in segregated schools and in 11th grade she dropped out of highschool for her family and had not sought out to continue her education. She eventually got her high school diploma at age 19.
Rosa Park's contribution to today's society has made it possibly for people of different races to be together and be socially accepted. It now allows anyone to have the same opportunity of education, care, and social atmosphere. We chose her as our hero simply because she has impacted many lives of African Americans and strove for the equality of all peoples.
Getting married at age 19, she joined the NAACP with her husband. Parks became attentively divulged in civil rights issues and had been apart of the organization for 25 years before the Montgomery Bus Boycott.
Montgomery Bus Boycott
On December 1, 1955, Rosa Parks refused her seat to a white man. When the police came, she refused to get up again. Filed out of the bus in cuffs, she went against the precedent of the separate but equal segregation that had been etched into their cuture. This act sparked the Montgomery Bus Boycott that was a key factor in the Civil Rights Movement.
The Cleveland Avenue Bus also stands to represent Rosa Parks.
Being a main figure within the Civil Rights Movement, Rosa Parks is commonly recognized by this too.
Heroine that sparked a cultural revolution by Hannah McIntire and Taylore Baker
Both Rosa and her husband had lost their jobs shortly after the boycott and ended up leaving Montgomery. Her husband quit and according to her personnel officer she was fired due to reasons "not related" to the boycott.
She was not the first person to refuse to give up her seat to a white person. Claudette Colvin, Aurelia Browder, Mary Louise Smith and Susie McDonald had also refused their seats. Colvin was the first Montgomery Bus passenger to be arrested.
Rosa Louise McCauley Parks. (2014). The Biography.com website. Retrieved 08:55, Sep 16, 2014, from http://www.biography.com/people/rosa-parks-9433715.
Klein, C. (2013, February 4). 10 Things You May Not Know About Rosa Parks. Retrieved from http://www.history.com/news/10-things-you-may-not-know-about-rosa-parks.