1- Factors of Space Inconstancy ( 27.18)
For soprano saxophone, two wireless speakers as pendulums in oscillation, cassette walkman, volume pedal.
"In general, the perceiver controls, sifts, and corrects the considerable range of sensory information offered by isolated local stimuli. The specific nature of these “corrections to conform to reality” will depend on the unique combination of stimuli at any given moment. In this way, spatial perception tends to ensure that a person experiences the continually changing circumstances of the environment with some degree of stability or constancy.
This “realistic” perception, based on an awareness of the real, physical world, is an aspect of so-called object constancy. Constancy of form means that an object is perceived to retain its fixed characteristic shape regardless of variation in the angle at which it is observed"
By courtesy of Encyclopaedia Britannica, Inc., copyright 2014; used with permission.
Two wireless speakers are moving as pendulums in oscillation. They amplify a cassette walkman in recording function. The cassette recorder works in this way only as a microphone, producing a delicate feedback that I modify or play together with by producing similar tones with the soprano saxophone. I modify the cassette walkman´s response using a volume pedal, considering that changing the volume with the walkman volume controller changes the material characteristics of the feedback in an unwanted way.
The wireless speakers receive the information with a few seconds delay, what creates an artificial reverberation.
According to the place where I situate the cassette walkman, and myself (playing the saxophone), this delay and the interaction with the feedback changes, in a subtle way, the idea of the shape of the room. The difference with the real resonance of the room becomes evident each time I stop the walkman´s function, using the volume pedal.
Note: The walkman´s cassette motor and tape produces a hiss, what gives an almost permanent subtle background white noise to this recording. Only absent when I stop the walkman function, via the volume pedal. I have played versions using the walkman without a cassette, reducing this hiss. But I have largely preferred the recording version including it.
2- Eyes don´t see simultaneously. (39.44)
For analog synthesizers and equalizers in feedback
"The right eye is seeing the foreground before the left eye and the background after the left eye, while the left eye is in a sense doing the reverse. There is this interesting intrinsic capability, in which the mind or the perceptual mechanism, probably the perceptual mechanism, has this intrinsic capability to put these back together. A lot of our whole ability for depth perception is the fact of the lag, that the eyes do not see the things simultaneously"
Robert Irwin- Notes toward a Conditional Art.
This piece works with sound regarding the way we can perceive it as foreground or background. It´s structured as a come-and-go between ears and body listening.
released September 30, 2014
visuals by Q Q
design by minivomplie
recording by Bryan Eubanks and Lucio Capece
mastering by Alexis Degrenier
silkscreen at Le Caillou
Lazer Cutting at Plateforme C
all rights reserved