Properly funded “clean air zones” which charge motorists to drive the most polluting vehicles should be introduced by the end of next year, campaigners have urged.
Analysis of Government modelling published as part of its court-mandated draft clean air plans suggest 58 local authorities will still have illegal levels of air pollution in 2019 without additional measures to tackle the problem.
Leeds and Birmingham will still have illegally toxic air in 2026 and London will be failing to meet legal limits in 2030, Friends of the Earth said.
The 58 councils should be required and funded to introduce clean air zones to restrict the worst polluting vehicles from areas with illegal air pollution, far more than the five areas the Government originally proposed or the 27 it is now considering, the environmental group said.
Affected councils Bristol, Birmingham, Liverpool, Nottingham, Leeds and Southampton have also called for clean air zones with charges to be mandated by the Government, but designed locally.
They said said local measures to improve air quality should be funded by the Government, and backed calls for a new Clean Air Act to ensure that people could breathe clean air.
Oliver Hayes, Friends of the Earth air pollution campaigner said the analysis showed that “shockingly, air pollution is predicted to continue damaging people’s lungs for many years to come”.
“The current plans for cleaning up our air are shamefully inadequate. With 40,000 early deaths each year from air pollution, and children’s young lungs especially vulnerable, this is a sickening amount of suffering – much of which could be prevented.”
The call comes on National Clean Air Day, and marks the closing day of the consultation into the Government’s plans to tackle air pollution.
Ministers were ordered to draw up the new clean air plans following a court challenge by environmental lawyers ClientEarth, with the High Court ruling that existing Government proposals to meet EU-mandated pollution limits were not sufficient.
Documents published by the Government along with the plans show the most effective way to cut illegal levels of nitrogen dioxide is to introduce charges on the dirtiest vehicles in pollution hot-spots in towns and cities.
While local authorities can introduce charging zones, as London is doing, the Government – which does not want to “punish” owners of diesel cars which cause much of the problem – warns town halls they should only bring in charges as a last resort.
The Chartered Institute of Environmental Health (CIEH) has criticised the Government’s air quality plans for “unfairly shifting” the burden to solve the problem to local authorities.
The institute is calling for financial support for pollution hotspots, action to reduce the number of vehicles on the road or remove polluting ones, removal of tax incentives for diesels, support for low emission vehicle infrastructure and better provision for sustainable travel such as public transport and cycling.