Vanuatu is one of the most disaster prone countries in the world. Disasters can be very damaging to social and economic infrastructure, the environment, property and general development. Giving communities the skills to reduce and respond to disaster risks is an important part of our work. Disaster Preparedness aims to minimise the loss of life and damage in the event of a disaster. By pre-positioning relief supplies in each of Vanuatu’s provinces, expanding our presence in remote areas, increasing community resilience and strengthening the skills of communities, we can help reduce the impact of disasters. Preparedness activities include community risk assessments, awareness sessions, first aid trainings, the development of mitigation and response plans, the improvement of early warning systems and the establishment of Community Disaster and Climate Change Committees. Our Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR) program helps communities to identify and manage local disaster risks with education and tools. Disaster Response helps to reduce the impact of a disaster and it's long term results. Relief activities carried out by VRCS in response to disasters includes (but are not limited to) rescue, relocation, provision of food and water, prevention of disease and disability and provision of temporary shelter.
Climate Change Adaption
This project aims to support communities to develop a greater understanding of climate variability and climate change impacts in their area and implement actions to increase their resilience to it. While these actions address existing risks, they are also increasing resilience for the longer term and strengthening practices in agriculture, water and natural resource management. We are assisting communities in the implementation of specific adaption activities as well as carrying out awareness sessions in areas such as erosion, rainwater harvesting and climate resilient crop production to improve community knowledge. Ultimately we are raising awareness about climate change and working with communities to develop local solutions.
First Aid Training
We offer communities across Vanuatu life-saving first aid skills and help them to identify and address health priorities. In emergency situations, 90% of lives are saved by everyday people. Being first aid trained gives everyday people the skills and confidence to react in an emergency. It is the first response that minimises the severity of injuries, benefits recovery and could even save the life of someone close to you. This is particularly relevant during disasters. Vanuatu Red Cross offers three course types: Refresher, Basic & Comprehensive First Aid Training. For more information or to enrol in a course, email us today.
Water, Sanitation & Hygiene Promotion (WASH)
The Water, Sanitation & Hygiene Promotion program focuses on supporting community planning in mitigating the impact of disasters by coping with water challenges. This includes increasing access to water, improving hygiene practices, building new gravity fed water systems, the construction or repair of rainwater harvesting systems (RWHS), latrine training, system maintenance training for communities, staff hygiene promotion training and community hygiene awareness trainings.
Livelihoods: Empowering Women
The EVM (Empowering Vanua Malagwelo) project facilitates foundation life skills training for young women. The project operates on the principle of 'women helping women' and is aimed particularly at girls who have dropped out of school. Workshops cover a variety of useful topics including practical income generating skills (i.e. sewing and cooking), reproductive health and civic education. All trainers, guest speakers, carers and staff are local women who support the empowerment of young women in Vanuatu.
Humanitarian Values: LFP Project
The Law and Fundamental Principles program involves advocating for a wider understanding of the Fundamental Principles and the Red Cross and Red Crescent movement. These humanitarian values provide the foundation for our work, promoting social inclusion and reducing discrimination.