Hermann Farm Museum is located on 200 acres of rolling hills about 75 miles west of St. Louis, in the heart of beautiful Missouri wine country. Its purpose is to celebrate the importance of the German settlement to the development of agriculture in the Missouri River Valley region, and to showcase the home and business establishment of George Husmann, one of the most prominent vintners in the development of the wine industry in America.
The Legacy of George Husmann
George Husmann emigrated from Germany to Hermann, Missouri in 1839, and would soon become the preeminent 19th Century expert on America’s grapes and wines. Husmann was instrumental in the development of both the Missouri and California grape industry.
Hermann Farm Museum is located on the same property where Husmann lived and operated Hermann Nurseries from 1851 to 1868. The grand residence where he lived and worked still stands and has recently been restored to its original grandeur. Carefully select period furnishings recreate the look of the interior of the house during this time period. This building is called the Teubner-Husmann House, as Carl Teubner built the house when he married George Husmann’s older sister. Husmann took over the complex several years later upon the untimely death of Teubner. The original farm outbuildings have also been restored and authentically represent the outside environment as it would have looked in the mid-1800s.
Civil War Connection
The Teubner-Husmann House and farm also played a role in the Civil War. First Husmann’s business partner, Charles Manwaring, was killed by Confederates at the Hermann Wharf in May of 1864. Then in early October of 1864, General Marmaduke’s Confederate forces stopped and camped on the property on their way to Jefferson City to join other troops participating in General Sterling Price’s final raid through Missouri. Before the Confederates Bushwhackers left Husmann’s farm they destroyed thousands of his fruit trees and vines, and emptied his hillside cellar of wine and cider into the Missouri River. Husmann estimated the loss at $10,000, but he felt lucky to have gotten off that easily since he was such an outspoken supporter of the Union.
Animals on the Farm
Hermann Farm is also home to Shire draft horses and their new foals. These beautiful filly's are the largest of the draft work horses, but are "gentle giants”. White Missouri mules, named Pat and Jane, are also a hit with visitors. Cows, heritage chickens, sheep, and the other farm animals are also present.
While Hermann Farm specifically honors the early life and works of George Husmann, it also tells the story of the many German immigrants who settled the lower Missouri River Valley in the mid-1800s with the goal of establishing a new Germany in America. Conditions were extremely difficult in the early days, but the settlers preserved and many thrived in the exciting new world they created on the Missouri frontier. Guests will learn how these educated, industrious people lived, worked, and interacted with the land.
Mission of Hermann Farm Museum
Hermann Farm Museum is operated by Dierberg Educational Foundation, a 501(c)(3) charitable foundation dedicated to preserving and presenting the History and Heritage of the Missouri River Valley.