A GIS (Geographical Information System) combines locational information (geographical information) with attributes (the characteristics of an object).
It’s a system that can help you discover geographical connections and trends, visualize, analyze and interpret data. The use of GIS-software has five major advantages:
- A more efficient workflow which means cost savings
- A better decision making process
- Sharing information becomes easier which improves communication
- Managing your data becomes easier
- Geographical management becomes part of your daily workflow
Follow these learning path :GIS Beginner without basic knowledge GIS Beginner with basic knowledge
A map consists of a base map and a number of additional layers. You can use ArcGIS for Desktop software and/or ArcGIS Online to create a map with layers. First you add the base map yourself (personal data) or download it from the internet (open data). Next, you can add extra layers to your base map after which the map can be used for further analysis. You can create data yourself with the available geoprocessing tools, or download it from the internet – after critically assessing it.
Follow these learning path :GIS user: Online GIS-userGIS user : Cartographer
GIS for Township
ArcGIS for Desktop is the most appropriate platform to create, visualize and manage your geographical data. There are several possibilities to display your data, to adjust the symbology, etc. For example: the two images above were created with the same data. You can also apply the editing workflow to adjust your data to your specific requirements (add, delete, merge data, etc.). And finally labeling your features becomes easy thanks to the Maplex tool. More info? (link to ARC II, ARC III, CPM, DESIGN, GDB, …)
Follow these learning path : GIS user : Cartographer GIS user : GIS-Manager
If you would like to print your map, you will need to determine the lay-out. This can be done with ArcGIS for Desktop. You can give your map a title, insert a legend, display the scale, choose the printing format, add a frame, etc.
Follow this learning path : GIS user : GIS-Manager
Solving spatial problems becomes easier when you use GIS-software. There are several geoprocessing tools available to use, such as buffer, clip, intersect, union, merge and spatial join.
Follow these learning path :GIS user : GIS-AnalystGIS for Township
Sharing your maps, models, toolboxes, etc. with your colleagues or with others, enhances the internal efficiency. You can share your geographical data in several ways via ArcGIS: you can share your models/toolboxes without the data, or you can package your data with the model/toolbox. Furthermore, you can also choose to share your data using your own ArcGIS for Server or by using ArcGIS Online.
Follow these learning path : GIS user: Online GIS-userGIS user : GIS-ManagerGIS for Township
ArcGIS for Desktop offers several possibilities to perform spatial analyses. There are four categories of spatial analysis: proximity, overlay, statistical and temporal analyses.
Follow these learning path :GIS user : GIS-AnalystGIS user : Cartographer GIS for Township
After creating a map in ArcGIS for Desktop or in ArcGIS Online, you can share it in different ways. One of these sharing options, is to create a web app. You can choose different templates and add more options to this web app. For example: you could add the option ‘print’, which means that the viewers of your web app can print your map. It’s totally up to you to determine what external users can or can’t do with your map. Here you can find an example of a web app: http://gis.irisnet.be/bruciel/#
You can localize important sites in Brussels and compare them over time – this was one of the options that was added by the creator of this web app.
Follow these learning path :GIS user: Online GIS-userGIS for Township
After creating a map in ArcGIS for Desktop or in ArcGIS Online, you can share it in different ways. One of these sharing options, is to embed the map into your own website. This can be easily accomplished by copying and pasting the HTML-code which is automatically generated by the ArcGIS Online platform.
Follow these learning path :GIS user: Online GIS-user
GIS for Township
ArcGIS for Server is a web-based geographic information system which makes it possible to share your data with others who have access to the GIS server. There are several advantages of working with a GIS-server:
- All of your data can be managed centrally
- Multiple users have access to the same data
- The users have access to the most recent and correct data
- Multi-User editing.
Follow these learning path : Data analyst/data managerGIS user : GIS-ManagerGIS for Township