Ethics * Science * Technology * Engineering * Entrepreneurship * Math
Our scholars are hard at work!
We are continuing to practice the Depth and Complexity Icons in order to become true scholars. So far we have learned about the Depth and Complexity Icons of DETAILS, RULES, PATTERNS, BIG IDEA, TRENDS, UNANSWERED QUESTIONS, MULTIPLE PERSPECTIVES, CHANGE OVER TIME, ACROSS DISCIPLINES, LANGUAGE OF THE DISCIPLINES, and ETHICS icons and have been using them in class.
Classroom Management - www.ClassDojo.com
Please sign up on Class Dojo using your code. Change your avatar - make it unique!
If you need the code again, please let me know.
It's a great way for parents and students to stay connected to what's going on in our class :) Thank you to the parents who have already signed up!
Here's what we're learning...
Because we had such a busy week last week, we didn't cover everything we needed to. So, we did not test spelling or our reading test on Friday. We will continue to work on the same story this week and test on Friday, May 26.
Genre - Narrative Nonfiction
Spelling - base word + -less/--ness suffixes
Comprehension Skill: Cause and Effect
Writing/Grammar: Punctuation - Commas
Reader Response Journal - Using the icons to be scholarly readers
Please continue to practice addition and subtraction at home to maintain the skills learned.
Chapter 11: Measurement - Customary and Metric
Inches, feet, yards
Select and use tools
Compare customary lengths
Select and use metric tools
Compare metric lengths
Measure on a number line
Please continue to practice addition/subtraction facts at home
Log on to xtramath.org - See me if you need your code again.
Branches of Government
Legislative, Executive, Judicial
We are doing activities and experiments to teach and practice the Scientific Method.
NGSS (Next Generation Science Standards)
States of Matter
Properties of Matter
Properties of Materials - with focus on function
Building Blocks of Matter
We are doing activities and experiments to teach and practice the Engineering Design Process.
Hot Air Balloons
Do you want to volunteer?
Click on the link for volunteer opportunities.