The feeling of being tired is extremely hard to define since everybody has their own idea of what being tired means. Everybody experiences fatigue from time to time and the most common reason is usually lack of sleep.
With lifestyles becoming busier and more demanding, the number of people complaining of being persistently tired is increasing every year. 1 in 10 people suffer from constant tiredness, with women more likely to be affected than men.
Symptom of Tiredness:
Always feeling tired despite a full night’s sleep
Feeling physically drained and constantly tired
Being unable to concentrate
Taking a long time to complete simple tasks
If you find yourself asking “why am I always tired?” and feeling lethargic without an obvious cause you should visit your GP to rule out any underlying medical conditions such as anaemia, diabetes, sleep apnea and thyroid problems.
If you are continuing to experience prolonged tiredness, it may be a good opportunity to take a closer look at your diet.
As individuals, our reactions to foods and drinks we consume varies a great deal. An ingredient which may cause problems for one person could be completely acceptable for another. At YorkTest, we like to refer to this as our personal ‘food fingerprint’.
For those with fatigue, discovering and understanding your own personal food and drink intolerances, and the effects they have on your health and wellbeing is important to ensure you make the best possible choices to optimise your diet and quality of life. Identifying and eliminating these specific foods from your diet can be an important step forward to improve your energy levels.
Sign up for the newsletter for news, advice and special offers
The University of York conducted a survey* to help understand the benefits of elimination diets based on the results of a food intolerance test.
Out of 436 who reported experiencing fatigue, 87% reported a boost to their energy levels having removed their ‘trigger’ foods. We define these as foods which show a positive IgG reaction to antibodies in the blood.
Overall in the study, 76% of people who rigorously followed the recommended diet reported a benefit, 68% of which experienced this after 3 weeks.
Main Condition Reported
% of people who reported a benefit
Low Energy e.g. Fatigue, Lethargy
Gastrointestinal e.g. IBS, Bloating etc
Respiratory e.g. Asthma, Sinusitis, Rhinitis
Neurological e.g. Migraine, Headaches, ME
Dermatological e.g. Eczema, Acne, Psoriasis
Musculoskeletal e.g. Arhtritis, Joint Aches & Pains
Psychological e.g. Depression, Anxiety
Information provided above regarding Food Intolerance (defined by YorkTest as a food specific IgG reaction) is intended to provide nutritional advice for dietary optimisation. YorkTest do not claim to treat or cure the aforementioned symptoms and recommend that you discuss any medical concerns you have with a GP before undertaking a YorkTest programme.
*Survey carried out with a total of 5286 people who had taken the YorkTest – or to give it its scientific name - a food-specific IgG enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) blood test.
The comprehensive Food&DrinkScan Programme analyses your IgG reaction to 158 foods and drinks, providing you with clear results and nutritional support to help you replace your problem foods and optimise your diet.
Money Back Promise - if no reactions are identified YorkTest will refund you €320 (available when you purchase the complete programme at the RRP)
Expert testing and analysis of IgG antibody reactions to 158 foods and drinks
Comprehensive guidebook and 12 week food and drink diary
Two x 30 minute telephone consultations with one of our NTOI/BANT* registered Nutritional Therapists
Convenient mail order service – no need to visit our laboratory