There was once a man who fell into disrepute, and his life of comfort and security fell apart quickly. The man's family disowned him; his wife left him and his children wished not to be associated with him. His close friends were no longer around to lend a listening ear or provide words of wisdom. The man was effectively cut off from everyone he knew.

Five long years had passed for the man, where he had lost his job, became poor, and had to move in with his parents. He became a leech on resources who could not pay for his stay at his parent's house, and he was quickly loathed by them. The man began to drink heavily, carousing in bars and bringing alcohol home to drink in bed and watch television all day and night. He had no desire to move from his position on the bed, and he hated to get up, even to use the bathroom or occasionally take a shower.

One day, the man hit his personal rock bottom when one of his children called him to say, "You're a loser, you have no job, you drink all the time, and you will die alone." The man, struck to his heart by his child's words, woke up from his daydreaming. A fire stoked by years of anger, frustration, and hurt pride began to burn within him. The man decided to change his fortunes around by changing his life completely.

The next year, the man went through many trials and tribulations that tested his resolve. One of the biggest tests he undertook was his daily exercise of jogging. During this year, every day the man decided to run between 4 pm and 5 pm, and every day only during that period the rain would pour on him while he ran outdoors. As soon as he finished running and went into the shelter of his house, the rain would stop. The man began to think he was cursed.

This lasted several months until one day, the man's anger, frustration, and hurt pride suddenly disappeared, and now he welcomed the rain during his runs. It was then that the rain stopped and the sun came out. From that day forward, the man put his life back together and became enlightened.
