Creation of lesson plans is a part and parcel of a teacher’s day to day lives. However integrating technology into lessons, those which in their previous avatars might have been without any infusion of technology can sometimes be a tiring task. We might wonder why care to introduce technology into the fold when we don’t have to.This temptation is even more if the task in question can just as easily be completed without technology. Also with a myriad and collection of lesson planning sites online offering templates or prepared lesson plans for free or for a fee, customizing the plans to your particular students and material is usually the best alternative.
The whole process of building a lesson plan can usually be broken down into a process with four distinct steps.
1. Level of Learning
In the first step you have to ask yourself, what is the level of learning I want the student to achieve? This question is asked according to indicators that point towards the reception of the taught material in terms of the following factors.
The first of these factors is knowledge. Knowledge in a simple sense can be an abstract or concrete concept, it can be information about a concept or idea. Knowledge is followed by Comprehension as the second factor to consider when building lesson plans. Comprehension refers to the grasping of the meaning delivered through knowledge. This faculty determines how well the concept has been absorbed by the learner. The third factor happens to be application. This is the factor that determines how well we apply the given knowledge to a particular situation adapting it to the unique needs of the situation at hand. Analysis is the fourth factor which comes into play. It is followed by synthesis and a final evaluation of how well the knowledge has been received by you overall.
2. Level of Technology
The second question to be asked by teachers while preparing lesson plans happens to be “What Level of Technology Will I Use?” The following technologies are available to the educator to achieve his or her goal according to the answers given by you.
Substitution (When in need of an extremely simple technological tool)
Augmentation (When in need of tech tools facilitating some functional improvements)
Modification (When in need of tech tolls bringing significant improvements)
Redefinition (When in need of technological tools enabling total overhaul)
3. The Classroom Look
The next thing to determine is to “How Should My Classroom Look?”
Engaging-You opt for this look when you want your students to be actively engaged working towards completing an objective.
Collaborative– You go for this method if you want your students to work together towards a common goal at points in the lesson.
Authentic – You should chose this alternative if your motive is to give the student’s learning personal meaning and want them to share it with the community.
Constructive– The last of the options as far as looks for learning environments are concerned is the constructive one. In this you want your students connecting the learning with their other classes and with you want them to see building products.
4. Evaluation and Assessments
The last part of a lesson plan is the evaluation and assessment of students which can be done through:
Hand Signals, Concept Map, Observation, Portfolio, Quiz, Journal, Debriefing, Think-Pair-Share, Talk a mile a minute and Writing Frames.