The Importance of Air Filters
Air filters are very important when it comes to filtering dust from the circulating indoor air and make it suitable for breathing. The people who mostly appreciate the importance of indoor air quality are those that suffer from breathing problems such as asthma and allergies. Without clean air in their home, these people will not have a safe haven that they can reside in since poor indoor air quality will cause them to be sick. It is not just the people that are asthmatic and allergic who need good indoor air quality, but also the rest of us.
Even if your home is the cleanest, pollutants will still find a way to invade it. These pollutants could be any number of harmful things including second hand smoke that remains in the air longer than we can see or smell it, radioactive dust or radon, bacteria among other substances that are introduced into the home by things such as fresheners, formaldehyde and asbestos. The signs of these impurities can be hard to identify unless there is someone who is asthmatic or allergic in the house.
The most obvious sign that you can use to determine if the air in your house is not clean is the air that you would describe as stuffy or stale. Another indicator of poor indoor air quality is odors that do not have an obvious source. The odors are most likely to be caused by a buildup of bacteria in the air. You do not need to wait until someone in your home gets affected by the poor air quality before you start taking action to clean it.
Even though cleanliness in your house will not cure pollution, lack of it will greatly exacerbate the matters. This is where air filters will play their part in preventing what would otherwise end up being a vicious cycle. If you want to get the most out of the air filters, be sure to look for those that use modern HEPA air purifier technology since they are the most powerful. They can remove 99.97 percent of particles including those that are as small as 0.3 microns.
The HEPA air filters are a common choice in hospitals as well as militaries throughout the world due to the effectiveness that they offer. When used with a regular cleaning schedule, they can help you ensure that the air inside your home is as clean as possible most of the time. Before ordering for air filters, it is important to make sure that the replacement fits your air handler.
You will also need to know the function of the air filter if you want it to serve you efficiently. For instance, there are some air filters that have ultraviolet sterilizers which usually kill contaminants in the air to prevent them from finding their way into the human body. If you have crowded rooms, this kind of air filter will be the best option. But if you are looking for an air filter that can screen out microscopic particles from the air and leave the space in your house clean of pollens, HEPA air filters will be ideal. Just make sure that you change them over time to prevent dust from accumulating.