Chris Boss was a leading authority on negotiation. He'd been in the field for 24 years. During his experience with the Federal Bureau of Investigation, he'd handled some of the toughest situations imaginable. He'd asked what the man wanted. He said he wanted his old life. That wasn't possible. But new strides can be taken to help somebody. There's always a brighter future ahead.

"I hear you," said Boss. One of the strategies he knew was to genuinely affirm them and let them know you care. "And why do you want that?"

The man broke down. Knife in hand, wife in arms. He was in a position of power, but everyone could see he was weak. They spoke back and forth for several minutes. Boss was with him every step of the way. It wasn't a conflict between them. It was a mutual approach to a genuine struggle in the man's life. Boss didn't view it as one man against another. He viewed it as one man crying for help and the others around him needing to listen. And Boss was helping in good faith.

Boss reassured him that he must be very hurt. He said he couldn't imagine how he would feel in this situation. He slowly built trust with the man. He asked him what he wanted to accomplish. What his hopes and dreams were. What his goals and motivations were. Unsurprisingly, they weren't too different than most men: be a better father, a better husband, a better worker. Gain control of his life rather than letting his life control him.

The man slowly appeared to agree. His body language opened up and he became less tense. Some well-timed jokes with Boss were the perfect hit of humor when the moment was just right. The man quivered his lip in a way that was almost a heartfelt, tearful cry. It was apparent that he wasn't getting what he wanted in life. Far from it. But he started to believe he could turn it around, thanks to Boss.

Boss finally heard the two magical words. They would unlock the potential for the rest of the negotiation. It was all downhill from here. If this negotiation was a chess game, it was now in check.

"That's right."
