Definition of indignant
: feeling or showing anger because of something unjust or unworthy : filled with or marked by indignation became indignant at the accusation
Examples of indignant in a Sentence
Melville was so struck by the drama of the Essex (deliberately battered by an indignant and maddened whale, which at last brained itself by sinking the ship) that he used it as the end of Moby-Dick. —Paul Theroux, New York Times Book Review, 11 June 2000
What you really need is a story that will not only excuse tardiness but encourage your boss to give you the entire day off. … Should anyone give you the third degree on your return to work, don't hesitate to become indignant and stomp out of the room. —Jeff Foxworthy, No Shirt. No Shoes. No Problem!, 1996
When the Roman soldiers were asked to take part in the Claudian invasion of 43, they waxed indignant. This was asking them to carry on a campaign “outside the limits of the known world.” —Antonia Fraser, The Warrior Queens, 1988
She wrote an indignant letter to the editor.
He was very indignant about the changes.
an indignant tone of voice
Recent Examples of indignant from the Web
Usmanov’s second video less than a week later was shorter than his debut, but had a more professional look and was less indignant.
Machinist was getting impatient, perhaps even indignant.
These example sentences are selected automatically from various online news sources to reflect current usage of the word 'indignant'. Views expressed in the examples do not represent the opinion of Merriam-Webster or its editors. Send us feedback.
Origin and Etymology of indignant
Latin indignant-, indignans, present participle of indignari to be indignant, from indignus unworthy, from in- + dignus worthy — more at decent
First Known Use: 1590
INDIGNANT Defined for English Language Learners
Definition of indignant for English Language Learners
: feeling or showing anger because of something that is unfair or wrong : very angry
INDIGNANT Defined for Kids
Definition of indignant for Students
: filled with or expressing anger caused by something unjust or unworthy
indignantlyadverb “I didn't insult you!” protested Jack, indignantly. — L. Frank Baum, The Marvelous Land of Oz
Seen and Heard
What made you want to look up indignant? Please tell us where you read or heard it (including the quote, if possible).