The Nature and Causes of Growing Slum Problems in the Metropolitan Cities of India!
A slum can be defined as a “compact settlement with a collection of poorly built tenements, mostly of temporary nature, crowded together usually with inadequate sanitary and drinking water facilities in unhygienic conditions.” The growth of metropolitan cities in India has been largely unplanned and haphazard and this can be seen from the fact that one-fourth of total urban population lives in slum and squaller settlements.
The rapid urbanization in conjunction with industrialization and lack of infrastructural and employment opportunities in rural areas has led to mass rural-urban migration and this has resulted in the growth of slums.
The proliferation of slums occurs due to many factors such as the shortage of developed land for housing. The high prices of land beyond the reach of urban poor.
Poor housing settlement:
All slums and squatters are made of bamboo, straw, low quality wood and tin and plastic sheets. Population density in slums and squatters ranges from 700 to 4210 per acre and a minimum of four and maximum of ten people share a room, which is highly congested and unhealthy. This poor housing and lifestyle cause a number of problems for the environment of city like
i. Indoor pollution.
ii. Degradation of air quality with frequent slum fires.
iii. Increase incidence of communicable disease that may spread to city dwellers from the workplace.
iv. Lack of water supply and sanitation facility: They lacks safe drinking water and proper sewerage services. As a result, both household waste and human generated wastes go directly or indirectly into the low-lying lands, open spaces or water bodies of the city and causes a number of problems.
Crime and Other Social Problems:
It socially slums tend to be isolated from the rest of the urban society, characterized by urban decay, high rates of poverty, illiteracy and unemployment, slums are commonly seen as “breeding grounds” for various social problems such as crime, drug abuse and alcoholism.