he halted, forcing the rest of the field to bunch up behind him
(of muscles) Flex or bulge
A number of things, typically of the same kind, growing or fastened together
a bunch of grapes
A group of people
A large number or quantity; a lot
I had to turn down a bunch of well-paid jobs
a grouping of a number of similar things; "a bunch of trees"; "a cluster of admirers"
bunch together: form into a bunch; "The frightened children bunched together in the corner of the classroom"
gather or cause to gather into a cluster; "She bunched her fingers into a fist"
crowd: an informal body of friends; "he still hangs out with the same crowd"
any collection in its entirety; "she bought the whole caboodle"
The group of mainframe computer competitors to IBM in the 1970s became known as the BUNCH: Burroughs, UNIVAC, NCR, Control Data Corporation, and Honeywell. These companies were grouped together because the market share of IBM was much higher than all of its competitors put together.
Rock On is a 1972 one-off album of oldies covers by the Bunch, a group of English folk-rock singers and musicians. The Bunch got together in late 1971 to record their one and only album, Rock On. ...
Bunches, also called angel wings and pigtails, are a hairstyle in which the hair is parted down the middle and gathered into two symmetrical bundles, like ponytails, secured near the scalp. ...
(bunches) Hair gathered together in two or more parts
Or "the bunch," this is used to refer to the main group of riders sticking together in an event or race.
The mix of filler and binder leaves before they are rolled into a wrapper.
the term to describe a full cluster of grape berries; also used to describe any non-Muscadine grape, most often employed by winegrowers in the American southeast.
Up to four different types of filler tobacco that are blended to create the body of the cigar. The bunch is held together by the binder.
Plant development by intravaginal tillering at or near the soil surface without production of rhizomes or stolons.
To assemble several logs together to form a load for subsequent skidding or yarding.
main group of cyclists; also field, pack, or peloton.
(1.) A bundle of twigs (Exo 12:22). (2.) Bunch or cake of raisins (Sa2 16:1). (3.) The "bunch of a camel" (Isa 30:6).
the main cluster of riders in a race. Also called the group, pack, field or peloton.
Refers to the cigar when it consists of the filler and the binder, before the application of the wrapper leaf.
The intermediate cluster of filler tobacco in a cigar
The rolled up, binder wrapped leaves that form the cigars inner core, or filler.