Phishing is the attempt to get sensitive information such as passwords, usernames, and credit card details often for malicious reasons, by masquerading as a trustworthy entity in an electronic communication.
Communications pretending to be what they aren’t falsely from popular social websites, auction sites, banks, online payment processors, etc. used in luring unsuspecting victims.
It is a continual threat and the risk is even larger in social media such as Facebook, Twitter, Google+, Instagram, etc. Hackers could create a clone of a website(e.g Facebook) and tell you to enter your personal information and security, which would be emailed to them directly.
Hackers do take advantage of these sites to attack their victims using them at their workplace, in public, home, in order to obtain personal and security information that can affect the user or company.
Phishing takes advantage of the trust that the user may have since the user may not be able to tell that the site being visited, or program being used, is not real; therefore, when this occurs, the hacker has the chance to gain the personal information of the targeted user, such as usernames, passwords, security codes, and credit card numbers, etc.
Most hackers use wapka.mobi, etc to create a phishing site. Today, I will be showing you how to know a scamming or phishing site.
How To Know A Scamming Or Phishing Site.
In this tutorial, we are going to use Facebook and Dollarnize as an example.
Most hackers use Fun Applications in luring people to their FB scam site which works for them. Example of the popular Fun Application used by FB users which Hackers also use in scamming their victims is http://meawapps.com/
Hackers clone Facebook Login Page and equally a link that will redirect you to http://meawapps.com/. When you open the facebook login page, you insert your Username and Password which will redirect you to http://meawapps.com/ and your Login details will be mailed to them.
For you to know if you’re actually on the right Facebook Page, make sure you check its copyright, favicon, header description, etc.
When you login to http://mongapet.wapka.mobi/site_0.xhtml, you’ll understand what I mean and also, the image below tells how a Facebook phishing site looks like.
Dollarnize is also a scam site. I know most of you know that already but if you don’t, I’m glad to let you know that dollarnize.com is a Scam site.
If you doubt me, write down the statistics of the site i.e the Online members, Total paid and total members.
After writing it down, study it only a day and you will notice that the same statistics you wrote down earlier before is the same statistics you are still seeing.
Author: Peter Umoh