After being off air for 23 years, the acclaimed children’s science program Curiosity Show is making a return on the Curiosity Show YouTube Channel - www.curiosityshow.com.au
Curiosity Show was a nationally broadcast science and technology television program for young people, including segments on natural history, astronomy, music, technology and puzzles. It is remembered for its emphasis on how to make working machines and models from everyday materials around the home.
Written and presented by Dr Deane Hutton and Dr Rob Morrison, Curiosity Show ran on national Australian television for 18 years from 1972 until 1990. It was broadcast for years in many countries, including Europe, where it was dubbed into German.
More than 500 programs were produced, with a total of around 5000 segments, Deane and Rob have selected hundreds of their favourite segments for the new Curiosity Show YouTube Channel.
The new Curiosity Show YouTube Channel www.curiosityshow.com.au will be launched by Enabled Solutions in mid winter in the week of July 12-18, 2013. It will be teamed with Facebook and Twitter accounts:- facebook.com/curiosityshow and twitter.com/curiosityshow
“Many of our team are fans of the show,” said Grant Hull, CEO of Enabled Solutions. “There was certainly a drop in productivity as we couldn’t resist watching the segments while working on them,” he said. “ I expect the show will find a natural home on YouTube, as these clips are bite-sized, and still so engaging.”
“Curiosity Show was popular in Europe where winter days are long and parents are always looking for indoor activities for children,” said Rob. “So mid-winter in Australia seemed a good time to re-launch the program here.”
“That week also includes the anniversaries of many events which we dealt with on Curiosity Show,” said Deane. “They range from the first European report of a kangaroo and discoveries about planets to the opening of the Panama Canal and publication of the first book on Australia,” he said.
Both Deane and Rob see the online delivery of Curiosity Show as a natural step into social media.
“For a lot of material, especially making-and-doing segments, online delivery is better than television,” said Rob. “You can freeze or replay segments to see how to make something. You couldn’t do that on television,” he said.
Curiosity Show won many national and international awards, including the Prix Jeunesse, the world’s top children’s television award. Many individuals have campaigned for years for the return of Curiosity Show. Now it’s happening!
The Curiosity Show YouTube Channel is expected to be a valuable resource for science teachers, especially now that greater emphasis is being placed on developing the science curriculum in all states.
“That’s the beauty of science,” said Deane. “It’s about being curious – wanting to know why things happen and how things work. Science outlasts other trends and fashions, constantly offering something new and surprising and is always fascinating.”’
Curiosity Show was broadcast in many countries and was very popular in Europe (where it was dubbed into German) because of its strong “Making and Doing” emphasis. European winter means long, dark, cold days, and parents need indoor activities to keep children involved. Curiosity Show provided these so, in response to popular demand, Deane and Rob have chosen mid-winter in Australia to re-launch Curiosity Show on Youtube at www.curiosityshow.com.au As well as “making-and-doing” segments, Curiosity Show covered inventions, nature, space, flight, history and more, and the weekend of its re-launch includes anniversaries of some notable events, all of which featured on the show at some time during the 18-years in which it entertained children all around the world.
Dr Rob Morrison
P: +61 8 8339 3790
M: 0433 082 79
Enabled Solutions Pty Ltd
Enabled is a multi-disciplinary creative firm specialising in strategic online deployment across a number of platforms. “We propel you into the online world of limitless potential, whilst maintaining the integrity of your existing assets. Our expansive skill-set allows us to integrate each of your marketing components across different platforms to work harmoniously - each adding value to the other.”
Enabled have been heralded as one of Australia’s brightest iPhone app success stories by Australian Macworld, with their first app reaching the 2nd top free app globally, and their second app reaching number one in the UK. With years of experience in iPhone, touch screen and interactive whiteboard application development, Enabled are experts in touch technology.
P: 08 8272 6658