Jika jadwal yang Anda cari sudah terselenggara (terlewat). Silahkan hubungi kami untuk permintaan jadwal terbarunya di 0899 812 1246
Emergency Response Plan Using Incident Command System (ICS)
Pelatihan ICS Yogyakarta. Kelas khusus dan tempat terbatas. Daftarkan segera
12 – 14 Oktober 2016 The Phoenix/Dafam Jogjakarta
3 (three) days
- Provide knowledge and understanding of Incident Command System (ICS) to respond to “all risk – all hazards” response of emergency/incident.
- Participants will be prepared to effect ively carry out their position assignment as a member of the incident command team , to respond to a full spectrum of emergencies/incidents or disasters bo th naturally occuring and man-made.
- ICS Fundamentals
o.ICS common terminology
o.ICS process flow.
- ICS Organization and Staffing
o.The ICS Structure
o.Expanding the ICS Organization
o.Reporting Relationships and Information Flow
- Organizing for Events and Incidents
o.Organizing for Events and incidents
o.Using Unified command
o.The Emergency Operation Center
Model EOC Organizational Chart
- Planning for Events and Incident
o.The importance of planning for incidents/events.
o.The differences between planning for incidents and events.
o.Major planning steps including logistical concerns, cost-benefit analysis, understanding the situation, developing and implementing the plan, and evaluating the plan.
o.The criteria for determining when the Incident Action Plan (IAP) should be prepared in writing.
o.Describe the role and use of ICS forms and supporting materials included in an IAP for effective incident/event management.
o.Describe the strategy meeting, tactics meeting, planning meeting, operational period briefing, and team meeting.
- Incident Resource Management
o.Basic principles of resource management.
o.Basic steps involved in managing incident resources.
o.Key considerations associated with resource management and the reasons for each.
o.The organizational elements at the incident that can order resources.
o.The differences between single-point and multipoint resource ordering and the reasons for each.
- Demobilization, Transfer of Command, and Closeout
o.The importance of demobilization planning.
o.Impact of agency-specific policies, procedures, and agreements upon demobilization planning.
o.ICS titles of personnel who have responsibilities in developing and implementing the demobilization plan and list their duties.
o.List the major sections in a demobilization plan.
o.The need for transfer of command or closeout.
o.The process involved in a closeout meeting.
WHO SHOULD ATTEND:
Personnel who require advanced application of the Incident Command System (ICS).
COURSE FEE :
(include certificate, modul, training kit, lunch & Coffee break),
Rp. 5.750.000,-Pembayaran sebelum tanggal 28 September 2016
Rp. 6.250.000,-Pembayaran sebelum tanggal 12 Oktober 2016
Rp. 6.500.000,-Pembayaran sebelum tanggal 14 Oktober 2016
Rp. 7.000.000,-Pembayaran Setelah tanggal 14 Oktober 2016 (Invoice)
cforms contact form by delicious:days
Harga dan Silabus Training sewaktu-waktu bisa berubah. Disesuaikan dengan kondisi terakhir. Jadi MOHON baca email PENAWARAN yang dikirimkan dari Mitra Info Seminar