In this session, we will explore tools, apps, activities, and strategies that nurture essential K-4 developmental and learning skills. Using the Collect-Relate-Create-Donate (C-R-C-D) model from Ben Schneiderman's book, Leonardo's Laptop, as a framework, we will develop innovative lessons and projects, communication and collaboration strategies, assessment tools, learning supports, and publishing platforms. Additionally, we we will examine the best K-4 web sites, work with innovative tools to help improve student reading, writing, and mathematics, and learn different strategies such as the Flipped Model, SAMR, and Understanding by Design to build creative, collaborative, and community minded classrooms.
The workshop will begin with the Collect phase. We will review advanced search strategies, elementary-friendly search engines, social bookmarking, digital note-taking, and techniques for teaching and modeling these skills to young students. From there, we will delve into Relate with an exploration of collaboration platforms such as Google Drive, learning management solutions like Edmodo, blogging solutions for teachers as well as students, and portfolio development with Evernote. In the Create phase, we will explore a variety of tools and apps for developing student voice, practicing reading fluency, incorporating multimedia into presentations, making thinking visual with screencasting, and building alternative assessments. We will conclude the workshop with the Donate phase: publishing student work, developing Personal Learning Networks (PLNs), and building a global classroom.
The projects, concepts, and tools addressed in this workshop not only apply to The Common Core State Standards, but also to the 4Cs - Communication, Collaboration, Critical Thinking, & Creativity - as defined by the Partnership for 21st Century Skills.
Who Should Attend: teachers, curriculum coordinators, instructional technology specialists, and administrators who work with K-4 students, as well as former summer workshop participants looking to further explore previously covered topics in a more advanced setting.
EdTechTeacher does not provide equipment for the workshop. Participants should bring a laptop computer with wireless capability. You are welcome to also bring iPads, tablets, or other mobile devices in addition to your laptop, but some tools may not work on all devices.
We will begin promptly at 8:30 am, and strongly recommend arriving 20-30 minutes early on the first day in order to get set up. Coffee and snacks will be available each morning. There are lunch options within walking distance of the University.
- 8:30 am - 12:00 pm - Class
- 12:00 pm - 1:00pm - Lunch
- 1:00 pm - 3:30 pm - Class
Beth Holland joined the EdTechTeacher team in July 2011 to expand the online course offerings, instruct at workshops, and bring expertise in elementary education as well as working with assistive technologies to the team. In addition to working with participants, Beth has also increased the amount of content in our Teaching with Technology section of the web site - including the new iPad section. She has presented at the 2011 Global Education Conference, the EdTechTeacher Winter Conference, the Massachusetts Assistive Technology Expo, the MassCUE Technology Conference, Edscape, and the EdTechTeacher iPad Summit. Bringing over 12 years of education experience, she most recently served as the Director of Academic Technology at St. Michael's Country Day School in Newport, Rhode Island. During her tenure at St. Michael's, she implemented professional development programs to encourage faculty members to integrate technology into their elementary and middle school curricula, designed interdisciplinary, technology-rich projects, taught students in grades 2-8 during technology classes, coordinated with the Student Services Director to facilitate the integration of assistive technologies to support students, and helped to design their iPad pilot program. Before St. Michael's, Beth worked as a researcher at the Naval War College in the Innovation Lab where she designed knowledge management plans to support blended communication environments and researched the potential to create an online environment to streamline training and education which she presented at I/ITSEC. She has also taught 9th grade English at the Rocky HIll School in East Greenwich, RI, and led adventure learning programs for ActionQuest in the Caribbean and Polynesia. Beth holds an Ed.M. in Technology, Innovation, and Education from the Harvard Graduate School of Education, and a B.S. in Communications from Northwestern University.
Register & Pay Online
The cost of this workshop is $595. Please note that our Eventbrite registration system uses PayPal as a payment gateway.
You do not need a PayPal account in order to pay online.
Register & Pay by Check or Purchase Order
The cost of this workshop is $595. To pay by check or purchase order, please send your completed registration form and payment to Ileen Matthews at firstname.lastname@example.org or 866-314-8214 (fax).
Your registration is not complete without both payment and a completed form.
Checks can then be mailed to:
Attention: Ileen Matthews
41 Kinsley Lane
Mendon, MA 01756
Please note: Space in our workshops is limited and they have sold-out in recent years. Spots are guaranteed on a first-paid, first-served basis, so please expedite payment as soon as possible.
Requests for cancellation must be submitted in writing to Ileen Matthews at email@example.com. If you have to cancel, we will issue a refund (minus a $25 processing fee) until 21 days before your workshop. After that date, no refunds will be given.
Waiting List Policy
If the workshop is full, we'll put you on the waiting list, and let you know if a spot becomes available.
Professional Development Credits
We are exploring options to be able to give professional development credits and/or grad credit for this workshop.
Travel and Logistics
The workshops will be held at the Loyola University Chicago School of Law located at 25 E Pearson St Chicago, IL 60611 on the Water Tower Campus. The building is conveniently located near historic Michigan Avenue in downtown, and is accessible by public transportation. Parking is also available nearby.
There are numerous hotel options near the School of Law including Baumhart Lodging at the University. Located two blocks west of the historical Water Tower and Magnificent Mile, Baumhart Hall is a high-rise deluxe apartment-style residence hall in the heart of Chicago. Each apartment includes two bedrooms, WiFi, and a full kitchen.
If you have any questions, please contact us or call (888) 377-9518.