There are different approaches and parameters to differentiate products. These are: A. Based on the nature B. Based on consumers’ intentions C. Based on social benefits:
A. Based on the nature:
Based on nature, product can be classified into 10 types. These are:
Physical goods are the tangible and physical materials. It has the quality of possession and ownership. E.g. Rice, Clothing etc.
These are intangible performances where the consumption and production point is the same. One can use the service by paying for it but cannot claim ownership. E.g. Hospital, Banking etc.
Every market offering includes the basic idea at its core. Charley Revson of Revlon commented that in the factory they make cosmetics, but in the store they sell hope. E.g. Consultancy firm, Ad Agency.
By orchestrating several services and goods, one can create, stage and market experiences. E.g. Science City, Aquatica Theme Park, Water World.
Marketers promote time-based events such as Olympics or Movie Awards.
Celebrity marketing has become a major business. Different film stars and sportspersons have their own publicity and endorsement agent.
Places can be marketed to attract tourists industries etc. Example: Kerala-God’s Own Country Campaign.
Properties are intangible rights of ownership of either real property (Real Estate like Amby valley project) or financial property (Stocks and bonds) such as Maruti or TCS IPO Campaign.
Organisations actively work to build a strong favourable image in the mind of their customers. E.g. Philips uses a tagline “Let’s Make things Better”.
Information can be produced and marketed as a product. E.g. Dictionaries, Encyclopedias, CBT (Computer Based Training) Software.
B. Based on consumers’ intentions:
Products can be classified into two broad categories based on who will use them and how they will be used. These are:
i) Consumer Product
ii) Industrial or Business Product
Products can be in both classes, if organisations and consumers purchase and use the product. For example, a light bulb would be considered a consumer product if purchased by a family for their home, but is categorised as a business product if bought by a businessperson for the organisation.
i) Consumer Products:
These products are purchased for personal (non-business) and family consumption. The product’s price and purchase importance determine the level of involvement a consumer will devote to purchasing the product. Consumer products can be further classified on the basis of how consumers view and shop for these products.
a) Convenience Products:
A convenience product is a frequently purchased, inexpensive standard item that buyers spend little effort to find and purchase. Toothpaste, soft drinks, shampoos etc. are the examples. Here companies advertise heavily to promote brand loyalty with the implication of regular repeat purchase. Consumers do not spend much time planning the purchase of a convenience item.
A consumer who prefers a specific brand of a convenience product will willingly accept a substitute if the preferred brand is not conveniently available. There are some convenience products that are the everyday necessities of life, where almost no planning goes into these routine purchases. These types of products are called ‘Staple products’; bread, milk, rice are the examples of such products.
b) Shopping products:
Consumers are willing to spend more effort to plan for and purchase a shopping product, such as an appliance furniture, clothing, a bicycle or a stereo. Buyers spend considerable time comparing brands and sellers with respect to price, product features, quality, service and warranty.
c) Specialty products:
A specialty product is a product with one or more unique characteristics that a group of buyers is willing to spend considerable time and effort to purchase. Consumers carefully plan the purchase of a specialty product because they know exactly what they want and will not accept a substitute. Consumers do not evaluate alternatives when searching for specialty products. They are extremely brand loyal and are concerned primarily with finding an outlet that has the preselected product available.
d) Unsought products:
An unsought product is purchased as a result of the sudden occurrence of a problem or in response to aggressive selling tactics that result in a sale that otherwise would not take place. Consumers generally do not think of buying unsought products on a regular basis. Some classic examples of these products include emergency automobile repair replacement appliances, insurance products etc. Marketers should stress advertising and personal selling in marketing unsought products.
ii) Industrial Products:
A product bought for use in the production of other products or in an organisational operation is an industrial product. Business products are intended for resale, for further processing in producing other products, or for use in conducting a business. Business (or industrial) products can be classified based on their use by businesses.
a) Raw Materials:
A raw material is a basic good that actually becomes part of a physical product. Materials and parts are directly used in the production of final products by the firm. Two types of raw materials include agricultural products (grain, fruits, and livestock) and natural products (minerals, land, and products of the forests and seas).
b) Capital Equipment:
Capital equipment (also known as installations) refers to the large tools and machines used in a production process and operation of the firm. Capital equipment is normally expensive and is intended to be used for a long period of time. Examples include machineries, lathe, cranes etc.
c) Accessory Equipment:
Accessory equipment is used in production or office activities but does not become part of the final physical product being manufactured. Examples: motors, hand tools, meters, word processors, calculators etc.
d) Component Parts:
A component part is a finished item or an item that needs little processing before becoming part of the physical product. Although component parts are used in the manufacture of larger products, they are easily distinguishable from those products.
e) Process Materials:
Like a component part, a process material is used directly in the production of another product; however, it is not readily distinguishable from the finished product. Example, a company that manufactures cosmetics might purchase alcohol for use in make-up or perfume.
Supplies are short-lived, low-priced everyday necessity items that aid and expedite the firm’s operations but do not become a part of the finished product. Paints, fuses, office stationeries, maintenance items, lubricating oils, cleaning materials, paper, pens and pencils etc. are the examples.
g) Industrial Services:
An industrial service is an intangible product that many organisations require in their operations. These services may not be a direct part of production but without these services the production cannot carry on. Financial, legal, marketing etc., are the examples of industrial services.
C. Based on social benefits:
From the social aspects, we can differentiate the products depending on long-term (long-range benefits) and short-term advantages (immediate satisfaction).
a) Pleasing products:
These give high immediate satisfaction, but do harm to consumers in the long run. Examples are pan masala, cigarettes, alcohols etc.
b) Deficient products:
These have neither immediate appeal nor long run benefits. Firms are not interested in such products as there is no chance to make any profit at all. Current examples could be typewriter or pager.
c) Salutary products:
They have long run advantages but have no immediate appeal to consumers. Hence, firms are not primarily interested in such products. But they can be taken as a challenge and they can be made initially attractive without loosing long run consumer benefits. The example is soyabeen chips (diet chips)
d) Desirable products:
These have a happy combination of high immediate satisfaction and high long run consumer welfare. Tasty, nutritious, ready-made food products are the examples of such desirable products. Socially responsible firms would attempt to find opportunities to produce desirable products.