Designed for adults with a ninth-grade education or higher, this no-cost online course provides a solid foundation in the GED topics, and includes many helpful tips and strategies. It even includes links to the official practice tests presented by the GED Testing Service of the American Council on Education (ACE). Topics include:
· Language Arts, Writing
· Social Studies
· Language Arts, Reading
Includes information about an online High School diploma program too!
The GED is program is entirely free of charge.
Learn how to take tests effectively by improving your skills, your test-taking strategies, and your ability to remain calm in stressful situations.
Info about the GED, including:
· What are the GED Tests?
· Content and score specifications; Score scale
· State, Provincial, and Territorial GED Contacts
· FAQ (frequently asked questions)
· Additional Resources and Links
American Council on Education
This free, online, Intelligent Tutoring System is designed to assist students in learning to write algebraic expressions and solve word problems. Program can also be downloaded.
Neil Heffernan; Carnegie Mellon University
Many useful resources to help you develop your logical thinking and ananlytical thinking skills, including:
Challenging word puzzles of various types. Have fun with these fiendish little gems!! (If you get stuck, try another...)
A listing of irritating words and phrases that commonly cause errors in written English. Clear explanations and examples of these deviations from the standard usage are also included.
Paul Brians; Department of English, Washington State University
National Institute for Literacy
A list of vocabulary words to study in preparation for the Verbal subtest of either the Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT) or the Graduate Record Exam (GRE).
John H. Bickford, Jr.
Explore the education resources available in these specific subject areas:
In case you decide you want to
complete your high school
Updated: 28 February '06 at approximately 18:30 GMT
© 1997 - 2006 Amby Duncan-Carr All Rights Reserved.
This site co-sponsored by Comcourse
URL of this page: