What is Trauma-Informed Care?
Among addiction and mental health treatment facilities, as well as with professionals in these fields, trauma-informed care is becoming a crucial part of treatment planning.
Many individuals who struggle with mental health issues or who have become dependent on drugs or alcohol have experienced a trauma in their lives. This trauma may be mental or physical, and may consist of one incident or many incidents over time.
Ignoring trauma can have a negative impact on the person’s short- and long-term mental and physical well-being. By addressing these traumas in treatment, an individual can acknowledge how their negative experiences have impacted their life and begin to learn how to manage the effects of trauma, whether they have manifested in the form of exacerbated mental health issues or total dependence on drugs or alcohol.
Trauma-Informed Care at Silvermist
At Silvermist, one of our treatment modalities is trauma-informed care.
This means our facility offers person-centered care that is designed to address an individual’s unique emotional needs, includnig any underlying trauma (hence, trauma-informed), rather than simply addressing the symptoms of mental illness or addiction. Our treatment program demonstrates an understanding of the neurological, biological, psychological and social impact of trauma.
However, programs with trauma-informed care are not specifically designed to treat the symptoms of trauma. Rather, addiction or mental health treatment is administered with recognition of the impact of trauma—that recognition is built into the delivery of all other aspects of care. Trauma-informed care-based systems may have a higher sensitivity toward the potential of re-traumatization and the trauma survivor’s perspective.
Silvermist offers trauma-informed care and recognizes everyone’s ability to overcome trauma and begin their journey on the road to recovery. For more information on receiving treatment at Silvermist, call (724) 481-1284 today.