There are about 26 clinical studies being (or have been) conducted in Malta. The country of the clinical trial is determined by the location of where the clinical research is being studied. Most studies are often held in multiple locations & countries.
The purpose of this study is to examine the differences in perceived health, psychosocial functioning, behavioral outcomes and quality of life of adults with congenital heart disease who are living in different areas of the world, and how these differences can be understood (e.g., differences in sense of coherence or illness perceptions).
The aims of the APRICOT study are: - To establish the incidence of severe critical events in children undergoing anesthesia in Europe. - To describe the differences in paediatric anaesthesia practice throughout Europe. - To study the potential impact of this variability on the occurrence of severe critical events (Laryngospasm, Bronchospasm, Pulmonary aspiration, Drug error, Anaphylaxis, Cardiovascular instability, Neurological damage, Perianaesthetic cardiac arrest and postanaesthetic Stridor).
EUROPAIN Survey is an epidemiological study aimed at assessing current clinical practices regarding the use of sedative and analgesic drugs in newborns admitted to NICUs or PICUs in different countries in Europe. This study is conducted as part of the NeoOpiod study. The main objective of this study is to determine the current clinical practices regarding the use of sedative and analgesic drugs in newborns in intensive units in different countries in Europe. The principal criteria are: the frequency of ventilated neonates receiving sedation and analgesia, the medications used for sedation and analgesia in ventilated neonates, the length of use of medications administered for sedation and analgesia in ventilated neonates and similarities and differences in sedation and analgesia practices among European countries. The secondary objectives are: a) to determine the proportion of neonatal units that have developed and implemented local written guidelines to provide continuous sedation and analgesia in ventilated newborn infants as well as to prevent and treat procedural pain, b) to document the published guidelines for neonatal analgesia and sedation in different European countries and develop consensus for common European standards that can be applied in all medical settings, c) to determine the frequency of use of pain assessment tools in ventilated newborn infants and evaluate their impact on pain management practices and d) to determine practices to assess and prevent withdrawal syndromes. The EUROPAIN STUDY is observational and therefore it will not interfere with routine practices of participating units. No changes in diagnostic, therapeutic or any managing strategy of patients are imposed by the participation in this study. This epidemiological study will only collect data on clinical practices in each unit. It will include all neonates up to a corrected age of 44 weeks post conception. The maximum duration of data collection for every included infant is 28 days. Data collection will stop before 28 days if the infant leaves the unit (discharge, death, transfer to another hospital). Data will be entered on a secure web-based questionnaire.
Title Prospective, single-arm, multi-centre, observational registry to further validate safety and efficacy of the Nobori® DES in real-world patients. Objective Primary objective The primary objective of e-NOBORI registry is to further validate the safety and efficacy of Nobori® DES system in unselected patients representing everyday clinical practice. Primary Endpoint: Freedom from Target Lesion Failure (TLF) defined as a composite of cardiac death, target vessel related myocardial infarction (MI) and clinically driven target lesion revascularization (TLR) at 1 year
The purpose of the study is to assess lead implant success and complication rate using the Medtronic Attain Family of left-heart leads and delivery catheters.
The purpose of this study is to gather information about the use of an investigational drug called IMC-1121B (Ramucirumab) in adenocarcinomas of the stomach or gastroesophageal junction.
This study is investigating the effects of an experimental drug (neratinib) in combination with paclitaxel versus trastuzumab in combination with paclitaxel for the treatment of women who have not received previous treatment for erbB-2-positive locally recurrent or metastatic breast cancer. The study will compare the effectiveness of each regimen in shrinking tumors and extending the lives of women with erbB-2 (HER2) positive breast cancer. The study will also compare the safety of the two regimens and as well as the quality of life of subjects receiving either regimen.
The purpose of this study is to investigate whether neratinib can further reduce the risk of recurrence from previously diagnosed HER-2 positive breast cancer after adjuvant treatment with trastuzumab.
Primary objectives of the study are: To assess the differences in survival of the two treatment options in both stage III (A and B) nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC) (Study A) and Stage IIIB (wet) and stage IV NSCLC (Study B), respectively Secondary objectives are: To assess the differences in toxicity of two treatment options in both stage III (A and B) NSCLC (Study A) and Stage IIIB (wet) and stage IV NSCLC (Study B), and To assess the differences in Health Related Quality of Life (HRQoL) of two treatment options in both Study A and Study B
Magnesium iron hydroxycarbonate is a phosphate binder that absorbs phosphate from food, reducing the amount that the body can absorb. The purpose of this study is to assess the efficacy of magnesium iron hydroxycarbonate in subjects requiring hemodialysis, compared with a marketed phosphate binder, lanthanum carbonate and placebo.