By Heather Driscoll-Woodford
Before the rose, the bluebell was the floral emblem of England
Modern technology may be taking over the world, but some of the more simple and traditional pleasures will never lose their appeal.
Bluebell season is here again and it is time to head to the woods as the forest floor turns into a carpet of velvety blue flowers.
Many of you will have a favourite place where you can see the 'fairy flowers' in bloom at this time of year.
For those who don't, here is a guide to the best bluebell sites in Surrey.
Chiphouse Wood, Chiphouse Bottom
Grid reference: TQ260570
Managed by the Woodland Trust. This ancient woodlands boast over 20 acres of broad leaved trees and bluebells.
Edolphs Copse, Charlwood
Grid reference: TQ236425
Managed by the Woodland Trust , these ancient woodlands are half a mile north-west of the village of Charlwood. Apparently recommended by Dale Winton! Look for raised areas of ground (hummocks) which possibly date back to the Ice Age.
Glover's Wood, Charlwood
Grid reference: TQ227406
Managed by the Woodland Trust, this is a 63 acre area of ancient woodland, including a site of special scientific interest. Wood from here was used to make charcoal for the iron industry.
Winkworth Arboretum has stunning displays of old English bluebells
Before the rose, the bluebell was the flower emblem of England.
Legend has it that bluebells should never be brought into the house!
Bluebells were known as fairy flowers. If you damage bluebells in the woods the fairies (called Oakmen) will make sure you get lost!
During the witch trials in olden times, it was dangerous to have bluebells growing in your garden, as it could be taken as a sign you were in league with the fairies, and therefore a witch!
In the 13th Century, monks used bluebells to treat leprosy.
In the language of Flowers bluebells stand for constancy.
Great Earls Wood, Limpsfield
Grid reference: TQ407487
Managed by the Woodland Trust. Small but perfectly formed woodland, situated on the Surrey border, close to the Greensand Way.
Hammond's Copse (Prestige Wood), Newdigate
Grid reference: TQ212441
Managed by the Woodland Trust. An ancient semi-natural woodland, with an abundant bird population. Oak from here was once used to build ships, as well as to supply local industries. Also called "Prestige Wood" after a major benefactor, the Prestige Hotels chain.
Hatchlands Park, East Clandon
Grid reference: TQ063516
Telephone: 01483 222482
The National Trust owned, famous bluebell heaven and retreat. A one-mile walk takes you through Little Wix Wood with its bluebells and primroses.
Leith Hill, Holmbury St Mary
Grid reference: TQ139432
Telephone: 01306 711777
The highest point in the SE. On a good day you can see 13 counties, London and the English Channel. Has an 18th century Gothic viewing tower. As well as bluebells there are rhododendrons, which allegedly were planted by Charles Darwin's sister, Caroline.
Little Earls Wood, Oxted
Grid reference: TQ406489
Managed by the Woodland Trust, it has over 6 acres of ancient broad leaved woodland.
Ricketts Wood, Charlwood
Grid reference: TQ230428
Managed by the Woodland Trust. The woodland is oak forest dating from the 1900s. There is a easy, circular route which takes a pleasant 15 minutes to complete.
Staffhurst Wood, Limpsfield
Grid reference: TQ413490
Managed by the Woodland Trust. This wood was originally part of a royal hunting forest in Saxon times. More recently it was used WWII as an ammunitions dump. The whole area is covered by a Tree Preservation Order.
Winkworth Arboretum, Godalming
Grid reference: SU990412
Telephone: 01483 208477
The National Trust owned hillside arboretum is home to an old English bluebell wood, as well as displays of magnolias and azaleas.