The CSE undergraduate curriculums prepare students for leadership in the technology sector and for advanced study in graduate school.
Specifically, lower-division requirements are designed to provide a strong foundation in mathematics, physics, electrical engineering, basic computing methodology and skills, and computer organization. This enables students to solve small computing problems through programming and discrete mathematical reasoning.
In addition, CSE upper-division core courses prepare students to solve computing problems using the theory and design of algorithms, hardware, and software. Students gain additional breadth and/ or depth computing by an appropriate selection of technical electives.
We use technology to facilitate better educational practices in and outside of the classroom. We use different technologies such as the: Ubiquitous Presenter, a classroom-presentation system originally developed at the University of Washington; Tablet PC Grader, which allows to email marked-up images of their quiz results to students; and digital pens for capturing and posting notes and animations directly to the Web for the benefit of all students in a class.
Clickers, Clickers, Clickers! Clickers are wireless personal response systems that are used in CSE classes to anonymously and rapidly collect an answer to a question from every student; an answer for which they are individually accountable. This allows for rapid reliable feedback to both the instructor and the students. They assist with the instructor-student interaction and also allow for tracking student's attendance.
Lastly, CSE is leading the effort to enhance a campus-wide technology curriculum called "Fluency in Information Technology," offered by CSE since 2003, in order to attract more students from non-engineering majors. Our efforts are to refashion the curriculum for lower-division CSE courses to attract and retain a broader spectrum of students, including women, disadvantaged and at-risk students.