Download Daily Astronomy apk 1.1 free for Android smartphone
Apk file size: 1.1 MB
This app keeps you abreast of the latest astronomy news, pictures, videos and articles. Don’t ever be the last to learn about a cool video or photograph that’s released online.
Here’s what you get.
Astronomy news - get interesting in-depth astronomy news articles delivered daily to your phone or tablet. We gather news, images and videos from genuinely authoritative and interesting sources such as Universe Today, SPACE.COM, the Hubble space telescope, and NASA.
Astronomy pictures – yes, you get captivating photos via the famous NASA image of the day. But why stop there? Through the app you can also see space photography from the Hubble telescope. Unlike the NASA photos which cover a variety of subjects, the Hubble telescope images focus mostly on the night sky, retrieving information about distant galaxies, planets and stars.
Astronomy articles - Read stories not just focusing on the US, but also international partners like Russia, China and the UK. Such stories often contain interesting facts, quotes, photography and links to videos. They cover subjects such as: observatories, astronauts, test pilots, telescopes and NASA missions.
Disclaimer: we do not own or claim to own any of the content distributed through our app. These are our personal favorite sources that we think combine informative content with ease of understanding. Easier to see them in one spot than to surf all around the web.
NASA or The National Aeronautics and Space Administration is the agency of the United States government that is responsible for the nation's civilian space program and for aeronautics and aerospace research. Most U.S. space exploration efforts have been led by NASA, including the Apollo moon-landing missions, the Skylab space station, and later the Space Shuttle. At present NASA is supporting the International Space Station and is overseeing the development of the Orion Multi-Purpose Crew Vehicle and Commercial Crew vehicles.
The most notable NASA activities are its space flight programs, both manned and unmanned. The latter can be either independent, carrying scientific equipment, or supportive, testing equipment for manned flights. In the beginning, NASA’s missions focused on the space race with the Soviet Union, which won the first round, but later USA took the initiative and won the final race to the Moon.
Hubble Space Telescope
The Hubble Space Telescope is a space telescope that was carried into orbit by a Space Shuttle in 1990 and remains in operation. In low Earth orbit, Hubble's four main instruments observe in the near ultraviolet, visible, and near infrared. The telescope is named after the astronomer Edwin Hubble.
Hubble's orbit outside the distortion of Earth's atmosphere allows it to take extremely high-resolution images with almost no background light. Hubble's Deep Field has recorded some of the most detailed visible-light images ever, allowing a deep view into space and time. Many Hubble observations have led to breakthroughs in astrophysics.
Hubble is the only telescope designed to be serviced in space by astronauts.
OK, that's about it.
Let us know what you think of the app, and if there's something you like us to add.
Shouty Media part of our Education and have average installs from 10000 to 50000. Last Update Sept. 27, 2013. Google play rating is 75.9664. Current verison is 1.1. Actual size 1.1 MB.
just some links. useless in the field. better you google it yourself.
Space the final frontier Awesome :-)
Swaggy This is awesome
Wonderful learning tool. Must have.
near perfect great for beginners and experts easy to use
This is a good thing
I believe this
What the heck is wrong with this game