Strategies, Sample Questions, and Random Ramblings.
July 16, 2015
The very thought of geometry scares people. For most, it is a topic we covered for 1 year in high school and have not looked at it since. So, understandably, this is one of the more difficult topics for many people on the GMAT. However, it does not have to be. After getting past the initial learning curve of relearning/learning the terminology, the questions can really turn out to be quite simple. Your goal for this section is to gain comfort with the terms to be used in geometry questions and also to recognize the ways in which some of the material is partnered together into questions.
Like all of the quant topics, geometry requires mastery of the building blocks to be able to answer the questions. The difficult part comes when trying to recognize what rule will help you arrive to the correct answer. The following sections will cover everything that you need to answer even the most difficult questions. Also, included will be the checklist of things you should be looking for when looking at questions and what certain cue words mean when trying to arrive at the solution.
Also included within will be definitions of key phrases and terms. The better you understand and know all of these terms (here comes the shocker...) the more successful you will be when tackling these problems. If you need to make flash cards to remember all of the terms or rules, by all means do it. However, remember that memorization alone will not make you successful in this section, it will be the practical application of these concepts that will provide success - that is exactly where we will focus.
WARNING: When going through geometry problems, NEVER assume anything about the drawing. Unless it is explicitly stated or a geometry rule can give you information about the image, it is not true. Ex. Just because it looks like a right angle, does not mean that it is one.
DOUBLE WARNING:: While the above is true, geometry figures in problem solving questions are drawn to scale, so you can do some estimation to figure out problems when you are stuck.
Greg R., client, New York City
Emil C., client, Singapore
Chris S, client, New York City