With nods to Buddha and Aristotle, a United Nations expert panel on Monday called for all countries to measure and track the happiness of their people, and to adopt a “a very different model of humanity” oriented toward subjective wellbeing rather than per capita gross national product.
Ranking Canadians as fifth-happiest in the world based on survey data — after Denmark, Finland, Norway and Holland — the World Happiness Report says happiness is unequally distributed within and among countries for reasons that transcend money and politics.
The high-level meeting to launch the report at the United Nations in New York was a coming-out party for Bhutan, the tiny Himalayan nation that turned itself into a science experiment by starting to track and promote its Gross National Happiness 30 years ago by decree of its former king. Now a democracy, its prime minister, Lyonchhen Jigmi Y. Thinley, chaired the meeting.
But it also represents the oversize influence of a Canadian research project into happiness, the Social Interactions, Identity and Well-Being program of the Canadian Institute For Advanced Research.
‘Altruism is central to the discussions here’
Based heavily on economic predictors of happiness developed in this project, such as trust of neighbours, the 150-page report argues that traditional economic policy is at odds with human nature and inefficient at promoting happiness, because it focuses on income to the exclusion of all the other factors that support happiness and explain its variation across countries.
These include “family and friends, good health, material sufficiency, freedom, and the pleasure of living in a justifiably trusting community and nation,” said John Helliwell, a co-editor of the report and an expert on the economics of happiness at the University of British Columbia, who leads the CIFAR program.
“Altruism is central to the discussions here,” Prof. Helliwell said, “since it not only makes people happy when they demonstrate it, but because concern for others far away, and not yet born, must underlie any progress towards sustainable [in environmental, social and political terms] happiness.”
To the Peanuts gang, happiness was a warm puppy; to the Beatles, it was a warm gun; and to Thomas Jefferson it was the third American priority after life and liberty. But for economists, happiness has traditionally sat in a blind spot, seeming either irrelevant or impossible to measure or both.
Instead, economists speak of wealth, which is often necessary for happiness, but rarely sufficient. This is the report’s central criticism.
“The western economist’s logic of ever higher [per capita gross national product] is built on a vision of humanity completely at variance with the wisdom of the sages, the research of the psychologists, and the practices of advertisers,” reads the report, co-edited with Prof. Helliwell by leading American economist Jeffrey Sachs and Richard Layard of the London School of Economics.
“The economist assumes that individuals are rational decision-makers who know what they want and how to get it, or to get as close to it as possible given their budget. Individuals care largely about themselves and derive pleasure mainly through their consumption.”
This is “foolishness,” the report says. “We increasingly understand that we need a very different model of humanity, one in which we are a complicated interplay of emotions and rational thought, unconscious and conscious decision-making, ‘fast’ and ‘slow’ thinking.”
This is a familiar criticism, and rethinking happiness has been a popular scientific preoccupation for years. Researchers in various fields have made theoretical progress by thumbing their noses at G.K. Chesterton, who thought that to explain happiness is to destroy it, that it is “a mystery, like religion, and should never be rationalized.”
‘The economist assumes that individuals are rational decision-makers who know what they want and how to get it’
The interest spread to a popular culture keen on self-help. Among economists and psychologists, the publishing boom for happiness studies has passed. That peaked about five years ago with a spate of books such as Stumbling on Happiness by a Harvard psychologist. Now the policy push has started.
Much of that progress can be traced back to British Columbia, to a cluster of researchers, including Michael Pennock of the Vancouver Island Health Authority who helped design the Bhutan survey, and Christopher Barrington-Leigh, who left a job as a NASA physicist to study happiness at UBC, as a junior fellow on the CIFAR program.
What he found, working with Prof. Helliwell and others, is that income hardly matters to happiness, and to the degree it does matter, it offers only a relative benefit. Moreover, the richer your metro region, the less happy you are likely to be.
One study, for example, ranked Canadian cities based on income and life satisfaction. It found that in the richer cities (Toronto, Calgary, Ottawa) people were the least satisfied with their lives, whereas in the smaller and poorer ones (Charlottetown, Quebec City and especially St. John’s) people were far and away the most happy. Another study ranked people’s estimates of the likelihood that a neighbour would return a wallet they found containing $100, as a proxy for social trust, which predicts happiness more reliably than income.