Medical Biomagnetism is a theory and therapeutic practice that uses pairs of magnets of medium intensity to equalize an organism’s pH level and cancels out the dangerous effects pathogens, toxins or organ or gland malfunctions can have on health. Not only is it capable of determining the etiology of the health problem, but it also reestablishes physical and mental health for many diseases.
But even more important, Medical Biomagnetism is also a preventative therapy, opportunely detecting the pathology even before its clinical manifestation.
There are numerous illnesses and ailments that can be prevented, cured, or improved through biomagnetic treatment. A full cure is limited, however, by many factors, like the possible irreversible cellular damage that the disease could have already caused, or the strength of the patient’s immune system and its reparative capabilities (old age, poor nutrition, toxins, effects of drugs, etc.)
There are never two patients with identical illnesses. Therefore, an absolute cure cannot be guaranteed, and least of all without previously evaluating the diverse circumstances of each concrete case.
Below are several examples of diseases that have been treated with great success by means of the Biomagnetic Pair:
IMMUNE SYSTEM: Lupus, Dermatocyst, Rheumatoid arthritis, HIV-AIDS, Allergies.
TUMOR PHENOMENA: Cysts, Abscesses, Cancer (Depending on how advanced the illness is, the irreversible damages already provoked
and the how much the immune system has been deteriorated).
NERVES and BRAIN: Migraines, Dizziness, Multiple Sclerosis, Sciatic Pain, Herpes Zoster, Neuralgia, Epilepsy, Convulsions, Encephalitis, Meningitis, Guillain Barré, Parkinsons, Alzheimers.
DERMATOLOGICAL: Psoriasis, Allergic Dermatitis, Neurodermatitis, Contact Dermatitis, Vitiligo, Acne, Cold Sores.
MUSCULOSKELATAL: Osteoporosis, Bone and muscle pain, Lumbar and back pain, Fibromyalgia, Artritis and artrosis, Ankylosing espondilitis, Gout, Bursitis, Sprains, Necrosis of the head of the femur.
MALFUNCTIONS: Diabetes, Thyroid gland, Parathyroids, Ovaries, Testicles, Adrenal, etc.
RESPIRATORY: Cold, Flu, Asthma, Bronchitis, Pneumonia, Emphysema, Laryngitis, Pharyngotonsillitis, Sinusitis, Pericarditis, Rhinitis.
MOUTH and EAR: Canker Sores, Gingivitis, Pyorrhoea, Halitosis, Otitis labyrinthica, Tinnitus.
EYE: Cataract (prevention), Glaucoma, Conjunctivitis, Macular Degeneration, Uveitis.
CARDIOVASCULAR: Arterial hypertension, Aterosclerosis, Cardiomegalia, Varicose veins (prevention, not correction).
HAEMATOLOGICAL: Anemia, Purpura, Leukemia.
HEPATIC: Hepatitis A, B or C, Cirrhosis, Hepatic amebiasis, Uric Acid.
GASTROINTESTINAL: Infections, Gastritis, Acidity, Acid Reflux, Colitis, Irritable Colon, Megacolon, Constipation, Diarrhea, Hemorroides, Diverticula, etc.
RENAL: Calculosis or Lithiasis, Infections, Deficiency.
GENITOURINARY: Infections, Urethra, Prostate, Cystitis.
GYNECOLOGICAL: Dysmenorrhea, Amenorrhea, Unfertility, Myomatosis, Cysts, Mammary pathology.
VENEREAL: Syphilis, Gonorrhea, Herpes, Human Papiloma, Candidiasis, Clamidia.
INFANCY: Mumps, German measles, Measles, Chicken pox, Smallpox.
EMOTIONAL: Aggressiveness, Irritability, Schizophrenia, Anxiety, Insomnia, Endogenous depression, Fear.