There was a time when summer camp meant leaving home for a few weeks to live in the woods.
You slept in cabins or in tents, usually near a lake. Days were passed hiking along nature trails, identifying plants and animals, swimming, playing volleyball, listening to scary campfire tales and learning a little Indian lore.
Essentially, summer camp traded an urban setting for the country. The idea was to have fun and maybe learn a thing or two about the outdoors.
That is still the case for most camps, but a growing number focus on honing a particular skill--perhaps a sport, an academic subject or a fine art. Most of these specialty camps still incorporate a range of outdoor activities into their programs so that learning is not simply unrelieved drill.
Some camps address needs, rather than offer luxuries like horseback riding. They concentrate on developing study skills or are devoted to helping physically handicapped or mentally retarded children function better in their homes.
Athletic camps generally specialize in one sport, such as horseback riding, football, tennis, lacrosse or soccer. Specialty academic camps target topics like French or mathematics. Schools specializing in fine arts might zero in on painting or on dance.
Specialization can become esoteric. The U.S. Space Camp in Huntsville, Ala., is devoted to teaching topics related to space exploration. Another very highly focused camp--Flying Cloud in Mt. Holly, Vt.--has youngsters living in teepees and studying Native American culture.
The best place to begin narrowing your choices, specialty or not, is with ``The Parents` Guide to Accredited Camps,`` published by the American Camping Association (ACA), a national nonprofit camping accreditation organization. The guide costs $8.95 postpaid. If parents promise to drop it off at a public library or a doctor`s or dentist`s office after using it, the price is $2.40, which is the cost of postage. It can be ordered from the American Camping Association, Illinois Section, 36 S. State St., Suite 1818, Chicago 60603.
Gordon Kaplan, associate director of the Illinois Section, recommends two other books: ``Guide to Summer Camps and Summer Schools`` (Porter, Sargent Publishers Inc., $18) and ``Summer Opportunities for Kids and Teenagers``
(Peterson`s Guides, $12.95). Many of the specialty camps listed in these two books are not accredited by the association, but, Kaplan says, that does not mean they are not good ones. Some, he says, do not know of the
association; others are not interested in being listed.
Specialty camps that are not accredited by the association, Kaplan says, can be checked in two ways by asking the camp for the names of parents whose children have attended or consulting someone in the specialty, a teacher or a coach.
Kaplan warns parents to be wary of camp consultants who do not charge a fee, which indicates that they are paid commissions by certain camps for referrals, he says. ``They may or may not refer a parent to a camp other than those they have a contractual relationship with,`` he said.
Parents with children in town this summer may want to consider daily summer activities offered by the Chicago Park District at every park. Programs vary according to the facilities at each park but may include theater workshops, swimming, baseball, arts and crafts, dancing and gymnastics.
Most parks will offer a day camp for children ages 7 to 13. This runs from 9 a.m to 3 p.m. July 1-Aug.7. Activities include swimming, singing, games, craft making and occasional trips to local museums. Youngsters must bring their own lunches. The cost is $40, and reservations are necessary.
Other park district programs to investigate include Moms, Dads & Tots
(for children ages 1 1/2 to 3) and Kiddy Kollege (for youngsters ages 3 1/2 to 5). Call 294-2493 for further information on all park district programs.
Many suburban parks and recreation departments also offer summer day camp programs and daily park activities. Brochures and information are available from the individual departments.