Q1 Compare Products
Buying and selling on the Internet has changed the way we live. We can now perform a web search to locate, compare, and buy goods and services.
In this Quest you are going to compare the pros and cons of different products.
During this Quest, you are going to compare specifications of three different devices, compare products and select the best choice for your classroom based on features and cost.
Memory: Memory is measured in Bytes (eg. Gigabytes) of information able to be stored on a computer. Example: 1 Gigabyte of storage can hold approximately 200 songs.
Screen Size: Screen size is usually described by the length of its diagonal, which is the distance between opposite corners, usually in inches.
Resolution: Resolution is the number of distinct pixels in each dimension that can be displayed on a device and determines how sharp the image is on the screen.
Processor: A processor is a part of a computer, such as the central processing unit, that performs calculations or other manipulations of data.
Specifications: Specifications are a detailed description of the features, operating system, amount of memory, processor speed, etc.
I Can Statements
- be a responsible online consumer
- compare the pros and cons of various online products
1. Your class is receiving a grant of $6,000. You have been asked to evaluate and recommend a tablet device to purchase from Samsung, Apple, Amazon.
2. Open, Copy and Save this Tablet Product Specifications Chart. The chart includes a blank column for a device your school might already be using or is considering for purchase.
3. Discuss the importance of the different features of each device in a small group or as a class and identify pros and cons.
- Memory, storage, resolution & screensize, processor, price.
- Consider whether other features are important for your class work:
cameras, the ability to attach a monitor or projector to it, keyboard or touchscreen, USB port for external devices...
4. Calculate how many of each device can be purchased with the grant funds.
5. Select one device (or the one your school is already using or considering) and make a recommendation to the rest of the class with at least three reasons why you selected it. Document this on your copy of the Tablet product chart in the table provided at the bottom of it.
6. Save and share your Tablet product chart and final recommendation with your teacher.
1. Your small groups can present and defend your recommended device to the rest of the class for a final class vote for a single device recommendation.
2. Invite your school or district technology director to present your recommendation and ask how the school/district makes a decision.
3. An anonymous donor has offered to match the grant. Will this make a difference to your recommendation?
4. Search Amazon for the device chosen and read the user reviews. Does this change your recommendation?
To Complete this Quest
When you are done with this Quest, review the I Can Statements and share or save the data chart in your File Space and with your teacher.
Check off this Quest on the 21t4s roadmap
I have completed this Quest and I am ready to tackle Quest 2
ISTE and Common Core Standards
2. Digital Citizen
a. cultivate and manage their digital identity and reputation and are aware of the permanence of their actions in the digital world
b. engage in postive, safe, legal and ethical behavior when using technology
5. Computational Thinker
b. Collect data or identify relevant data sets
Common Core Standards
CCSS.ELA-Literacy.CCRA.R.7 Integrate and evaluate content presented in diverse media and formats, including visually and quantitatively, as well as in words.1
CCSS.ELA-Literacy.CCRA.R.8 Delineate and evaluate the argument and specific claims in a text, including the validity of the reasoning as well as the relevance and sufficiency of the evidence.
CCSS.ELA-Literacy.CCRA.W.7 Conduct short as well as more sustained research projects based on focused questions, demonstrating understanding of the subject under investigation.
CCSS.ELA-Literacy.CCRA.W.9 Draw evidence from literary or informational texts to support analysis, reflection, and research.
CCSS.ELA-Literacy.CCRA.SL.5 Make strategic use of digital media and visual displays of data to express information and enhance understanding of presentations.