A variant of the blanket drag is the clothes drag,
where the rescuer drags the victim by the clothing on
the victims upper body.
Tied-hands Crawl: The tied-hands crawl,
shown in figure 339, may be used to drag an
unconscious person for a short distance.
particularly useful when you must crawl underneath a
low structure, but it is the least desirable because the
victims head is not supported.
To be carried by this method, the casualty must be
in the supine position. Cross the wrists and tie them
together. Kneel astride the casualty and lift the arms
over your head so that the wrists are at the back of your
neck. When you crawl forward, raise your shoulders
high enough so that the casualtys head will not bump
against the deck.
TWO-RESCUER TECHNIQUES.If the
casualty is ambulatory, you and your partner should
assist him to safety. However, if the victim has either a
spinal injury or a fractured extremity, there are a
number of two-rescuer techniques that can be used to
move him to safety.
Chair Carry: The chair carry can often be used to
move a sick or injured person away from a position of
danger. The casualty is seated on a chair, as shown in
figure 340, and the chair is carried by two rescuers.
This is a particularly good method to use when you must
carry a person up or down stairs or through narrow,
This carry must NEVER be
used to move a person who has an injured neck,
back, or pelvis.
Arm Carry: The two-person arm carry, shown
in figures 341 and 342, can be used in some cases to
move an injured person. However, this carry should
not be used to carry a person who has serious
wounds or broken bones.
Another two-person carry that can be used in
emergencies is shown in figure 343. Two rescuers
position themselves beside the casualty, on the same
side, one at the level of the chest and the other at the
thighs. The rescuers interlock adjacent arms as shown,
while they support the victim at the shoulders and
knees. In unison, they lift the victim and roll his front
toward theirs. This carry must not be used to move
seriously injured persons.
Figure 337.One-person arm carry.
Figure 338.Blanket drag.
Figure 339.Tied-hands crawl.