I would be glad to give you some book suggestions for your kids! Let’s see if these hit the mark:

1. The Chronicles of Narnia by C.S. Lewis. This series is one of the most classic and well-known children's fantasy series, with a world of magic, talking creatures, and adventure. It is considered suitable for children aged 6-12.
2. Charlie and the Chocolate Factory duology by Roald Dahl. This whimsical duo of books about young Charlie and his adventures with Willy Wonka is delightful for younger readers. It is suitable for children ages 6-10.
3. The Children’s Circle Stories by Terry Pratchett.  This collection of short fantasy stories was written in the 1960s and has been collected and released as a series that will delight young readers with stories like Dragons at Crumbling Castle. This series is appropriate for readers ages 7 and up.
4. Harry Potter, by J.k. Rowling. This series of books follows young Harry as he discovers he is a wizard, and follows him on his adventures and escapades at a magical school for wizardry. This series is suitable for readers ages 8 and up.
5. Alice in Wonderland and its sequel, Through the Looking Glass, by Lewis Carroll. These classic works are fantastical and engaging. These books are appropriate for children 9 and up.
6. Howl’s Moving Castle by Diana Wynn Jones. This series is a trilogy about Sophie and the wizard Howl and their adventures with witches, wizards, and a fantastical moving castle. It is appropriate for children 9 and up.
7. The Redwall series by Brian Jacques. This series is huge, with 22 books for children to enjoy. The books follow the adventures of sentient animals as they live in communities together and fight their enemies. Because of battles and fighting in the books, they are best suited for children over the age of 9.
8. His Dark Materials by Philip Pullman. This trilogy follows the protagonist Lyra as she lives in a world where magic has been repressed by the government. It’s best for children over the age of 
9. The Inheritance Cycle by Christopher Paolini. These books are considered high fantasy, and take place in a world with magic and dragons. The themes of intrigue, revenge, and war make these books suitable for children 12 and up.
