Map: Interracial Marriage: Who and Where
In 2008, a record 14.6% of all new marriages in the United States were between spouses of a different race or ethnicity from one another. Rates varied by region, by state and racial group.
Islam and Christianity in Sub-Saharan Africa
In little more than a century, the religious landscape of sub-Saharan Africa has changed dramatically. In 1900, traditional African religions dominated. Since then, the numbers of both Muslims and Christians have risen into the hundreds of millions. A new survey explores how sub-Saharan Africans themselves view the role of religion in their lives and societies.
The Census: College Students Count — but Where?
Should college students be counted in the 2010 Census at their parents’ home or their school address? The Census Bureau has a cut-and-dried answer, but this question recurs each decade because census rules and people’s preferences are not always in sync.
The Prisoner Dilemma
Should the Census count inmates in the areas where they are incarcerated or try to link them to their hometowns?
Between Two Worlds: How Young Latinos Come of Age in America
Never before in this country’s history has a minority ethnic group made up so large a share of the youngest Americans.
Religious Landscape Survey Data Release
Data files from the U.S. Religious Landscape Survey, including interviews with a representative sample of more than 35,000 U.S. adults, are now available to the public for further study and analysis.
Data: Marriage and Divorce: A 50-State Tour
The proportion of Americans who are currently married has been diminishing for decades and is lower than it has been in at least half a century.
Mapping the Global Muslim Population
A comprehensive demographic study of more than 200 countries finds there are 1.57 billion Muslims of all ages living in the world today, representing 23% of an estimated 2009 world population of 6.8 billion. A series of interactive maps show the size and distribution of the worldwide Muslim population.
Go West, Old Man
Searching for a modern fountain of youth? American’s West has the highest concentration of older adults who don’t think of themselves as old. Older Westerners also feel healthier and get more exercise than older folks elsewhere.
A Portrait of Mormons in the U.S.
Founded in 1830, Mormonism is now practiced by 1.7% of U.S. adults, comparable to the American Jewish population. Followers are concentrated in the West, and stand out for having exceptionally high levels of religious commitment and for very conservative political views.