Here you’ll find out what bamboo needs so you can bamboo with confidence.
More than just a gently swaying plume of foliage. Bamboo breathes in and out through its leaves, which nourish the underground system of rhizomes, uniting the grove.
Rhizomes throw up more culms and the cycle revolves.
Bamboo obtains dissolved nutrients underground, via its shallow root system. Together with sunshine, this show runs on water and fertiliser. Don’t over fertilize.
Bamboo is a grass. It likes lawn food.
Because growth is rapid bamboo should be fed regularly just prior to, and over summer. Spring is when the fast growing, new shoots of Running Bamboo emerge. Summer is shooting time for Clumping Bamboo.
Summer time, something like a ratio of, N:10.P:6. K:6, applied as a slow release is fine. Bamboo dosent use much food in temperate and sub-tropical zones during winter. When the warm weather starts up again. Feed me! Organic is better than processed fertilizer. Friendly for soil bacteria, fungui and who knows what else!
With chemical fert’ feed a small amount often rather than a lot at once. Compost? Too-much is never enough.
Bamboo responds well to lawn food, particularly liking chicken manure.
Too much fertilizer damages bamboo and then it washes down to the river and fertilizes it too. Eeek!
Giant Buddha Belly Bamboo should not be given much nutrient at all, it will grow too fast to attain its distinctive swollen shape. But. if the leaves yellow then… better feed it something.
Until it has become established in its new home bamboo needs to be kept moist.
In warm, summer weather this may take only 6 – 8 weeks.
In colder months, it may just hold out for summers’ warmth to send out feeder roots.
Once established bamboo is hardy.
Planted in the ground, it will withstand dry spells by shedding foliage.
If you need it to look lush and green then an automatic watering system and timely feeding is recommended.
As a rule of thumb keep the soil moist.
Clumping bamboo can absorb a lot of water so it is good to empty grey water here. The bamboo will suck it up and look great.
However, if too much grey water is discharged in one place, the excess of nutrients will turn the soil noxious and your plants will suffer. Etc
Running Bamboo doesn’t like lots of water. Hates waterlogging. It likes it’s growing medium moist not wet. Grey water should be used sparingly.
Of course you want your bamboo looking lush – be mindful of food and water.
Soil pH. Bamboo prefers around 6.5 pH.
Please consider Mr Bamboo if you need bamboo maintenance work in Sydney.