Something I really want to do better in my classroom is having respectful, thoughtful and passionate discussions about many varied topics. One way I want to do this is by having a Statement of the Week.
So each week you introduce a statement such as ‘Zoos are awesome’ or ‘Students should have to wear uniforms’ and based on the statement, your student have to go to one of the 4 corners. Each corner will be labeled with a piece of paper that says Strongly Agree, Agree, Disagree, or Strongly Disagree. In their corners they will discuss with the other students in that corner why they feel that way about the topic. They will go back to their desks and circle their point of view and write why they feel that way.
Then for the week, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday you read articles based on the statement with differing points of views. Each day your students will write down the name of the article and the key ideas in that article.
Friday, the students need to evaluate their initial viewpoint and then analyze their key learnings from each article. Then they need to choose a final viewpoint and defend why they are keeping the same point of view or why they changed it. Then they will have a discussion where they try to convince the other corners that their corners are right. Then they will have to fill in the sheet on their final verdict.
I have added a option of a pro and con list on the back so that if the students are stuck on their options, they can use that to decide which point of view is correct.
To find the best articles, use Newsela. Newsela is a site that has tons of articles on different subjects and can be sorted by age range and language. You can find an article about your statement and then choose Lexile levels to suit your students reading levels. This way you can differentiate easily but all your students will still be able to participate on the same statement.
I knew the second that I was told that I would be teaching Grade 6 next year that I would be using Google Classroom with my students.
I decided that in the first week of school I would introduce Classroom, get them to join our online Classroom and introduce a very simple but fun get to know you slideshow. First, I showed them my “All about me” Project and then showed them how to access theirs.
I only showed my students how to write in the slides and add pictures. I was amazed that some students were so excited about this that they figured out how to change the text colour, insert gif’s, and change the theme of the slides.
A great first project using Classroom!
*NOTE: Even though it says 6 are not done, they just forgot to turn them in.
I created the below document to help my students learn about the learning skills we assess them on in Ontario. I am going to give them this document at the beginning of the year so that they can create goals about these learning skills. I want my students to be able to self-assess and reflect on what they can do better for the next term.
Scott Monahan has started an amazing collaboration project. He is trying to gather all of the Ontario Curriculum on one spreadsheet/database for easy referencing. He is asking for teachers to help and choose a grade and subject to enter into the Google Form he has created.
If we all chip in and do our part, an amazing resource will be created for all Ontario educators to use. If you help out, you will also have your name on the document when it is completed. What a great idea and opportunity!
As we use more and more technology in our classrooms, I find myself getting confused about which students I can post pictures of on our classroom website, twitter and who is allowed to skype.
At the beginning of the year, when you collect your technology in the classroom permission forms, you can make these posters so that students, staff and visitors know which students they can take pictures of. It is also a great reminder for you to remember who not to post on your classroom blog and twitter account.
If you know me well, you know that I have a love for Mario Brothers. Here are some examples of the posters using Mario and Luigi.
This resource should be printed and displayed on your classroom wall and should be easily seen in the classroom.
Click on any of the pictures or on this link to get the free downloadable resource with the 4 different display options.
I don’t know about you but I have several IEP’s on the go and have a hard time keeping them all straight. All of the IEP at a glance sheets I found were one student per page but sometimes you just need a quick reference. This is what I created to help myself, and I hope you find it useful. To download this, please click on the poster.