The Cold War was a series of conflicts between The United States and Nazi Germany.
Germany's Age of Expansion
By the 1930's Germany had established a dictatorship, along with Italy these two would eventually form the Axis Alliance. By 1939 Axis (including Japan) would go to war with the Allies starting by Germany and the Soviet Union's invasion of Poland. By 1940 the Axis would contain much of Europe. Hitler then would lead a successful invasion of the Soviet Union. By 1941 Nazi forces reach Moscow, where they looted and burned down the city, also massacring most of the Communist Party and Stalin was taken prisoner (to be later executed two years later, as for the U.S.S.R, it would relocate east of the Ural Mountains in Siberia, it would also lose all land in Central Asia.). By spring of 1941 Hitler would turn the bulk of his army against Britain, quickly taking London; Winston Churchill would flee to the U.S.
The Pacific War
On Dec 7 1941 Japan would bomb Pearl Harbor causing the U.S. to declare war on Japan. Churchill called for the U.S. also to declare war on the Axis, Roosevelt had his Generals assess an invasion of Europe, and his generals pointed that an invasion of Europe would be too difficult because they would have to sail across the Atlantic than deploy soldiers in to the West coast of France. Also it would be difficult to give supplies to the U.S. forces. By 1942 American forces began the Pacific War. Hitler began to assess whether he should invade the U.S. but also saw it too difficult to execute. The war would drag out until 1947 were U.S. forces had taken much of Japan's island colonies. On April 25 1947 the U.S. would drop an atomic bomb on Hiroshima, two days later on Nagasaki this would cause Japan to surrender on April 29 1947.
While the Japanese War was being fought Benito Mussolini began to think that Nazi Germany was gaining too much strength. It began a secret negotiation between Italy and Spain to fight Germany called the Roman Alliance. Hitler began to suspect the treason and was soon validated by spies. On August 14 1947 Germany declared war on Italy. This cause the Roman Alliance to come to arms. Even with Spanish aid Nazi Forces easily crosses the Alps and soon was digging in to central Italy. On the Spanish front, Nazi soldiers took over much of Spain. By fall of 1948 Nazi forces took over all of the Roman alliance. Using Propaganda Germany was able to declare war on Portugal and quickly took over all of Europe. On February 12th both Benito Mussolini and Franco were executed.
By 1950 all of Europe was united under Nazi control, Hitler began to look into Asia and Africa for expansion. Throughout the 1940's China had experience a violent decade. From fighting Japan to now fighting a civil war. It pitted nationalist forces against Communists. Hitler having a deep hatred of Communism supported the nationalist forces. The Chinese civil war dragged on for two bloody years. Until in 1952 where the nationalists won. After all the Communists fled to Korea or were executed China was renamed the Chinese Empire. Korea than experienced a violent war between the Communists and the government. China brought aid to the government and by 1954 Korea's government was stable and most of the Communist leaders were executed. A few managed to escape to Taiwan where they named it the People's Republic of China. China would soon sign a treaty with Hitler.
The Structure of Hitler's Empire
Hitler structured his empire in different sections. Central Europe was named German Proper including all of previous Germany before WW1, Denmark to the north, the dissolved Austria-Hungary, and to Switzerland and the Alps at the very south. France, the Netherlands, and Spain were renamed Western Germany, the United kingdom named the British Germany, Italy was named Roman Germany. The rest of the empire was grouped into: Balkan Germany, Russian Germany (Russian Germany only included western Russia, the German army never invaded Siberia believing it to be a frozen wasteland) Baltic Germany, Armenian Germany and Scandinavian Germany. Hitler also established many puppet states, including many in Northern Africa (these puppet states were ruled by a white upper class), Central Asia, Turkey, Syria, Jordan and an Alliance with China and Korea.
Hitler also began a structured genocide of those he believed to be lesser. By the 1950's all of Europe's Jewish and Slavic population had either been executed or fled to the U.S. or Siberia. Hitler than began a genocide in Northern Africa against Africans and many races in Europe.
The Cold War Begins (1953-1954)
The Cold War didn't actually start until 1953, when Germany would test the first Atomic weapon. This alarmed the United States, before the U.S. believed that Germany wouldn't invade for fear of a nuclear retaliation, and now with evidence to support that the lasting radiation effects of an atomic bomb could be disastrous for the environment. The U.S. also began to acknowledge Hitler's appetite for conquest, and began to form an Alliance to defend against a war. On July 16th 1953 the U.S. formed the American Treaty Organization (ATO) Including: America, Canada, Mexico, El Salvador, Panama, Ecuador, Columbia, Brazil, Venezuela, Argentina, Australia, Bolivia, Peru, Chile, Cuba, The Philippines and Japan. America would spend billions of dollars not only to improve its own army, but to also improve the armies of the other members of ATO.
Hitler would then show interest in the Middle East for their oil reserves. Many Arabian countries including Saudi Arabia, Iraq and Iran began to have talks about join ATO. In 1954 all of the nations would be accepted. Hitler with Chinese assistance began an invasion of Southern Asia. America asked for the invasion to be halted but the invasion continued. ATO troops were sent to Vietnam where they clashed. A bloody battle ensued were the ATO forces won and pushed the invaders out.
After the failed invasion Hitler began his own alliance Called The Holy Roman Empire of HRE, including all of the German Empire all of the Northern African States, the Central Asian states, China, and Korea. The HRE armies outnumbered the ATO armies significantly, but the U.S. nuclear stockpile was almost twice as large as Germany's.
The Suez Wars (1955-1961)
In 1955 Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia, and India joined ATO for fear of invasion. Most of the countries of the world at this point were positioned into two opposing camps. Another conflict wouldn't break out until Egypt and Saudi Arabia had a dispute over the Suez Canal. This started the Suez War. When Egyptians invaded into Saudi Arabia. At the start Egyptian forces were much better armed and supplied than the Saudi Army and had numerous victories, until Iraq and Iran armies were deployed and pushed back into the Sinai Peninsula. This started the Battle of Sinai, Egyptian forces were outnumbered and being pushed back into Egypt. Soon other North African countries sent their Armies to the aid Egypt. This turned the tide and pushed back the Arab armies and then ATO mobilized sending Indian army. This escalated the bloodshed. Both armies were experiencing heavy casualties. American threaten for the North African nations to withdraw or face intervention. Germany then threatened to join in if American forces did, so the U.S. backed off. The Siege of Sinai would continue for 9 months consuming many of the nation's resources. One soldier at the sight reported that with all the killing in such a small area it could be realistic that the whole place could be drowned in blood.
The Treaty of Jerusalem
After the 9th month cries around the world asked for an armistice and an end to the blood bath. On Dec 18th 1955 Leaders of America, Germany, Saudi Arabia, Iraq, Iran, India, Egypt, and many other nations meet in Jerusalem to talk about an Armistice. The crisis disputed how the Suez Canal was to work and both nations were clear that they wanted to control the Sinai Peninsula. Instead a treaty was made that Sinai was its own nation and the canal was to be open to all nations with a small tax, America paid Egypt an estimated 700 thousand for Sinai. On Jan 4th 1956 the treaty was signed, and on Jan 8th The Democratic Republic of the Sinai Peninsula was founded.
The Second Suez War
The peace found by the Treaty of Jerusalem wasn't enjoyed for too long. Now an even bigger power struggle waged. The U.S. since paying for Sinai believed that it could influence it. America tried to sway Sinai to join ATO, this would help give the nations an access to the Suez Canal. Hitler well aware of this soon began to offer Sinai to join the HRE, to also allow them access to the Suez Canal. Both nations began to bribe the Sinai government with money, weapons, soldiers, and secret information. This caused heavy instability throughout the new found nation. Different factions lived in Sinai, including an Arab population, an Egyptian, and since the U.S. had been a haven for many Jews during the Holocaust , many Jews in America and Siberia migrated to the Sinai in hope of one day regaining Israel. These three different factions lead to three different political parties, The Muslim Arabian Party (MAP), The Democratic-Republican Egyptian (DREP) party, and the Abrahamic Jewish Party (AJP). Fueled by U.S. and German influence a civil soon erupted, The MAP supported a pro-American government, along with the AJP but DREP favored a Pro German Government. The civil war started when a AJP candidate won the 1960 election, MAP supported the transition, but DREP revolts happened over night. AJP and MAP joined forces and renamed themselves, the Muslim Arabian and Jewish Hebrew Coalition (MAJHC). DREP renamed itself the Egyptian Revolutionary Forces (ERF).
The Capital Al Qantarah along the Suez Canal, and the border of Egypt, was soon over run by ERF fighters, the newly elected president was forced to flee for fear of invasion by Egypt from the west. the MAJHC Soon took Eastern Sinai. America alarmed by the take over of the Suez Canal, pressed for a cease fire, while Germany and Egypt sent supplies to ERF. Soon Saudi Arabia and many Arabian nations sent supplies, and even troops to help the MAJHC. The First Major clash between the two forces was in March 1960 at the Battle of Gidi. The two armies met at the Gidi pass were both sides had heavy casualties but the MAJHC overcame and began a campaign take back the capital. In Oct a giant force of ERF fighters meet then at the Little Bitter Lake another bloody battle ensued, and MAJHC was slowly making progress. Egypt declared a fear that the MAJHC would continue in Egypt so a battalion of Egyptian soldiers crossed the border and pushed back the MAJHC. The retreating forces withdrew to the Milta Pass. Saudi Arabia warned that if Egypt didn't withdraw from Sinai they were violating the Treaty of Jerusalem and were declaring war of Saudi itself.
Not only did Egypt ignore Saudi's treaty they sent reinforcements to destroy the MAJHC strong hold at the Milta Pass. In Feb 1961 a combined ERF forces and Egyptians invaded the Milta Pass. Saudi Arabia then sent its army to support the MAJHC. A long bloody battle began. America called for another meeting for a ceasefire. But a problem soon arose in the German government. General Dronitz, in his bid to gain the throne, established a secret underground movement to topple Hitler.
On April 5th 1961 a second conference was held in Jerusalem. President John F Kennedy was their, the President Muhammad Naguib was the Leader of Egypt, Abdul Aziz of Saudi Arabia, Haim Weizman was there for Sinai. The treaty denounced that this time no foreign body was allowed to intervene in Sinai affairs for ten years, unless Sinai asked for it. Also it stated that foreign armies were never allowed in Sinai for 20 years. The treaty was signed on April 13th.
The U.S.S.R. after the Fall of Moscow (1940's-1960's)
No country had seen more tragic decades then the U.S.S.R. After the fall of Moscow the nation would flee east of the Urals. The only survivor of the Nazi massacre was a close associate of Stalin, Nikolai Bulganin, who would resume as leader of the Soviet Union, at the new capital Novosibirsk, in central Siberia. The 40's for the U.S.S.R. were the most brutal ever seen by any Russian nation. Disease, famine, and poverty ran rampant through the nation. Bulganin even feared for a revolt. But by the 50's Bulganin ordered for the rise of industry. Throughout the 50's The U.S.S.R. using the raw materials of the Siberia managed to steadily build up its economy. By 1960 with the output of Soviet material Bulganin began to build up The Red Army. The nation had actually managed to build up its forces and industry and had seen great progress since the 40's or even as far back as the 30's and 20's.
Revolution in Germany(1961, 1962)
Coup d'etat against Hitler
While the Germans feares the rise of the USSR, another problem occured. On August 12th 1961, Donitz troops launched a full scale attack on Berlin, starting the German Civil War. The revolution last for only one night and two days. Due to all high ranking officials of Nazis were loyal to Hitler, they were executed by Dronitz troops. Hitler was killed during the unrest together with his family. Thus the revolution ended with Dronitz became the new fuhrer.
The Proxy Wars, and The New Soviet Leader (1963-1976)
The Vietnam War
One of Americas greatest problems was the Fascist threat in North Vietnam, against the Democratic South. After the North Vietnamese (Backed by the Germans), invaded the South in 1963, America devoted a great deal of her effort fighting the North Vietnamese and the Viet Minh. Nazi propaganda described the Americans involvement as "A typical Imperialist stance by the West". In total, around 70,000 Americans and over four Million Vietnamese (North and South) died in the war. This was the most deadly and destructive war since The Pacific War. American forces finally withdrew in 1969, after a peace was negotiated. North Vietnam would join the HRE while South would continue with ATO.
The Afghan Civil war
By the late 1960's Afghanistan was an ally of Germany, but by 1970 it would face instability. A terrorist group began to rise ( back by U.S. aid) against the Nazi backed government. By 1971 the terrorist attacks became a full a full civil war. The terrorist group came to be know as Al Qaeda and would use guerrilla type warfare, backed by U.S. aid. (Some of the attacks lead by the group were headed by U.S. Special Forces, and CIA officials) By 1972 German forces were deployed to find and destroy the group. The Afghan Civil War would continue until 1974 were Al Qaeda officials would flee to India and Iran, but not with out leaving its mark the Afghan government which was left unstable and weak.
The New Soviet Leader
In 1975 Nikolai Bulganin leader of the Soviet Union passed away. The new leader would be Mikhail Gorbachev. A year later The soviets would test their first nuclear weapon. They would be the 3rd to test a nuclear weapon, but the fourth to obtain nuclear weapons. (First The U.S., Second was Germany and China was third because Germany lent some to them)
Civil Wars throughout the World
From 1974-1976 many guerrilla type wars would spring throughout the world, but none were successful, including: Bolivia, Ecuador, Cuba, Libya, Mali, Ethiopia, Iraq, Pakistan, Turkmenistan. The only successful was the Mongolian Civil war. Mongolia a soviet nation was infiltrated by a Chinese backed fascist party. By 1976 they would topple the government, and establish a puppet state government of China.
The Road to World War (1976- 1979)
The Greek Civil War
By 1976 a civil war would spring were it was least expected. Greece a section of Balkan Germany would see the rise of the Democratic Army of Greece (DAG). Backed by American aid , unexpectedly the DAG would win the Civil War. Establishing the Hellenic Republic of Greece. Germans horrified by this demanded immediate action, from Gregory. In 1977 The Nazi Army invaded Greece. The newly developed country had nothing but a small militia to defend against the highly trained army. America demanded a halt to the invasion but it was too late. By Oct 1977 The Nazi Army had conquered the whole region.
Germans throughout the empire were outraged of how Greece had been able to liberate itself. Anti feelings toward Gregory's administration was at an all time high. In an emergency address to the empire he states that he swore revenge on the U.S.'s disrespect of the superior German nation.
Mexico, at the start of the 1900's was a poor nation but since the 1950's, with American aid, began to rise and by the 70's it had risen in power, as did many Latin American nations. Gregory set his sights on Mexico, for two reasons,: First. because of its proximity to the U.S. it would be pay back for the Greek Civil War, and Second: because Gregory believed that if he could turn Mexico into an ally, then if he could benefit the nation heavily, many Latin American nation could follow, weakening the ATO alliance significantly.
On Fed 13th 1978 a German ambassador was sent to Mexico to talk about an Alliance. America was on high alert. Mexico turned down the offer. Ironically two weeks later a insurgency group would rise in Mexico. The Mexican civil war would continue until 1979. That year America would intervene to try to destroy the group. On Sept 16th 1979 a German ship headed to Mexico smuggling supplies to the terrorist group was sunk by a Mexican destroyer. Germans were outraged and ordered Gregory to declare full war on Mexico. Gregory made a speech on Sept 19th and the ordered Mexico to make compensation. Even though Germans were dissatisfied even if Mexico made compensation. Four days later Germany officially declared war on Mexico.
The Beginning of The World War (1979-1983)
German Invasion of Mexico
On Sept 25th the German Army landed at Veracruz Mexico. The army was met by both Mexican and American forces already stationed in Mexico during its civil war. Terrorist groups aided German forces. By Sept 29th the Germans managed to take Veracruz and establish a base there, their target was to take Mexico City. With the taking of Veracruz they also managed to take two thousand Mexican and American POW's. Americans were outraged and ordered their release. President Jimmy Carter ordered Germany to release them or face war. Germany ignored the threat and on Oct 5th they met the Mexican army at the Volcano of Pico de Orizaba. Even with the aid of Americans the Mexican army was well trained, but no match for the Superior German forces. The Germans had a decisive victory and slaughtered the Mexican resistance. Americans were disgusted by images they saw of the destruction of the Mexican soldiers. The Mexican army retreated to Pueblo, just outside of Mexico City. Talks between American and Germany began but Gregory, ordered the punishment of Mexico. fueled by the public's outcry President Carter reluctantly declared war on Germany on Nov 3.
New President of America and Germany's Invasion of America
During the election candidate Ronald Reagan won because many Americans believed that he had what it took to lead the country through the war. By Nov 14th German forces stationed in Mexico began their advance to Puebla. Two ships filled with German reinforcements, scheduled different destinations after word of Americas declaration of war. One ship already in the Gulf of Mexico turned North to New Orleans, while the other ship outside of the Gulf invaded Florida.
On Nov 20th German armies invade New Orleans. Two days later in Florida. The Armies made advances. The objective was to take the Mississippi river and to take Florida. On Nov 26th German forces invade Virginia Beach, Va, and New York City with two objectives: One. to take Norfolk Virginia, the largest naval base in the world, doing so would cripple the U.S. Navy, and Two. to take New York City, America's industry capital. Doing so would slow down America's war industry
The Conflict Goes Global
On Dec 8th Germany would begin the battle of Puebla. ATO was soon activated sending armies from El Salvador, Peru, Colombia, Chile, Argentina, and Brazil (because of American aid, it had risen to be the 2nd strongest nation in the western hemisphere, only behind the U.S.). With ATO reinforcements the Mexican Army was able to hold their position in Puebla only because of sheer numbers. On the American front, unlike the Latin forces which alone were no match for the Nazi's , American forces were more evenly match. Long bloody battles began in both Virginia Beach, and New York. South the Germans had been able to take Miami, Florida. New Orleans had been captured by the Germans and now were moving north along the Mississippi.
With the failure to take Puebla Gregory order HRE to mobilize. German forces backed by North African armies invaded Caracas, Venezuela, and Eastern Brazil. The Brazilian,and other South American forces withdraw to defend their homelands, leaving only, El Salvador, and Panama to support Mexico. In Asia, China, Korea, and Mongolia were ordered to invade the U.S. from the West. Japan was ordered to intercept the Asian fleet. At the battle of Midway on Jan 5th 1980 Japan was outnumbered by Chinese, Korean, and Mongolian ships. With better strategy, luck and some Canadian aid the Japanese were able to win.
Back in Mexico, German forces had a second assault of Puebla on January 15th 1980, even with Salvadorian and Panama support Germany won control of Puebla and began a destructive march to Mexico City. By late January Germany began a siege of Mexico City. The siege would last until March when the city would fall and the Mexican government and army would flee north to Chihuahua.
Before China and its allies could mount another assault in the Pacific, Japan began a surprise invasion of Korea in Feb by April the reached Seoul. But soon Chinese and Mongolian reinforcements halted the assault. The line between the two forces was a bloody battle to push forward. By June China and its allies began to push back Japan. On June 12th Japan would sent an Ambassador to the Soviet Union, to ask for it to invade Mongolian and China. The Soviets agreed, but on one condition to be able to annex all conquered lands, Japan agreed with not too much of a choice.
On July 29th The Red Army invade Mongolia. Mongolian forces were pulled from Korea and some of China's. The Red Army, which had been hardened from the past few decades of tragedy, even though slightly outnumbered, won numerous victories. In America Virginia Beach Fell to the Germans. Reagan, the new president, ordered for the army to hold the line and not let them enter Norfolk. In New York Canadian Aid helped repel German invasion. Germany would begin the siege of Orland in Florida by August. At Vicksburg the American army was able to halt German advancement into the Mississippi.
In South American Brazil had managed to repel HRE invasions and Gregory decided to instead focus in Venezuela were they had managed to make a beach landing. Soon Brazilian, Argentinian, Ecuador, and more combined to fight Germany. At the Calabozo a huge battle began. Germany and Latin Forces both saw heavy casualties. But by October Germany was being pushed back.
Soviet Forces had managed to take more than half of Mongolia Japanese forces were advancing into northern Korea. In Dec North and South Vietnam declared war and soon joined the fighting, Cambodia, and Laos supporter southern Vietnam. In America Germany advances were beginning to slow. The Army had managed to hold the line at Norfolk and in New York Canadian aid had helped to push back the Germans. Germany instead tried to flank the Americans by invading at the lower bay. American forces pushed Germans back from St. Vicksburg to St Francisville on the Mississippi. Florida was only were German advances were being made, By Dec German had reached Jacksonville.
By 1981 Latin forces had managed to push Germany to Maracay, Venezuela. In Mexico Germany had taken all of Southern , the Yucatan and central Mexico. By Feb they conquered Guatemala, El Salvador, and Honduras. In Asia India joined in the war on March 3rd by invading Southern China. Many Central Asian countries sent their armies to defend China. Iran soon aided India. By June the Red Army had taken all of Mongolia, and North East China. The flank maneuver tried by the Germans had done nothing to help the cause American forces repelled the invasion, and the battle was still a draw. By August Germany had been completed pushed out of Venezuela. Nicaragua fell to the Germans by August. Costa Rica having no armed forces surrendered Germany. Germany then began an invasion of Panama. Germans managed to take El Poste until Latin reinforcements arrived. Latin forces had finally been able to expunge the German army out of Venezuela and aid Panama.
In Mexico, Germany Prepared to take the rest of Northern Mexico. President Jose Lopez Portillo, galvanized the army by giving a speech that if Mexico falters the Germans will be able to mount invasion in the U.S. by Texas. German forces met Mexican resistance starting at Torreon. Germans made advances until in Sept Germans reach Chihuahua where a violent siege started. The President prepared the country so that if this was the final battle he declared they would fight it with the "Honor of Mexico!". With aid Panama's army was able to not only repel German invasion but began to push it back into Costa Rica.
On Oct 3rd after finally using the flanking strategy for a second time New York fell to the Germans. But it was described as a hollow victory, with heavy German casualties. The German official stationed there ordered for more troops, or the Americans and Canadians would take back the city. In Virginia the Army was pushing the Germans back into Virginia Beach. A bloody battle began at Baton Rouge between Americans and Germans. It resulted in an American victory. The objective was to rid the Mississippi River of Germans soldiers. By Nov Germans entered Georgia. In December American-Canadian forces invaded New York to try to take back the city. Even with reinforcements, many of the German soldiers were exhausted from the last siege. By 1983 Germans lost all land south of Mexico. Latin forces entered Mexico by mid January. With Latin Aid Mexicans rallied and lead a heavy offensive against Germany, and managed to push them out of Chihuahua.
ATO Turns the Tide of The War and The War Spreads to the Middle East (1983)
The Tide of the War Changes
By Feb 1983 ATO had managed to turn tide in the war. German forces had retreated from both Virginia, and New York. American forces took back New Orleans expelling Germany from the Mississippi. American forces finally halted German advances in the eastern south at Brunswick, GA and the Germans were retreating from Florida. Latin forces invaded German Occupied Mexico, and took the old capital. By May they flanked the Germans fighting Mexicans at Fresnillo, winning, causing Germany to retreat from Mexico.
In Asia Korea fell to Japan. The Red Army took all of China to the Huang river, and Japan was now joining them. India and Iran took most of South western China. Took make the situation worse for China, Taiwan lead Australia, and The Philippines into an invasion of the Eastern shore of China. China was fighting and losing a three-front war, The U.S.S.R. and Japan to the North, India and Iran to the West, and Taiwan, Australia, and The Philippines to the East.
What had started as glorious campaigns had ended as disastrous defeats for Germany. Germans were surprised at how the army had lost not only to America, but to the inferior Latin races. Gregory expressed fear with his generals that America would return the favor of their invasion and soon invade the western empire. Gregory prepared for invasion by rebuilding the Atlantic wall from Scandinavia to Spain. He distribute his army to Scandinavia, Ireland, England, Western France, and Spain. Also using some armies of the North African nations to defend against ATO invasion.
The War moves into The Middle East
In a meeting with military advisors Gregory had one last campaign that might be able to slow the ATO invasion. He believed if he could take the Middle East and its oil resources it would slow down ATO. Gregory order, Turkey, Jordan, Syria, Egypt, some of the North African nations, and Central Asian nations to invade the Middle East. On July 3rd Turkey, Jordan , and Syria, invade Iraq, Egypt, Ethiopia, Somalia, Libya, and Sudan invaded Saudi Arabia, Kazakhstan, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, and Afghanistan invade Iran.
The Invasion prove successful as advances are made into the three regions. Iran pulls its armies out of China to defend against invasion. Fueled by Indian, Iranian, and American, aid Al Qaeda lead by Osama Bin Laden leads a revolution in Afghanistan. On August 17th 1983 the second civil war was won by Al Qaeda, Afghanistan was renamed The Islamic Republic of Afghanistan. Two days later the nation joined ATO. On August 23rd the Afghan army invade Central Asia to the north. This caused the armies of those nations to retreat defend. Afghans were joined by Iranians.
In Iraq HRE forces had managed to reach Tharthar Lake. A battle ensued but ATO managed to defeat the HRE. They also managed to kick ATO out of Thartar Lake.
The Fall of China
On Sept 3rd Soviet and Japanese forces took Nanjing, the capital of China, and the last strong of Fascist China. With the fall of the capital The Chinese government signed an Armistice with ATO. Even though they signed it with ATO The Soviets (even though The U.S.S.R. fought with ATO they never joined the alliance) lead most of the meetings the demands were:
1. All land above the Huang river was annexed into the Soviet Union, a move ATO and America disagreed with but were in no position to stop it.
2. The People's Republic of China (a Communist Party) was established as the official government of China.
With the War over in China, Japan, India, and even the Soviets joined in on the Middle Eastern theater. The Soviets invaded Kazakhstan, India aided Iraq, and Japan aided Saudi Arabia. The Soviets crossed the Kazakhstan border, causing the army of Kazakhstan to withdraw to defend against the Red Army. India, joined the Iraqis at the capital of Baghdad and help push the HRE forces out of the capital. At Hail, Saudi Arabia Japan aided in halting the North African nation's campaigns. Late 1983 the war in the Middle East turn for in ATO's favor, America decided that an invasion of Germany would soon be necessary.
The Invasions of Europe (1983-1985)
The Atlantic War
Before America could invade mainland Europe they would have to break the Atlantic Wall. From Nov 1983- May1984 the Atlantic War was fought. Battles between the Navies of the U.S. and Nazi Germany were fought continuously. In the Beginning Germany had the upper hand but after constant fighting American were managing to break through. In June Reagan in a meeting with his advisors believed that the time for the German invasion was soon.
The D-day Invasions
On July 18 1984, a day that came to be known as D-day, ATO invade Europe. Three different locations were invaded, causing this to be the largest military invasion and campaign of all time. Invading the U.S. Canada, and Mexico at Eministmon, Ireland, the U.S. El Salvador, Panama, Colombia, and Venezuela, in La Rochelle in Western France, and finally Brazil, Ecuador, Peru, Chile, Argentina, and Bolivia at Vigo, Spain. Nazi forces stationed there fought good battles but ATO manage to make beach landings in all three areas.
By Late 1984 Both Jordan and Syria fell to ATO. An Invasion of Turkey was under way by Iraq and India. Japan and Saudi Arabia gained permission to cross Sinai and began a destructive march to Cairo, Saudi claimed it as revenge for the Egyptian invasion. Kazakhstan fell to the Red Army and both Uzbekistan, and Turkmenistan surrendered to Iran. Kazakhstan would be annexed into the U.S.S.R.
In Europe progress was slow with heavy causalities for the Americans. In Ireland the Americans took Ennis after a terrible siege. American forces in France reached Poitiers, France. Leon in Spain fell to the American as well. By the beginning of 1985 with the American invasion under way, revolutions throughout British, and Western Germany ignited. The army managed to put them down, but it halted supplies and troops to the front, allowing all of Ireland to be liberated and for progress to have been made in Spain, and France.
By Feb ATO forces took Nevesehir in Turkey. Cairo along with Egypt fell to Saudi Arabians. Saudi Government declared for the other African nations to surrender or face invasion. The sued for peace and by mid 1985 Libya, Sudan, Ethiopia, Somalia, surrendered. Saudi Arabia and Japan joined with ATO in Turkey.
The Lenin-Stalin Offensive
On Aug 2nd Gorbachev, Premier of the U.S.S.R., made a speech claiming that he would restore the glory of the Soviet Union. On August 4th he began the Lenin-Stalin Offensive (named after both Soviet leaders, who Gorbachev admired). The Red Army crossed the Ural mountains and began a long trudge to retake Moscow. German forces were stationed there but they weren't able to stop the invasion. German re-enforcements were sent from to stop the Soviets. They met the Red Army at Kudymker but the Soviets won.
With German having to reinforce the East ATO forces in the West were able to make advancements. The Invasion of England began and was being successful. Madrid was to be taken and in France all Western France had been liberated to the Loure river. By late 85 England was liberated. With the liberation of Britain, in the beginning of 1986 revolutions started through Western Europe. These revolutions were much more successful, even causing the Nazi Army to retreat out of Spain completely, and barely West of the Rhine river.
America and Allies, and U.S.S.R. bring Germany to its knees (1986, 1987)
The Soviets retake Moscow
By 1986 The Red Army began the siege of Vladimir. By Feb they took the city. Gorbachev made a statement that Moscow, the crown of the U.S.S.R., was in arms length of the Red Army. On Feb 15th The Soviets began the invasion of Moscow. Gregory ordered that the Nazi Army to not allow the soviets the victory. What began was the bloodiest battle of the war. Germans halted the Red Army's assault four times, causing heavy casualties for the Soviets, but they were determined to regain the ancient capital. The Final invasion began and lasted two days the casualties were enormous for both sides. By Feb 23rd The Soviets broke the German line at finally entered Moscow, after two days Germans evacuated the area. Coupled with weather and casualties, just this single battle is estimated to have taken at least one million lives. Soviets across the nation rejoiced, Gorbachev visited the nation and is reported to have kissed the ground were the Kremlin had once stood, but now was half burned down. Gorbachev gave medals to all soldiers of the Red Army who had been part of the battle. But even with this victory, Gorbachev galvanized the nation to take revenge on the Nazi nation. After this battle reports by Nazi soldiers said that the Soviet soldiers fought like wild animals. Also after the battle of Moscow, Gorbachev ordered that KGB follow the army with a mission to find the remains of Stalin and Lenin.
Gregory knew that if ATO crossed the Rhine River the war would be over. With this fear the German Army began Operation Bismark, a large scale military invasion (only second to the D-day landings). Millions of German soldiers crossed the Rhineland and fought ATO. The attack was successful pushing ATO all the way to Paris. Both sides knew that victory was important, The Germans knew that if they won they could expel ATO out of Europe, America knew that the attack was a last desperate move, so if they won the rest of German Proper would fall easily.
One of the bloodiest battle began at Tours, France in Nov 1986. ATO reinforcements had finally arrived and caught up with the army. For 4 days both combatants fought fiercely, causalities were heavy for both sides. But on the fifth they finally managed to break through, and slowly started to regain lost lands. By March 1987 they reach the Rhine river, By May they crossed in to German Proper.
ATO Invasion of Balkan Germany
On the Eastern Front, while ATO had been fighting, The Soviets had made huge gains, by mid 1987. By June they took Warsaw. Gregory, ordered the retreat of German citizens, and soldiers to defend Berlin. By 1987 Australia joined forces in Turkey (Australia, because of American aid had grown to a super power.) By July Turkey signed an Armistice with the armies. With the Fall of Turkey, Germany was left alone with no allies. Not only that, but ATO forces invaded across Istanbul into Europe, and into Greece across the Aegean Sea, into the Balkan Germany. Germany was now fighting a three-front war.
Nazi Germany Loses The War (1988)
The Fall of Berlin
By mid 1988 Roman Germany surrendered to ATO, Americans took Bremen in German Proper, so close to Berlin. Belgrade in the Balkans fell to ATO. But the final blow came in August 3rd 1988 when the Soviets reached Berlin. The siege continued for three days, casualties were of huge proportions. But then finally the Soviets broke through and raided the capital. Soviet soldiers burn down the city, killed many Germans, and massacred anyone who was suspected to be related with the Nazi's. They claimed it was revenge for the destruction of Moscow. KGB agent Vladimir Putin, lead his group secretly into the Nazi headquarters what they found was astonishing. A walkway to the Führer's chamber had tiles each with names of past leaders of Europe. Each one had the same saying "Here they lie, fallen worshiping the one true leader of the world for all eternity. Long Live The Führer!" On one tile was the names of Stalin and another Lenin. Putin moved the slabs and found corpses, believed to be those of the two Soviet Leaders.
Then KGB searched for Gregory but he could not be found. They came upon the solution he had flee the city, or maybe the country as well. KGB went under high alert and moved on out of Berlin to find Gregory. Three days later he would be found in Potsdam just outside of Berlin. They caught him before he was able to board a airplane to Southern Africa. KGB then escorted him, and other Nazi officials who survived the Red army massacre, back to The U.S.S.R. to stand trial against the Soviet people, also bringing the remains of Lenin, and Stalin to be given a proper funeral.
With Gregory gone The Generals of the Nazi Army sue for peace. On Sept 30rd 1988 Nazi Germany signs an Armistice ending the War.
The Treaty of Rome and Soviet War Trials and Burial Ceremonies (1988, 1989)
After the War, the leaders of the World met at Rome. America had a huge task to rebuild not only Europe but much of the world. All the members of ATO showed up, the U.S.S.R. at first wasn't going to show with its belief it would handle its own Justice, but after American Persuasion Gorbachev agreed. Also coming were leaders of the fallen nations including; China (China's new Communist government decided to come) Korea, Egypt (after the surrender of many African states, revolutions occurred, Egypt was the only nation which managed to keep its government stable), and Turkey. As for Germany Gregory had been held in Prison at a Siberian work camp. America pleaded for the Soviets to allow him to represent Germany, but Russia proclaimed that he would be tried in a Soviet court, and that was final. In his place instead was the General of the Army.
On Dec 1st Leaders of the world arrived at Rome the Role call follows:
Ronald Reagan- U.S.A.
John C. Major- Canada
Carlos Salina de Gortari- Mexico
Alfredo Cristiani- El Salvador
Manuel Solis- Panama
Miguel Antonio Caro- Columbia
Jaime Lusinchi - Venezuela
Rodrigo Borja Cevallos- Ecuador
Victor Gonzalez Fuentes- Bolivia
Augusto Pinochet- Chile
Raul Alfonsin- Argentina
Ernesto Geisel- Brazil
King Faud- Saudi Arabia
Saddam Hussein- Iraq
Ali Khamenei- Iran
Osama bin Laden- Afghanistan
Emperor Akihito- Japan
Abdullah Gul- Turkey
Bashar al-Assad- Syria
Hussein of Jordan- Jordan
Yang Shankun- People's Republic of China
Park Chung-hee- Korea
Anwar El Sadat- Egypt
Mikhail Gorbachev- U.S.S.R.
Ulrich de Maiziere - Nazi Germany
The Treaty of Rome would come to these terms:
1. The dissolution of Nazi Germany.
2. European nations would be restored, based on ethnic regions.
3.The establishment of a new Democratic German state.
4.The Rhineland was to be a Demilitarized Zone.
5. The Army of Germany would be kept in check, but unlike the Treaty of Versailles, This Treaty wasn't as harsh, so to avoid another war.
6. The official abolition of the League of Nations (it had unofficially ended in the 40's with Germany's takeover of most participating countries)
7. The creation of the United Nations, a organization to keep the Peace between nations and to stop any war from being as destructive as this.
8. Lastly, the U.N. Security Council was founded including the 5 major powers of the world: The U.S., The Soviet Union, Japan, Australia, and Brazil.
By Jan 1st The treaty was ratified and all the nations in this meeting would join The U.N. On Jan 3rd The Federal Republic of Germany was founded. After this Gorbachev would return to Moscow, which had returned as the capital of the U.S.S.R. where he would begin his own trial against Nazi officials, especially, Gregory.
On Jan 11th The Soviet trials began, the trials brought world attention, but the Soviets kept a lot of it behind close doors. By Jan 15th expectantly all the Nazi officials including Gregory were sentenced to death. The U.S. demanded that they be brought to a court in front of the U.N. but Soviets declared that the trials was already over. On Jan 18th The Reagan visited Gorbachev, to talk about the executions. By the end Gorbachev decided to keep good ties with the Americans and sent only Gregory to stand official U.N. trial the next day. All other Nazi officials were executed.
Two weeks later Gregory was ordered to life in prison. He would be sent to a prison at the U.S. military base Guantanamo, Cuba where he resides to this day.
The move of Gorbachev releasing Gregory to the Americans was strongly disliked through the country. This would severely weaken his administration. But on Jan 29th both the remains of Stalin and Lenin were given proper funerals at Moscow.
The Class System after the War
After the war an unofficial class on the nations seem to arise. It would originally have contain four classes but by the 90's it would grow one more: the classes are
The United States
Before the war both America and Nazi Germany were the two superpowers of the world. But after the war Nazi Germany was abolished and the succeeding state The Federal Republic of Germany was not nearly as strong. This left America in a class of its own. America was the strongest nation with the strongest economy before and after war, and before the war it had the second largest army (first was Germany) but after it had the largest army.
America and the members of this class make up The U.N. Security Council
These countries are major powers but not as powerful as the U.S.
Before the war The Soviet Union had been on the rise for many decades. It had the fourth largest army before the war (1st Germany, 2nd America, 3rd China) and The 5th best economy (1st America, 2nd Japan, 3rd Germany, 4th Australia). After the war it rose to the Second largest army, and 4th best economy. But Russia would also gain huge land territories during the war, this would eventually lead to Russia having a bigger army then the U.S. Some debate by whether the late 90's or early 00's The Soviets joined America in its First Class.
After Imperial Japan's defeat in The Pacific War, America would aid in the rebuilding of Japan. This would lead to Japan becoming one of America's greatest Allies (so close some believe that Japan was a puppet state of America, this was eventually proven false). From the 40's to 60's Japan was kept under tight restrictions. But by late 60's Japan was allowed to rebuild it armies. Throughout those decades though Japan had built its economy, It was the Second biggest economy both before and after the war. Before the war it had the Seventh largest army, after the war it would have the fifth largest.
Being a member of ATO Australia received American aid and capitalized on it becoming a world power. It was a region super power of southern Asia, and Oceania, especially with the fall of China. Before the world it had the 4th largest economy and 5th largest Army, soon rising to the third best economy and third largest army. It become so powerful it was able to annex Western Guinea, New Zealand, and many other small islands in the Oceania, and South Pacific.
Just like Australia, who capitalized on American aid, Brazil did the Same and became the 2nd most powerful nation in the Western Hemisphere, only second to the U.S. It had many trade agreements with other Latin American nations, and later in the 90's would form the Congress of South America, which would be a economic alliance with other South American, and Central American nations. Before the war it had the Seventh best economy, and Sixth best economy. After the war it would rise as the fifth best economy and fourth largest army.
Third class nations were nations part of ATO who were economically stable, and military able. Including: Canada*, Mexico, El Salvador, Panama, Columbia**, Peru**, Venezuela, Ecuador, Bolivia, Argentina**, Chile**, Saudi Arabia*, Iraq**, Iran, Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia, India*, The Philippines and Sinai** (although Sinai never joined ATO). (*- represents nation who are just under the top five economies, and ** represent nations who just under the top five militaries)
Fourth class is a class of nations that would develop in the 90's and 00's. These nations were ex-Holy Roman Empire nations, or nations that were just created, that were rising in their economies, and militaries. Including: Egypt, Turkey, China **, Korea, The United Kingdom*, France*, Spain, Germany, Greece**, Italy*, Ukraine**, Poland**, Denmark*, Sweden, Norway, Portugal*, and Finland (* represents nations who are near the top five economy-wise, ** represents countries with militaries just under the top five).
These nations are nations that have either not recovered from the war, or are in poverty. Many African nations, Syria, Jordan, and many nations in South Asia.
The Map of the World After The War
The Treaty of Rome reconstructed the world and many countries.
Europe After the War
Any place in the world that would go under more rapid changes would be Europe. Europe had been completely run by Nazi Germany for almost half a century. The new countries in Europe would be based on ethnic regions. Another obstacle came with language. The reason was because German had been the official language throughout Europe so many nations had difficulties returning to their native language. American ambassador went to Great Britain and helped revive English. Diplomats from Mexico, El Salvador, Colombia, and many other Latin nations helped revive Spanish in Spain. Brazilian diplomat aided Portugal. A Canadian official from Quebec, helped France. As for Italy, Roman Catholic Cardinals from The Vatican managed to keep Italian alive, and helped the new Italian government. The Democratic Army of Greece ha
d managed to keep Greek alive and taught the new government. Lastly Germany kept German as the official language.
The rest of Europe wasn't as fortunate. Many other nations would try to pick up their old language, but their new language would heavily be influenced by outside influences. The Netherlands, Belgium, and Switzerland would be influenced by English( they knew since America was the strongest nation, having English could help their relation) and both French, and German because of proximity with the 2. Denmark, The Czech Republic, Austria, Hungary, Slovakia, Norway, and Sweden would be heavily influenced by German.
Eastern Europe including, Finland, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Belarus, Ukraine, Moldova, Romania, Prussia, and Poland would be influenced by Russian the language (Poland would be influenced by both Russian and German, includi
ng its native language). The Balkans would be a mash of German, Russian, English, Greek, and even Italian influences with native languages.
Asia After the War
With the fall of Germany Asia would also undergo many border changes. The most notable was the expansion of the U.S.S.R. Before the war it was limited to the Siberia. But now it would expand to it original borders in the west. It would also include Kazakhstan, Mongolia, and China north of the Hueng River. China would also under changes, it would lose all of the land north of the Hueng, its government instead of Fascist was now Communist, eventually it would sign a treaty with the U.S.S.R. Korea had been influenced by Japan and The U.S. and had been turned into a Democracy, and a pro Western state. Vietnam would be reunited with the victory of the south. India would grow into a regional power annexing Nepal ,Bhutan, Bangladesh, and Sri Lanka. Central nations in Central Asia rose, including, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan.
The Middle East After the War
The Middle east had been a crucial theater in the war, and ally of the U.S. The borders of the region didn't change too much. Only that since Saudi Arabia was a regional power it annex the rest of the Arabian peninsula, and
that the Nazi control "Armenian Germany" was now under control by the Soviets.
Africa After the War
Africa during the cold war was split between Northern and Southern spheres. While the Southern didn't get involved with global affairs , the Northern countries were controlled by upper class white Germans, and where involved in German plans. Before the war had even ended months before revolutions would spur. Only Egypt was able to keep its government stable the rest however went into the confusion of civil wars. Old countries would break off into two or a faction would break off from the original. However, some countries during the war would expand including The Democratic Republic of The Congo, Guinea, South Africa.
Oceania After the War
Australia joined the war to fight China, so that it could be the only regional power in the Oceania and Southern Asia. Before the war it had annexed Western New Guinea and New Zealand. After the war it annexed many islands to the east and much of Indonesia.
The Americas after the War.
The Americas stayed pretty much the same before and after the war.
New Tensions Rise (1989-1993)
Many believed after the fall of Nazi Germany peace would return to the world but unfortunately they were wrong. More tensions rose across the globe.
The Soviet Treat
Gorbachev tried to keep good ties with America and the rest of the world, but the Russian people were bitter and mistrusting of outside forces, this would cause Gorbachev's administration to lose support. After the victory over Germany, many Russians supported him, but after a few of his decisions he sank from the public approval. His first wrong decision was when he allowed Gregory to leave, many wanted revenge from him directly for their suffering. His second was when he agreed with the U.N. not to annex much of eastern Europe, many believed that they had entered the war to regain land by past Russian states, and that the international system and Gorbachev had lied.
The final strike would come with the reunification of Germany. Berlin had been under Soviet control. By 1989 America and the U.N. pleaded for Berlin to rejoin Germany, and Gorbachev finally agreed. Many were outraged, Russians believed if anything that The Soviet Union should occupy all of Germany and get revenge for the Nazi's occupation of the Soviet Union. The leader of the movement was KGB head official Vladimir Putin, a national hero after discovering Stalin and Lenin's corpses. He would lead rallies and demonstrations against Gorbachev. By 1990 Gorbachev left his position and fled to Switzerland. Putin would continue as the Premier of The U.S.S.R.
Putin would become heavily aggressive in his foreign policy. His first move was a treaty with Communist China, which helped Sino-Soviet relations. Next he established Communist and pro-Soviet governments through eastern Europe including: Finland, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Belarus, Ukraine, Prussia, Poland, Slovakia, Hungary, Romania, also in Central Asia including: Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan, Kyrgyzstan, and Tajikistan.
This would cause tension between the U.S. and The Soviet Union. A struggle between the West and East began. America aided much of Western Europe, and then many would join ATO including, Great Britain, France, Spain, Portugal, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway, Austria, and Greece.
In late 1980 Putin would form the Union of Socialist Republics (USR) including: U.S.S.R., Finland Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Belarus, Ukraine, Prussia, Poland, Slovakia, Hungary, Romania, China, Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan, Kyrgyzstan, and Tajikistan.
President Bush, in an address to the nation, believed that a new cold war may have just begun.
Middle East Conflicts
By late 80's Sinai had became a Jewish state. The Egyptians had fled west to Egypt, and Arabians moved to the much better and regional power, Saudi Arabia. By 1990 rallies across the nation would push for Sinai to annex ancient Israel, currently in the hands of the the weakened Jordan nation. The new leader would began the Sinai-Jordan War. Jordan had been reduced to a third war country after its defeat, and collapse of Nazi Germany. Sinai's Army had numerous victories, even with Syria, and Turkey aiding Jordan. By 1991 Jordan who give to Sinai's demands and Sinai annex the ancient Israeli land. Doing so he would also move the capital to Jerusalem, and he would change the name of Sinai to The Democratic Republic of Israel.
Turkey which had aided Jordan , began to despise Israel and the Jews. The reason why is because Turkey was home to an extremist Islamic group named The Turkish Hezbollah. This group believed Muslim to be the one true religion, and despised other religions especially the Jews. They also believed That they could give birth to a new Ottoman Empire throughout the Middle East. Turkey would sign a treaty with Syria and Jordan called the Ottoman Alliance. Soon Egypt would join it. Israel was surround by Turkish allies and began to search for its own allies.
Saddam Hussein leader of Iraq, the nation with the largest military in the Middle East, began to look into Kuwait because of its oil reserves. Israel promised support to Iraq in an invasion if Iraq aided Israel, and Saddam agreed. Soon an invasion of Kuwait began and was successful. Israel also looked into Iran as being an ally. The three nations formed the Nations of Abraham Alliance (NAA), later Afghanistan would join as well.
The main ally that both Turkey and Israel coveted was Saudi Arabia. Saudi's economy was one of the best in the world and the best throughout the region. Both nations would try to sway Saudi to join but the nation would remain neutral.
Competition for Dominance in Asia.
With China's huge lost of land the government was trying to expand into Southern Asia, but the only problem was that India, which had risen to a regional power, had been expanding in that region for the past decade. This would cause tension between both nations. In the beginning India had an upper hand on its economy and army size. But with Soviet aid by the late 90's China had managed to salvage its economy and army and was on the rise. This competition soon draw the Americans as well with America aiding India and the Soviets aiding China.
The same is true for Australia, which had grown to contain much of the Oceania and Pacific. After losing some land, Indonesia , would begin to fight back. This would lead to a vast conflict that would thousands of small battles throughout the islands. The Soviet Union would aid Indonesia, and Indonesia would join U.S.R.
Tensions in Africa.
Africa after the fall of Germany went under many changes. One was the revolutions that occurred in Northern Africa, which would established new governments and whole new countries. One conflict was the break of Sudan. Sudan had broken across the Nile. The western side, named Darfur, was ruled by some remains of the Nazi officials, while the east, renamed Al Qadarif, was ruled by African revolutionist. This would cast conflict between the two in the early 90's. Another problem came from just the economies of these past German ruled nations. Many were reduced to third world countries and sank from global activities, only Egypt managed to keep its government and economy stable. Probably the biggest tensions in Africa were coming from the south. Southern Africa had been isolated from the world during the Nazi regime. But during the late 70's and 80's both the Democratic Republic of The Congo, or Congo, and South Africa had expanded and coming into conflict over sphere of influence.
The U.N. Interventions & Progress ( 1994- Early 00's)
U.N. Calms the Tensions
A change for the better would occur in 1994 with the South African election. Nelson Mandela would become the new president. Mandela would begin establishing peace talks with Congo leader Mobutu Sese Seko. The U.N. would get involve after its 1994 meeting were President Bush declared that the U.N. unlike the League of Nations would be more involve in global affairs. The U.N. officials helped the Congo-South African talks. By 1995 the tension had cooled and both Nations considered each other allies, and had even joined the U.N. Also they would start the African Union which would help unite Africa and aid poorer nations.
From then the U.N. began a more aggressive approach to conflicts. In 1995 U.N. official went to try to solve the Israeli-Turkish conflict. Turkey wanted Israel to give the land they invaded back to Jordan, and for Iraq stop its occupation of Kuwait. The General consensus was that now nations were to invade other nations without making an appeal to the General Assembly at the U.N. Turkey was still upset with Israel but soon let it slip, only the Hezbollah terrorist group still had resent against the Jews, but also America and the west because of its support of Israel.
The U.N. would help with the Indo-Sino pact which India and China agreed that Southern Asia was independent and also established trade between the two, which helped both of their economies.
The Second Renaissance
From 1990-early 2000's Europe would be reborn, and some would call it The Second Renaissance. Many of the nations with help from either the U.S. of the U.S.S.R. Great Britain, France, Spain, Italy, Greece, Austria, Hungary, Poland, Ukraine , Prussia, Norway, Sweden, Denmark, and Finland would all experience economic boost. Unity though was difficult between the West and the East. Both had conflicting government, democratic and Communist, and both were part of different allies. Many new arts began to be found, new artwork began, the rise of Alternative Rock began in Great Britain and would spread to Europe and to the Americas, bands like Muse, Coldplay, Oasis, and many other acts would begin to rise in popularity. By the end of the decade unity throughout the continent was being questioned and being thrived for.
Unity In Africa and Latin America
With the Congo and South African dispute over they joined together to form the African Union (AU), in 1995 including: The Congo, South Africa, Harriba, Angola, Tanzania, Mozambique, Kenya, Somalia, Ethiopia, Zambia, Malawi, and Central Cameroon. The objective of the Union was to grow African Union, Harmony, and the well being of African nations. From 1995- 2003 the AU would to include all of Africa and would help the economies of the Northern African countries.
In South America changes were slowly happening. With the fall of Germany, not as much American money came to these countries, and the economies of Venezuela, Ecuador, Peru, and Bolivia began to slip. Also, drug cartels in Colombia began guerrilla type wars. Brazil, a major world power, began to believe that it was their duty to aid their Latin neighbors. On May 5th 1995 the first Congress of South America met in Buenos Aires, Argentina including: Colombia, Venezuela, Ecuador, Peru,Bolivia, Paraguay, Chile, Argentina, Uruguay, and Brazil. The Congress agreed that they would have economic ties with each other and that they would military defend each other if any member was invaded, Brazil aided with money to other nations. The Congress of South America would continue the same until 1998 where Mexico, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Costa Rica, and Panama would join. The name would then be officially changed into the Congress of Latin America (CLA).
Prosperity of The United States
America had felt pressured for the past couple of decades. From the Great Depression to the Pacific War, with a small break for the America public, to a fearful Cold War. With the fall of Germany began a period of growth for the American public. President Clinton helped pass laws for Americas to buy houses, and cars more easily. America's economy experienced very much growth in the 90's and early 00's Just as in Europe where it had a growth of the arts Americans also had a growth of the arts. Hip-Hop began to make a huge impact in pop-culture, and quickly spread to Europe and Latin America. Rock saw the rise of Alternative, with influences from British including, Linkin Park, Taking Back Sunday, My Chemical Romance, and others saw rise in popularity throughout the world. Metal which had started in the 70's and 80's but stayed underground, but with Alternative influences saw the rise of Metalcore and Post-Hardcore with bands like Underoath, the Devil Wears Prada, Killswitch Engage, Silverstein, and others gained popularity.
Into The 21st Century
9/11 and The War on Terrorism
Terrorist in the Middle East saw anger in the Jews and believed America to be a prime supporter and the center of all evil. Terrorist attacks had been aimed at the Western world and even in the U.S.S.R. and its allies, but all of them were minor incidents. On Sep 11th 2001 Terrorist Hijacked planes: two were crashed into the world trade center, while one hit the Pentagon, and the last crashed in a field outside of Washington D.C. Brave attempts by firemen and policemen to save as many victims as possible, but the death toll was enormous. Recently reelected Bill Clinton made a speech to the American public. The CIA and FBI did investigations and the Hijackers had been part of the Turkish based Terrorist group Hezbollah. The next day Clinton asked the Senate to vote on war with the group, the Senate agreed, he then went to the General Assembly of the U.N. and asked for permission and was granted.
Many nations throughout the world expressed their sorrow to the U.S. Many countries like in Latin America, Europe, Africa, and elsewhere expressed their mourning to the U.S. Even opposing states, like The U.S.S.R., China, and other USR countries expressed sorrow. On Sep 30th, the 13th anniversary of the end of WW-II was also set as a worldwide memorial for the U.S. and the victims of the hijackings.
After all the mourning was complete U.S. forces began to search for the Hezbollah. CIA officials knew that they were in Turkey, and may even be supported by the Turkish government, although the CIA did not know who lead the group. The U.S. asked permission from the U.N. and Turkey to search for the insurgency group. The U.N. agreed but Turkey heavily denied. In a statement Bill Clinton ordered Turkey allow American forces to enter or face, war. Turkey didn't answer. On Oct 3rd American and ATO forces began Operation Enduring Freedom and invaded Turkey.
Surprisingly, non-ATO forces aided the invasion. The U.S.S.R., China and other Communist nations aided ATO forces. Putin gave a speech, in were he said America, even though a foe, had been dealt a blow that the Russian people can sympathise with. This helped relations with between the West and the East.
The invasion caused huge effects throughout the Middle East. Arab terrorist in Israel lead bombings, while Kuwait that had been occupied by Iraq, began a revolt with terrorists as well. Syria, Jordan and Egypt all aided Turkey against the invaders. Clinton warned that doing so was supporting terrorists and declaring war on the U.S.
Also, evidence also found that Egypt supported some terrorist groups, and terrorists in Turkey were fleeing to Egypt. America knew they would have to topple the oppressive regime to stop Egypt, this began Operation Egyptian Freedom began in March 2003. America and others invaded Egypt to topple the government. By May they toppled the regime in Cairo. At first, they believed that armed forces could pull out of Egypt, but a new insurgency group arose against the soldiers in Egypt and the new government.
Also began Operation Peace Keeping, where forces aid the Iraqi government against Kuwait terrorists. This started in early 2004 and has been going on ever since. The War on Terrorism is still being fought to this day consuming both Clinton's and Bush's presidencies, and the beginning of Obama's. Later in the decade Operation Enduring Freedom would spread to Northern Africa and to Indonesia, with America forces invading Somalia, believed to be a hideout of terrorists, and invading Indonesia, with Australian forces, after Australia attacked by terrorists.
Effects of The War on Terrorism
Effects of the war have been showed by how people's view of America has changed. During the 90's Most countries, except for those part of the USR were pro-American. but the War has changed this in two ways.
First many ATO European countries viewed the war differently. Great Britain, Spain, Italy, and Greece were quick to lend forces and aid to Americans in the middle east. While France, Germany, Austria, and The Netherlands, condemned the invasion and the war, stating that the Terrorist should be handled like criminals and brought before the U.N. World Court, to stand trial, instead of invading nations.
Also many nations, especially in North Africa, have grown Anti-American for its invasion, believing America is only in the Middle East for the Oil reserves. Nelson Mandela, a Nobel Prize winner, criticized America for its aiding Iraq against Kuwait revolutionist, citing that America's intervention is only helping the aggressor against the abused, and suppressed. Many others have cited that America's Operation Peace Keeping is an attempt to aid Iraq so it can have access as well to the Kuwait oil fields. Also many believe that Australia's and American invasion of Indonesia, is so that Australia can keep expanding, and gaining territory.
On the flip side though the War has aided America-Soviet tension. Soviet forces have aided America and ATO operations. Putin was invited to the white house both during Clinton's and Bush's administration, the first time a Soviet Primer has visited the White house since Gorbachev's 1989 visit. Trade between the two has picked up as well. Also the war has aided unity between western and eastern Europe. Hungary, Poland, Ukraine, Prussia, Belarus, and Romania have fought alongside Western European soldiers.
The Scientific Boom
The new millennium would see a rise in science and technology. In the following fields:
2001- First space tourist visits the International Space Center.
2002- Mars Odyssey orbits Mars.
2003- The Space Shuttle Columbia disaster.
2004- Probe discovers that at one time an area on Mars was covered in water.
2004- Probes arrive at Saturn.
2004- First Privately Funded human spacelift.
2005- Probes land on Titan, Saturn's largest moon.
2006- New Horizon's is launched on a nine year journey to Pluto.
2006- Pluto is reclassified as a dwarf planet.
2009- NASA searches for earth-like planets.
Medicine would be on the rise for the new millennium. One accomplishment was the finishing of the Human Genome Project, an attempt to map all of the DNA in humans. Other genomes of other animals would also be mapped including horses and rats. Dolly, the cloned sheep from 1996 would die prematurely. Both SARS and H1N1, first known as swine flu, would spread through the world and would cause pandemic scares. Also an Australian scientist made a vaccine to cervical cancer.
The new millennium saw a huge boom of technology. The cellular phone is almost used by 100% of Europeans with many new features. Digital music players gain heavy popularity along with digital cameras which have almost made film cameras obsolete. Wireless technology plays a huge role in people's everyday lives.
Global Climate Change and The Global Environmental Campaign
Man's negative impact on the environment had been noted since the 70's with the whole in the ozone layer over the arctic. But in the new millennium climatologist hypothesized global warming later global climate change (GCC). This was a scenario of changes that would occur because of the burning of fossil fuels. Many also believe that GCC caused disasters around the world including, Hurricane Katrina, The tsunami that hit India, the Ice caps melting and more. This would cause global environmental movements around the world. Headed by Al Gore, vice president of former president Bill Clinton, and vice president of current president Barack Obama. Many politicians and scientist tried to tackle GCC, many politicians around the world and in the U.N. called for taxes and laws to reduce the fossil fuel emission. Many new Hybrid cars were invented but have yet to outnumber cars using fossil fuels. In the 2008 U.S. presidential election GCC played a major role in the both candidates' stands, Obama said that by starting Green Jobs it would also aid the current economic recession.
The Global Economic Recession
After World War 2 most of the nations of the world experienced economic boom. The U.S. was the main leader of this boom with the value of the dollar increasing. but by the late 200's the economy starting going south. The U.S. dollar began to shrink, and the number of foreclosures began to rise. America wasn't the only nation hit Many currencies in Europe started to shrink. Brazil's economy started to weaken leading to many of Latin American nations sinking. Congo and South Africa the main powers of the African Union began to see their economies decline. The Soviet Union and China both experienced economic downturn, as did India, Indonesia and Australia. Reforms were being made in the U.N. to slow down the recession and to stop it from becoming a Depression like back in the 1930's. This issue to played a huge role in the U.S. presidential election. So much that in a survey the greatest fear Americans had was the economic recession, unlike the last election which was terrorism.
Decline in the U.S.
After World War 2 the U.S. emerged as the number one superpower in the world. But by the late 00's this began to change. Coupled with economic plight, rise of other nations (U.S.S.R., China, India, Europe, etc) many began to believe the U.S. was slipping. Others believed the U.S. loss the ambition that made them the world power they were. Many also believed that the five set class system that developed in the 90's was outdated. The Reason why was nations outside the U.N. Security council had reached the same level of influence, including, China, India, Saudi Arabia, Argentina, The Congo, South Africa, and many western European nations. The general consensus what that America would have to renovate its ideals, and beliefs to remain a superpower.
Other Issues In the 21th Century
The population of the world had grown to six billion by the start of the century. Many scientists believed this would grow exponentially. Resources on Earth are already running low, and millions starve around the globe. At this rate millions of more will.
A huge debate is Pro Life or Pro choice, on whether abortion, the killing of a future human, should be legal or not.
Homosexuals after persecution by the German Nazis demanded the same right straights had. They demanded they be allowed to marry and to not be persecuted.
Poverty remains large and rampant through the world, causing millions to die from disease, famine or other poverty related reasons.
Throughout the start of the 21st century disease has made epidemic scares again and again throughout the globe. Many scientists fear AIDS, SARS, H1N1, Bird Flu, Ebola, and other diseases that could cause epidemics.
The 2008 Presidential Election and The Future
In 2008 Democrat Candidate Barack Obama beat incumbent George W. Bush. This marked the first time a colored president was elected. Obama promised an end to the war with Egypt, and to help the economy with Stimulus packages, and Green Jobs, which will help the environment. Many nations around the world seem to like the new face of America and many have improved relations with the U.S.
The Future of the world is uncertain as military and war seem to expand, but more nations strive for Peace, U.N. works to keeping peaceful ties with member nations. Latin America renews its close ties with the U.S., while talks between Western and Eastern Europe have begun to march towards a European Union. The African Union is beginning to try to help African nations' relationships with the U.S. The Soviet Union and The U.S. have begun to work together along with China and Socialist Nations. The Nations of the world are trying to work together to aid the economy, poverty, environment, and stop violence.