You can Boost Your Weight Loss Plan.......
Achieving and maintaining a healthy body weight is a crucial part of good health. A healthy weight range is
associated with healthy blood lipid levels and lowers your risks for heart disease, diabetes, and some cancers. If
you are overweight, decreasing body weight by as little as 5% (as little as 10 pounds for someone who weighs 200
pounds), can significantly reduce risk factors for heart diseases and stroke.
Is My Weight Healthy?
To determine if you have a healthy weight, many health care professionals use a tool called BMI, or body mass
index. BMI is a measure of your weight compared to your height. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
describes a healthy BMI as one that is less than or equal to 25. People who have a BMI higher than 25 should
consider altering their lifestyle to improve their BMI. Your waist measurement also provides a means for tracking
your weight changes and risk for heart disease.
What Can I Do To Lose Weight?
Fruits and vegetables are generally more filling and lower in calories than other choices.
Including three servings of low-fat yogurt,milk or soy milk type of products may help with weight loss as part of a
A recent study suggests that yogurt enhances weight and fat loss as part of a reduced calorie, high calcium diet.¹ In
the study, researchers found that when obese adults ate three servings of yogurt each day as part of a reduced-
calorie, high-calcium diet, they lost more body weight and more body fat from the abdomen, than adults who ate a
reduced-calorie diet that was low in calcium.
Research has shown that abdominal fat may increase the risk of some chronic diseases like diabetes and heart
disease. So, weight loss around your middle not only gives you a trimmer waistline, it can also benefit your health.
Pay attention to portion sizes. Many so-called single servings of foods may be larger in size than the amount
recommended by the latest food guide developed by USDA. click here.
Frequent cereal eaters have healthier body weights, consume less fat and have a higher intake of several
important nutrients like calcium, iron and zinc compared to infrequent cereal eaters.
Make small changes. Gradual weight loss promotes behavioral changes necessary to maintain weight loss.
Incorporate daily exercise — ideally 30 minutes or more most days of the week. If you don't have a chance to block
off 30 minutes at a time, small bouts of 10 minutes each are also helpful. Just keep moving!
Remember, small changes over a long period of time lead to weight maintenance — and sometimes even weight
loss! click here for more tips.
Recent stories reported that MK and Ashley were taking Hoodia. Sources spotted the two buying
the product in the local store ... Reports are claiming this is why they have such shockingly thin
10-Day Hoodia Diet Liquid Softgels -
With Powerful Green Tea & African Hoodia Cactus
10-Day Hoodia Diet: Previously unknown to the Western world, African tribesmen have eaten the
Hoodia Cactus for hundreds of years to silence their hunger during times of famine. Recently, the
worldwide scientific community has discovered Hoodia. And studies are being conducted to
understand how this traditional appetite suppressant might help people who are trying to lose
weight. This powerful formula, developed by a PhD, contains Hoodia extract that is supercharged
with 100% pure Green Tea extract. It also contains a precise blend of five other potent botanicals
and nutrients to further help you achieve your goals.
Hoodia Gordonii is a African cactus that has been used traditionally by the San Bushmen to
counter hunger and thirst during their hunting expeditions.
Garcinia Cambogia and Green Tea Extracts were shown in separate studies to impact the
metabolism of fats.
Choline, Inositol and L-Methionine are nutrients with lipotropic properties that enhance the
metabolism of lipids and fats in the body.
Serving Size: 1 Soft-Gel
Servings Per Container: 30
Amount per Serving
Green Tea Extract leaf, 20% 100 mg
Hoodia Gordonii Extract aerial, 100 mg
Garcinia Extract fruit, 50% 100 mg
Natural Caffeine 50 mg
Choline as Choline Bitartrate 40 mg
Inositol 40 mg
L-Methionine 40 mg
Vegetable Oil, Gelatin, Glycerin, Water, Beeswax, Sodium Copper Chicrophyllin.
As a dietary supplement take up to three (3) soft-gel caps once a day with afternoon meal with a
full glass of water. If caffeine keeps you up at night, do not take this product in the evening, since
it contains natural caffeine.If you would like to continue with your diet goals after 10 days, it is
advised to continue taking this product.Weight loss benefits are achieved when this product is
used with our Diet & Exercise Program, available online at AppliedNutrition.com/deplan.
This product is not intended to diagnose, treat, cure, or prevent any disease
Not intended for use by persons under 18 years of age
Do not exceed recommended daily intake
Do not use if pregnant or lactating
If you are under the care of a physician, please consult your physician
before using this product, especially if you have a heart disease or high
Keep out of reach of children
This product contains naturally occurring caffeine
They say it has caffeine... The Olsen Twins love their caffeine.. if this has naturally reoccurring
caffeine and they live at Starbucks... these two must be wired for sound.... lol.