The United Nations Human Settlements Programme, UN-Habitat, is the United Nations’ agency for sustainable urban development. Through its World Urban Campaign and technical support it promotes efficient and realistic planning at national, regional and local levels as the most effective way to develop our cities to meet increasing demand for urban shelter and services. UN-Habitat organizes its work around the following areas: urban planning and design; urban legislation, land and governance; urban economy; urban basic services; housing and slum upgrading; risk reduction and rehabilitation; and research and capacity development. www.unhabitat.org
ICLEI - Local Governments for Sustainability
ICLEI – Local Governments for Sustainability is an international association of local governments dedicated to sustainable development. Created in 1990, ICLEI is a network of 12 mega-cities, 100 super-cities, 450 large cities and urban regions as well as 450 small and medium-sized cities and towns in 83 countries. ICLEI promotes local action for global sustainability and organizes its work around the following areas of supports for cities: sustainability, resilience, resource-efficiency, biodiversity, low- carbon, smart infrastructure, green urban economy, and healthy and happy communities. www.iclei.org
ICLEI World Secretariat
The ICLEI World Secretariat engages in international discussions, climate negotiations and global platforms in order to promote the local government perspective and optimize local-national-international synergies and cooperation. ICLEI World Secretariat acts as Focal Point of Local Governments and Municipal Authorities (LGMA) constituency at the UNFCCC to coordinate the local government observers at the intergovernmental climate negotiations and ensure effective communication with the UNFCCC Secretariat. It also manages the Bonn Center for Local Climate Action and Reporting – carbonn® which plays a central role in this regard. Established in 2009 as an initiative of ICLEI and the United Nations Environment Program (UNEP), carbonn promotes visibility of local climate action and runs a global reporting platform for cities. From a relevant thematic perspective, ICLEI for example also takes part in the United Nations Marrakech Task Force on Sustainable Public Procurement.
ICLEI Africa Secretariat
The ICLEI Africa Secretariat is the African regional office for ICLEI and based in Cape Town in South Africa. ICLEI Africa collaborates closely with the global ICLEI network and other regional offices around the world, in sharing tools, materials and strategies and good practices specifically designed and implemented at the local level.
In addition to the work done in Africa, ICLEI Africa is home to the ICLEI Cities Biodiversity Centre which has ICLEI’s mandate to engage globally with local governments on biodiversity-related matters. www.iclei.org/africa
ICLEI European Secretariat
The ICLEI European Secretariat is the regional ICLEI office dealing with the wider European geographical region, including some countries from Asia and Africa. It is based in Freiburg, Germany. It offers practical tools and guidance to local governments (addressing both local leaders and municipal staff), as well as training programmes. Since 2006, ICLEI Europe has been supporting the work of the European Commission regarding green public procurement (GPP). ICLEI Europe is a Covenant of Mayors (CoM) Supporter , in turn linking the CoM to global developments and relevant protocols. Staff are experienced in working in multi-disciplinary environments with local governments, combining engineering with planning and policy experts – mostly working in European projects and initiatives tackling different aspects relevant to climate change mitigation. Their focus is on addressing policy, people, technology and financing, using an integrated approach with sustainability as a foundation. www.iclei-europe.org
ICLEI South America Secretariat
The South America Secretariat is the regional office for ICLEI, based in São Paulo, Brazil. This office covers the following countries: Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas), French Guiana, Guyana, Paraguay, Peru, Pitcairn Islands, South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands, Suriname, Uruguay, and Venezuela. www.iclei.org/sams
ICLEI South Asia Secretariat
The South Asia Secretariat is based in New Delhi, India. This office covers the following countries: Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, British Indian Ocean Territory, India, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan, and Sri Lanka. southasia.iclei.org
ICLEI Southeast Asia Secretariat
Based in the Philippines, ICLEI Southeast Asia Secretariat (ICLEI SEAS) currently operates in Indonesia, Philippines, and Thailand but caters to the needs of the Southeast Asian region in general. ICLEI SEAS began its work with the Cities for Climate Protection (CCP) Campaign in 1999. Since then, it has been expanding rapidly, becoming involved with new and evolving campaigns and programs that enable and empower local governments. Areas of expertise include climate change adaptation and mitigation, sustainability management, water and sanitation, and biodiversity. In 2012, ICLEI SEAS Indonesia Project Office opened in Jakarta, hosted by the APEKSI or the Association of Indonesian Municipalities. Continuously, ICLEI SEAS inspires and invites more partnerships from cities and urban regions wanting to be at the forefront of creating resilient and sustainable communities.