The rising trends of casteism and communalism and the accompanying violence have created a feeling of suspicion and insecurity among various castes. People in high positions in a caste give preference to members of their own castes and sub-castes in appointments and promotions.
This creates the caste solidarity to the extent that:
(i) One caste attempts to dominate over others,
(ii) Higher castes exploit the lower castes,
(iii) Elections are contested and won on caste basis, and
(iv) Inter-caste conflicts increase in society.
Though casteism, inter-caste conflicts and incidents of caste violence are more prevalent in rural areas yet they occur in the urban areas as well. In independent India, competition among different castes seems to be the normal situation. With the passing of political power to the people, castes have become pressure groups and are competing for power and using power to benefit caste fellows.
Many examples are cited in this regard. A few years ago, in one state, a very large number of Yadavas were recruited in the police department because a Yadav enjoyed the highest political power in the state. In the 1950s, there was a case of a state in which a Reddy Chief Minister appointed a large number of Reddys as ministers. In one state, a Jain officer gave preference to Jains and a Rajput officer to Rajput’s in all appointments.
This tendency increases not only hatred for other castes but also leads to caste conflicts in the country. Such conflicts abound in Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Gujarat and Maharashtra. When one caste numerically preponderates over other castes in one geographical area, it seeks the position of a ‘dominant’ caste by attempting to secure economic and political power. When a caste enjoys one form of dominance, it is frequently able to acquire the other forms as well in course of time.
Casteism creates such solidarity among members that they use their unity to assert themselves or exploit the deprived caste(s). The best examples of this nature are found in Bihar among Bhumihars, Yadavs, Kurmis, Dalits, etc.
In politics, since last few decades casteism factor has been playing an important role even in the selection of candidates for contesting elections. In seeking votes also, this factor is played upon heavily. The National Integration Council, set up in June 1962, has been striving to deal with problems of casteism, regionalism and communalism.
The Council set up in 1968 separate committees to deal with these problems. All these committees produced worthy recommendations focusing on guidelines, legislation and administrative action. By 1970, all this lapsed into inaction. In 1980, the second incarnation of the National Integration Council met in 1980 and again 1984. This time also, three sub- committees were set up but they too failed to do anything substantial.
The September 1986 meeting set up a sub-group of five persons to foster national integration. In February 1990, and again in 1991 and in July 1993 came yet other incarnation of the NIC but no solution has been evolved till date on the burning problem of containing casteism and communal- ism and creating national harmony.