BASE Allergy Therapy:
An allergy is the cumulative effect of many insults to the body which, over time, have overwhelmed the body’s protective mechanisms. While dust may appear to be the cause of your runny nose, in reality it is only the trigger that activates the symptoms in an already compromised organism.
An allergy is often thought of as a problem with a certain substance. However it’s not the substance that’s the problem, the problem is in the individual’s body. BASE allergy therapy is used to re-balance and strengthen each individual’s body and clear any blockages in the meridians that may be causing or contributing to the allergy.
BASE allergy therapy is a technique that treats allergies, food sensitivities and nutritional deficiencies using Acupressure, Applied Kinesiology, Intrasound Therapy and Nutrition. BASE stands for Body Allergy Sensitivity Elimination.
Initial testing (muscle testing) helps to determine the allergies, sensitivities, and the root cause of the health issues that need to be addressed.
A BASE treatment involves applying acupressure and intrasound technology on specific acupuncture points along certain meridians while the client holds energy vials.
A BASE treatment is very relaxing and painless.
In addition to food intolerance and allergy relief, BASE Allergy Therapy has had great success over the past seven years providing relief for health issues such as asthma, ADD/ADHD, Tourette’s Syndrome, Autism, food / sugar cravings, eczema and other skin conditions, chronic tonsillitis, sinusitis, Irritable Bowel Syndrome, nutrient deficiencies, hormonal imbalance, etc.
How does BASE Allergy Therapy work?
There are three important stages that define a BASE Allergy treatment:
- Body Analysis: Applied Kinesiology or Muscle Testing is used to identify the root cause of health issues of the client. It is also used to identify allergies, sensitivities and nutritional deficiencies. This is the discovery step and probably the most valuable one.
- BASE Allergy Treatment: Specific points are stimulated on the client’s back, while the client participates. This clears the body of allergies, balances the systems and meridians, strengthens the immune system and clears nutritional deficiencies. The following protocols are followed:
- a) The Four-Phase Protocol System: A unique protocol that is used in the first four treatments to balance the meridians and the systems of the body as well as strengthen the immune system.
- b) Individualized Treatments to clear allergies, sensitivities, and nutritional deficiencies related to the client’s specific health issues. These treatments are determined by the Body Analysis. (Muscle Testing)
3. Meridian Clearing & Balancing: This is achieved with Intrasound Technology, which is a Sonofon device that is used on various acupuncture points to further clear blockages in the meridians. This provides the benefit of acupuncture without the needles. It is intended to enhance and support the treatment, thereby allowing for more permanent healing. Also, during this balancing stage, a basic Craniosacral Technique called stillpoint is used to further balance and clear the body.
BASE Allergy Therapy Costs: $150 +HST (Initial Consultation [includes Nutritional Consultation) $70 +HST (Follow up Visit)