Buildings or physical structures; beautiful & modern or worn out, tall or short, old or new, all owe to one field of study ‘Architecture.’ A field that translates abstract ideas into concrete frameworks, starting from planning the structure of the buildings, designing its blue prints and then constructing it into actual models. The field is a combination of both; art & science, it involves designs and aesthetics but along with that it takes into account technical aspects such as utility, space, safety, climate responsibility, function etc.
History of Architecture
The roots of architecture dates back to 200 BC, when Greeks evolved cement as a structural material for construction of buildings. Afterwards, Romans used ground volcanic lava as mortar for buildings. The most initial works in the field may be found by Vitruvius named as ‘De Architechtura’ in which he laid down the principles of architecture. The structures such as the dome, arch and vault are strongly linked to the history.
Roman buildings and structures are said to have laid down the foundation for the modern buildings.
Famous Architectural Buildings
For someone who loves architectural sites, some suggestions not to miss as they travel are; Dome of Rock in Jerasulem, La Padrera in Barcelona, One World trade Center in New York, St Paul’s Cathedral in London, Petronas Tower in Kuala Lumpur, The White House in Washington, Leaning Tower of Pisa in France, The Kabba in Meccah, The Shard in London, St Basil’s Cathedral in Moscow, Empire State Building in new York, Llyod’s Building in London, Colosseum in Rome, Taj Mahal in India, Chrysler Building in New York, Sydney Opera House in Australia, Space Needle in Seattle, Hagia Sophia in Istanbul, Buckingham Palace in London, Falling Water in America, Pantheon in Rome, Guggenheim Museum in Bilbao, Flatiron Building in New York, Villa Savoye in France, Burj Khalifa in Dubai and the list goes on. The ones mentioned cover the most known for their unique style and construction, covering the globe.
Well Known Architects
To study Architecture, it is imperative to know the people behind it and their works. Daniel Libeskind, a Polish by origin is known for his famous Jewish Museum in Berlin, Canal Theatre in Dublin & Imperial War Museum in UK. Another famous Architect is Richard Meier. Heard of Wembley Stadium in London, its the work of Sir Norman Foster. Renzo Piano is known for the Menil Collection in Houston. One female architect who is famous for her work in public sector is Zaha Hadid. Cesar Pelli, an Argentinian architect is known for the Petronas Tower in Malaysia. Frank Llyod Wright, born in Wisconsin, is known for his unique designing of Falling Water.These are just a few to mention.
Architecture is a profession that initially requires hardwork and expenses to qualify. However, once the person enters the professional world and starts gaining experience, it pays off well. Contact us