Grace Ann is a high school biology teacher in the Hudson Valley area of New York state. She's going viral after her response to a scientifically-inaccurate post about transgender people that acquired more than 30,000 shares and thousands of comments.
Ann was browsing Facebook recently when she saw a transphobic post that read the following:
"In a sexual species, females have two X chromosomes and males have an X and a Y, I'm not a bigot it's just science."
Being a science teacher, Ann had to reply and shoot down the post. Which she did in amazing style...
"First of all, in a sexual species, you can have females be XX and males be X (insects), you can have females be ZW and males be ZZ (birds), you can have females be females because they developed in a warm environment and males be males because they developed in a cool environment (reptiles)."
"You can have females be females because they lost a penis sword fighting contest (some flatworms), you can have males be males because they were born female, but changed sexes because the only male in their group died (parrotfish and clownfish)."
"You can have males look and act like females because they are trying to get close enough to actual females to mate with them (cuttlefish, bluegills, others), or you can be one of thousands of sexes (slime mold, some mushrooms.)"
"Oh, did you mean humans? Oh ok then. You can be male because you were born female, but you have 5-alphareductase deficiency and so you grew a penis at age 12. You can be female because you have an X and a Y chromosome but you are insensitive to androgens, and so you have a female body."
"You can be female because you have an X and a Y chromosome but your Y is missing the SRY gene, and so you have a female body. You can be male because you have two X chromosomes, but one of your X's HAS an SRY gene, and so you have a male body."
"You can be male because you have two X chromosomes- but also a Y. You can be female because you have only one X chromosome at all. And you can be male because you have two X chromosomes, but your heart and brain are male. And vice - effing - versa. Don't use science to justify your bigotry. The world is way too weird for that shit."
Obviously people loved Ann's shut down, with one mother thanking her for laying out the facts:
"Brilliant! You added a zesty fresh perspective to what can be an exhaustively entrenched debate. Thank you, from all the mama bears out here."
While another commenter spoke about her own experience:
"I worked the NICU for years. A baby boy was born, with low apgar scores and he was brought to the nursery."
"Because of a couple of physical features that may indicate a form of a genetic anomaly, blood was drawn and send out of state to a very reputable geneticist. When I was changing his diaper, I spotted what looked to be another orafice, just below the penis. There was a visible absence of a scrotum."
"I alerted the neonatologists, and they called the geneticist to see of any of the studies were ready....Low and behold, Johnathan turned out to be a Tiffany.
The very small penis was actually a clitoris."
"Genetically the baby was an XXY. So what I am saying, there are many factors that could cause sexual confusion."
"And it is NOT psychological. It is a true fact many people are born in the "grey area" not knowing 100% which gender they actually are. Believing otherwise is uneducated bigot."