|Are you bored with your workouts? Is your workout so redundant that you need to force yourself to the gym or out for a run, swim, or bike? Do you remember someone telling you "variety is the spice of life?"
The above saying applies to exercise in the same manner that it does to food selection. Nutritionally speaking, it means balancing your intake of proteins, carbohydrates, and fats in proper proportion. In exercise, variety is identified by the name "cross-training".
Just What is Cross Training?
What is cross training? Simply stated, it refers to training for more than one sport at the same time, or training for several different fitness components (such as endurance, strength, and flexibility) at one time. When combined efficiently, they may simply provide a more complete body workout. For example, runners need more upper body workout, so swimming and/or weightlifting would be great complementary activities.
Cross-training can provide whole body benefits. Many people find a cross-training program more interesting and beneficial than participating in the same sport every time. Another advantage is that cross training may reduce overuse injuries. When the same muscles and joints are continually stressed, the risk of injury increases.
However, by alternating activities that stress different major muscle groups and joints, you give your body a much-needed rest and decrease risk of injury due to over training and overuse. Furthermore, with cross training, if you do injure yourself, you limit lost training time by merely changing your workout emphasis in those activities that will not exacerbate your condition.
Improve Your Primary Exercise Activity
Cross training can make you stronger in your primary exercise activity. Even though your favorite activity may be tennis or racquetball, stationary cycling, jogging, or aerobics a couple of times per week will really help your overall game. Your general overall fitness will improve, you will perform and feel better and maybe even want to participate in new activities.
Aerobic or fitness classes are changing to meet the varying needs of different age groups and different conditions. High impact, low impact, kickboxing, step, sculpt, indoor cycling, yoga, Pilates, aqua and circuit classes are available to suit the needs and demands of our more educated population.
Remember, keep variety in your workout, stay active, and do everything in moderation. Cross training will allow you to keep your workout's fun, safe, effective and always different.
Stay healthy, be happy and remain fit.
Cross training helps to keep your workouts fun, safe and effective.