The history of Rome dates back well over 2000 years. In the 1st century BC, Roman mathematician and astrologer Lucius Taruntius Firmanus put his abacus to work and established that Rome was founded in 753 BC – on the 21st April, to be precise.
Mythology has it that Romulus and Remus founded Rome, choosing the Aventine Hill on which to construct the city foundations.
Science however tells that Rome is actually even older. Its early populations, a mix of Etruscans, Sabines and Latins, blended to form the Romans. The Roman Kingdom and subsequently Roman Republic were born, before being taken over by the Roman Empire – as many of the surrounding lands far and wide also came to be.
Having conquered much of the world as the Romans knew it, their beloved city became known as “Caput Mundi” (World Capital) and “The Eternal City”.
Today, Rome is the capital city of the Lazio region as well as that of Italy itself. Well over 4 million people call Rome’s metropolitan home.
Internally within Rome is Vatican City, a country within a city (within a country). After the fall of the Roman Empire, the Pope had much control of Rome, establishing the city as the Papal States capital.
It was only the unification of Italy that saw this come to an end. Rome went on to become the capital of the Kingdom of Italy in 1871 and subsequently the Italian Republic.
Rome is home to many iconic symbols of Italy, none greater than the Coliseum. Other iconic must-see Roman sites include the Trevi Fountain, Piazza Navona, the Pantheon, Roman Forum, the Vittorio Emanuele II Monument, and a host of other breathtaking piazzas, buildings, monuments and more.
Avoid the hassle of driving in Italy. Save on car rental, road tolls, fuel (and possible fines!) when travelling to Florence from Rome.
Whether you wish to bike ride through the Tuscan hills, treat your family to the art cities, experience Italy's rich gourmet and wine heritage, explore your artistic side, or have a romantic honeymoon vacation, we can arrange it all.