The Southwestern Historical Quarterly, Volume 18, July 1914 - April, 1915 Page: 72
The following text was automatically extracted from the image on this page using optical character recognition software:
The Southwestern Historical Quarterly
that the solution of the slavery problem should be left to the South.
In the event the North should succeed in barring slavery from
the territories, the South believed it would soon attempt to do
the same thing in the states. And, if the constitution could not
protect the Southern states in their constitutional rights within
the Union, they would protect themselves outside of the Union.
The entire time of the thirty-sixth Congress was devoted to
heated debates between anti-slavery and pro-slavery agitators. The
Northern members accused the Southern members of favoring and
planning disunion, and were in turn, charged with refusing to
enforce the fugitive slave law and to respect the Dred Scott
The leaders of the Texas democracy were just as alive to the
situation as any of their Southern brethren. And, as it was a
presidential year, the political excitement was great. The task
of the South was to secure the nomination of a. presidential can-
didate who favored Southern interests, and who at the same time
might be strong enough throughout the country to defeat the
Black Republican candidate. The Texas state Democratic con-
vention convened at Galveston in April for the purpose of electing
delegates to the national convention at Charleston. The platform
adopted looked entirely to the national political situation. It again
endorsed the principles of the Cincinnati platform of 1856, and
the Virginia and Kentucky resolutions; denied that Texas had
given up any portion of its sovereignty in becoming a member
of the Union;' that in case of encroachment of the central gov-
ernment upon its sovereignty, Texas alone should judge of such
encroachment; that Texas possessed the right as a sovereign state,
to annul the compact, to revoke the powers it had delegated to
the federal government and to withdraw from the Union; that
every citizen had the right to move his property into any of the
common territory, and to have it protected there under the federal
constitution; that while Texas was attached to the Union, the
election of a sectional president would force the state to hold itself
in readiness to co-operate with the other Southern states in adopt-
ing such measures as might be necessary for protection. The reso-
'lutions further maintained that the government was founded for
the benefit of the white race, and concluded as follows:
Here’s what’s next.
This issue can be searched. Note: Results may vary based on the legibility of text within the document.
Citing and Sharing
Basic information for referencing this web page. We also provide extended guidance on usage rights, references, copying or embedding.
Reference the current page of this Periodical.
Texas State Historical Association. The Southwestern Historical Quarterly, Volume 18, July 1914 - April, 1915, periodical, 1915; Austin, Texas. (texashistory.unt.edu/ark:/67531/metapth101064/m1/78/: accessed June 26, 2017), University of North Texas Libraries, The Portal to Texas History, texashistory.unt.edu; crediting Texas State Historical Association.