THE FOKKER F III: Front view.
THE FOKKER F III: Side view.
This view of Fokker F.III H-NABL of KLM during a visit to Britain give a good impression of the aeroplane’s general appearance. Note the absence of a fin, the thick, cantilever wing devoid of the more common "struttery” of the period, and the balanced ailerons extending beyond the wing tips.
THE FOKKER F III: Three-quarter front view.
A close-up of the nose of a F.III, showing the installation of the Siddeley Puma engine and the proximity of the pilot’s seat.
THE CABIN OF THE FOKKER F III: Well upholstered armchairs and ample leg-room make this cabin extremely comfortable, and, owing to the high position of the monoplane wing, the view obtained through the windows is absolutely unobstructed.
THE FOKKER F III: Sketch showing pilot's seat and engine controls, etc. Note instruments on nose rib and front spar.
THE FOKKER F III: The petrol pump, by means of which the tank is easily filled by one man in a few minutes.
Fokker F III 230 hp Siddeley "Puma" engine
A NEW ZEPPELIN-DORNIER TWIN-ENGINED AEROPLANE: The keen competition between the Friedrichshafen and Staaken Zeppelin works appears to continue. In our issue of March 17 we published a photograph of the wind-tunnel model of a Staaken twin-engined monoplane. Above is seen the model of Herr Claude'Dornier's reply. This machine, it will be seen, has a fuselage practically identical to that of the single-engined land machine shown in our issue of March 31, 1921, and single-engined flying boat published on April 21, 1921. The new machine is characterised by a very low position of the engines, in fact one would imagine that they are placed too low. They are mounted on the ends of the usual Dornier wing roots growing out of the sides of the fuselage. From the outer lower corners of the engine nacelles bracing tubes run to the monoplane wing. Each of the landing wheels is enclosed in a streamline casing.
THE NEW ZEPPELIN-DORNIER TWIN-ENGINED MONOPLANE: This front view of the wind-tunnel model gives a good idea of the clean appearance of the machine.
AN ALTERED DORNIER CS.II: In our issue of April 21, 1921, we published an illustrated description of the original Dornier Cs.II. We have now received the accompanying photograph, which shows the machine with altered bow. The hull portion has been extended forward of the nose of the body so as to protect the tractor airscrew against spray, and also to prevent the machine from nosing over. We understand that the alteration has greatly improved the seaworthiness of the machine.
SEINE TO THAMES IN TWO HOURS: On the right the Vickers "Viking III" alighting near the end of Lambeth Bridge last week. On the left the machine is seen taxying toward the Hard at Doulton's, with its wheels lowered ready for beaching.
LONDON (THAMES) TO PARIS (SEINE): On April 20 the Vickers "Viking," 450 h.p. Napier "Lion" engine, flew, with Gen. Sykes and Col. Beatty on board, from the Thames at Westminster to the Seine in the centre of Paris, thus demonstrating the feasibility of a direct air service between the two cities, by means of which the delay of getting to and from the aerodrome is avoided. The machine left at 3.30 p.m., and arrived on the, Seine at 6.20 p.m. On the following day the "Viking" returned from the Seine to Croydon aerodrome. Our photographs show the machine on the Hard outside Doulton's, and, on the right, Sir F. Sykes just aboard, ready for the trip.
SEINE TO THAMES IN TWO HOURS: On the left General Sykes is seen assisting M. Laurent Eynac from the Vickers "Viking III," and, on the right, Capt. Guest is chatting with General Sykes, while M. Eynac shakes hands with Lord Londonderry.
The Petroczy-Karman Captive Helicopter: The spheres under the framework are pneumatic shock-absorbers. Each of the Le Rhone engines has its petrol tank mounted concentrically with it, so that the petrol system should be of the simplest.
The Petroczy-Karman captive helicopter in the air.
THE PETROCZY-KARMAN HELICOPTER: Side elevation and perspective view of the machine as it appears from below.
THE BERLINER HELICOPTER: Last week we gave illustrations of the Petroczy-Karman helicopter, and here is shown two views of another direct-lift machine, invented by H. A. Berliner of Washington, U.S.A. The top photograph shows it in flight (on June 10 last), and below is a close-up view. The first successful flight of this machine, before the addition of the vertical stabilising fins and rudder, was made on November 11, 1919.
Lisbon to Madeira in a flying-boat: As announced in FLIGHT some time ago, a fine flight of 540 miles was made by Portuguese Naval Air Service officers between these two places. Our photograph shows the machine, a British-built F.3, in which the flight was made. The engines are, of course, Rolls-Royce "Eagles." The machine was taken over by the Portuguese Government in May of last year, when it was flown from Calshot to Lisbon, crossing the Bay of Biscay.
The Lawson Midnight Airliner, L-4: A general view of the machine minus the main plane extensions. It is fitted with three 400 h.p. Liberty engines, the central engine housing, on the fuselage, being a complete, detachable unit.
THE LAWSON MIDNIGHT AIRLINER, L-4: Diagrams showing the cabin lay-out for passenger or mall work.
Lawson L-4 Airliner - 3-400 hp. Liberty engines
Huff-Daland Biplane: The "Early Bird" HD-1B twin-engine five-seater, constructed by Huff, Daland and Co., of Ogdensburg, N.Y. The 'plane, which has a useful load of 1,100 lbs., is fitted with two 10-cylindered 100 h.p. "Anzanis," and its loading is 6.5 lbs./sq. ft. and 14.1 lbs./h.p.
Huff-Daland Biplane: The HD-4 Army Training 'plane, constructed by Huff, Daland and Co., of Ogdensburg, N.Y. The 'plane is a two-seater fitted with a 7-cylindered A.B.C. "Wasp " (140 h.p.) or 9-cylindered "Lawrence," and has a loading of 5.8 lbs. sq.ft. and 13.9 lbs./h.p.
The H.L. "Marlburian' : Three-quarter front view.
The H.L. "Marlburian": Side view.
The H.L. "Marlburian": Rear view, showing port wing in skeleton.
THE H.L. "MARLBURIAN": Three-quarter front view of fuselage.
H.L. "Marlburian" 60 hp Gnome engine
The "Ae-2.01" Chaser Biplane: Three-quarter front view.
THE "AE-2.01" CHASER BIPLANE: View of the uncovered fuselage, showing steel-tube construction.
"Ae-2.01" 220 h.p. Hispano-Suiza engine
THE HANDLEY PAGE CRICKLEWOOD-PARIS AIR SERVICE: So great is the demand for tickets that not infrequently two machines have to be despatched on the same day. This was the case on Saturday of last week, when two machines left within a few minutes of one another. Our photographs show: (1) The two machines ready; (2) Mr. E. Cogni, general manager of the air service; (3) One of the machines off; (4) The machine leaving the aerodrome; (5) The passengers getting on board; (6) Some of the luggage being taken on board.