A republic lying at the southeastern end of central Europe, Croatia is an elongated crescent-shaped country to the north, west, and southwest of Bosnia and Herzegovina. In the north it borders on Hungary and in the northwest on Slovenia. Its extensive Adriatic coastal region on the southwest includes nearly 1,200 islands and islets. Area: 56,610 sq km (21,857 sq mi). Pop. (1996 est.): 4,775,000. Cap.: Zagreb. Monetary unit: kuna, with (Oct. 11, 1996) a free rate of 5.45 kune to U.S. $1 (8.58 kune = £1 sterling). President in 1996, Franjo Tudjman; prime minister, Zlatko Matesa.
In 1996 Croatia achieved key diplomatic breakthroughs that promised a peaceful resolution of the Serb-Croat conflict that lay at the core of the violent breakup of former Yugoslavia. On January 15 the UN Security Council passed Resolution 1037, outlining the peaceful integration of eastern Slavonia, the last area under rebel Croatian Serb occupation, back to Croatian authority. The UN initiative came on the heels of the Erdut Agreement, signed at the end of 1995 by the government of Croatia and Serbian officials, in which Serbian Pres. Slobodan Milosevic agreed to give up territorial claims on eastern Slavonia. A newly created UN Transitional Authority for Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium (UNTAES) was given the task of implementing both military and civilian provisions of the agreement. By June 27 all Yugoslav troops and heavy weapons had been removed, which thus completed the demilitarization of the territory. Full diplomatic relations between Croatia and Yugoslavia were established on August 23. Repatriation remained the principal domestic challenge for Croatia, especially the contentious return of some 120,000 Croats expelled from eastern Slavonia and 150,000 Serbs who fled Croatia.
As fears of renewed conflict with Serbia subsided, domestic support for the ruling Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ) waned. Public impatience with government corruption and authoritarian behaviour could no longer be mollified by popular support for Pres. Franjo Tudjman. The HDZ prevented the opposition coalition from assuming the mayorship of Zagreb, the largest city, following the previous year’s loss at the polls, relying on a constitutional technicality that allowed the president to reject any candidate for mayor of the capital for "national security" reasons. About 100,000 people rallied on the main square in Zagreb in November to protest the government’s efforts to close down a popular independent radio station. Concerns about the government’s commitment to democratization delayed Croatia’s becoming a member of the Council of Europe, though it finally did so on November 6.
Croatia’s economy showed remarkable resilience. The tourism sector saw more than a million European vacationers return to the Adriatic coastline. An explosion of small and medium-sized businesses helped soak up the ranks of the unemployed. The pharmaceutical company Pliva offered its shares on the London Stock Exchange, the first industrial company from Eastern-Central Europe to do so. Inflation remained one of the lowest in Europe, and foreign exchange reserves grew.
Croatia’s ambivalent relations with Western Europe contrasted with strengthening diplomatic and business ties with the U.S. Retired U.S. general Jacques Klein was chosen to command the UNTAES operation. Pres. Bill Clinton and three Cabinet members visited during the year.
This article updates Croatia, history of.