Think predicting the weather is all about high-tech climatological equipment? Think again.
These days some of the most vital tools in weather forecasting consists of simple, plastic rain gauges and a grassroots team of volunteers willing to spend a few minutes each day analyzing data they've collected in their backyards.
On May 1, Georgia will be the 31st state to join that team of weather watchers as part of the Community Collaborative Rain, Hail and Snow Network (CoCoRaHS), a 9,000-member organization that provides more actual precipitation data than the National Weather Service, according to the CoCoRaHS Web site.
The organization's goal is to have at least one weather watcher every 6 square miles, filling in gaps between NWS reporting sites.
In Northeast Georgia, the data are important in studying problems caused by runoff, said Jean Smith, a member of the Broad River Watershed Association who plans to take part in CoCoRaHS.
At least 19 members of the Broad River Watershed Association, a nonprofit, regional land trust dedicated to the protection and management of the Broad River, has committed to joining CoCoRaHS, Smith said.
Smith said rainfall observers are needed in Athens-Clarke, Jackson, Barrow and Oconee counties
"It's very important for us to know how much rain fell. ... If we're watching a particular area where we know there's some erosion problems, we need to know if it was an inch of rain that fell in an hour or an inch of rain that fell in a day. It makes a big difference as far as runoff," Smith said.
CoCoRaHS began in 1998 in Fort Collins, Colo., a year after a devastating flood struck the city, killing nine people and injuring at least 30. The floodwaters also caused extensive damage to Colorado State University.
Now, CoCoRaHS is trying to get Georgia residents interested in joining the volunteer group by distributing rain gauges and training volunteers throughout the state at community meetings and via online instruction.
Starting May 1, volunteers will call in their precipitation totals at 7 a.m. each day to CoCoRaHS to help the organization build a Georgia database.
Even weekly reporting of precipitation totals can help, according to Smith.
"For climatological data, these small differences add up," she said.
By the time the network is available in Georgia on May 1, CoCoRaHS organizers hope to have a trained group of volunteer rain observers in place. Washington coordinates BRWA volunteers. Al and Pat Kelly of Oglethorpe County can provide rain gauges at cost ($22) to people interested in collecting rain information.
For more information contact Pat Kelly at (706) 743-5280 or Al Kelly at (706) 743-5000 (Al) or by email at firstname.lastname@example.org.
For more information, visit the Community Collaborative Rain, Hail and Snow Network Web site at www.cocorahs.org.
© 2017. All Rights Reserved. | Contact Us