“Most Americans do not have a clear sense of the significant health risks of indoor pollution. They also do not know what they can do to reduce risk of asthma, cancer, and other serious diseases caused by indoor pollutant exposure.” -Environmental Protection Agency
“Since the energy crisis of the early 1970s, emphasis on energy-efficient homes has skyrocketed. A great deal of attention centers on making homes airtight to decrease the amount of energy and expense needed for heating, which may decrease natural ventilation (an exchange of outside and inside air). Because of this, we have become concerned about the health effects of indoor air pollution within the home.” -MedFacts: Indoor Air Particulates: Wood-Burning Stoves, Gases & Fumes
Pollution of the air in a home is higher than it has ever been. It is estimated that the air is 5 to 70 times more polluted than the air outdoors. With Americans spending up to 95% of their time indoors, we are subjecting ourselves to environmental challenges that will eventually take a toll on our health. The very young, the very old, and immunocompromised people are at the greatest risk, but everyone needs to be concerned about this problem. What is the solution? Follow the four steps to a healthy home: ventilation, humidity control, air filtration, and envelope integrity. Combining these four steps will provide an integrated approach to a healthier, more sustainable inside environment.
At HealthyAir, we are committed to helping our customers not only become more educated about the effects of this all-too-common problem, but also to provide simple, affordable methods to correct the problem.
A few months after I began inspecting buildings for mold I was asked by a real estate agent representing a potential buyer to test for mold in a four year old home. The home was bricked on all sides. On two sides of the home the finished basement was completely below grade with a third side about fifty per cent below grade.Read More View All
Whether you need an experienced consultant to identify environmental hazards in your home, or need help maximizing the quality of your indoor air, we can help... LEARN MORE