Also found in: Dictionary, Thesaurus, Medical, Legal, Acronyms, Encyclopedia, Wikipedia.
to reach one's maximum in something, such as weight in weight lifting or credit on a credit card. Andy finally maxed out at 300 pounds. Randy just knew when he had maxed out. Something in his body told him to stop.
1. Sl. exhausted; tired. lam just maxed out. I haven't been getting enough sleep. I had to stop work because I was too maxed out.
2. Sl. intoxicated. Sam was maxed out and seemed happy enough to sit under the table and whimper. I hadn't seen Barlowe so maxed out in years. He was nearly paralyzed.
to the max
Sl. as much as possible, maximally. She is happy to the max. They worked to the max their whole shift.
max (yourself) out
to reach a limit By Christmas our credit cards were maxed out. This great athlete hasn't maxed herself out - yet.
Etymology: based on the literal meaning of maximum (the greatest amount possible)
to the max
to the highest degree or level She does what she wants, living her life to the max and enjoying every moment.
to the max(American informal)
as much as possible We're stretched to the max - we can't possibly take on any more work. A lot of these guys push their bodies to the max, spending three or more hours a day in the gym.
1. Exhaust one's options, capacity, or the like by producing or performing to the maximum, as in The weight lifter maxed out at 180 kilograms. [Slang; late 1900s]
2. Reach a point at which no more growth, improvement, or benefit is possible, as in The salary for this job maxes out at $90,000. [Slang; late 1900s]
3. Relax, take things easy, as in Let's go to the beach and max out. [Slang; late 1900s]
1. To achieve a maximum value, especially as a final value: The rocket kept accelerating for a while, but finally maxed out at 6,000 miles per hour.
2. To cause something to achieve a maximum value, especially as a final value: I think I've maxed out the number of favors I can ask of my cousin. If you keep your foot on the accelerator pedal, you'll max the engine out.
3. To extend some source of credit to a maximum value or degree: I can't pay for this—I have no cash, and I maxed out my credit card. We maxed our credit line out, so we can't afford to do any more home improvements. Don't use the credit card again—we'll max out.
grody to the max(ˈgrodi tu ðə ˈmæks)
mod. totally disgusting. (see also grody.) This pizza is, like, grody to the max!
n. the maximum. (see also to the max.) I want the max. I’m hungry.
in. to reach one’s maximum in something, such as weight in weight lifting or credit on a credit card. Andy finally maxed out at 300 pounds.
1. mod. exhausted; tired. I am just maxed out. I haven’t been getting enough sleep.
2. mod. alcohol intoxicated. I hadn’t seen Marlowe so maxed out in years. He was nearly paralyzed.
to the max
mod. maximally. (see also max.) They worked to the max their whole shift.