Motivation why we do or don’t have it!
Why do some kids arrive at secondary school already motivated to work hard, while some arrive demotivated to exert much effort at all in lessons?
Picture two students you’ve taught: one who works incredibly hard, and one who seems incredibly lacklustre and avoids making effort. What explains this difference? How does motivation work?
In a series of five blogposts, I plan to explore what we as teachers can do about motivation, self-control and willpower in school. There’ll be stories of elephants, chimps and bees; mindsets, biases and self-fulfilling prophecies. The heroes of the story will be Carol Dwek, Daniel Kahnemann, Richard Thaler & Cass Sunstein, Jonathan Haidt, Kelly McGonigal and the Heath brothers. Going beyond the cognitive psychology I’ve been exploring, this is a journey into our social, intuitive minds.
In the first post of the series, I want to see how two approaches from the field of economics might apply…
View original post 1,282 more words
Equality vs Equity…
Michelle Morrissey makes a case for Common Core in By ‘Common,’ We Mean Equity:
When the Common Core State Standards emerged, it was both a shock and a revelation — for the first time, the dominant model said that my students, who live in low-income neighborhoods and are predominately Hispanic or African American, would have some guarantee of the same kinds of educational experiences that students at high-performing schools across the country have. All students would be asked to do the hard stuff—and reap the benefits of those high expectations.
Setting aside the inaccurate hyperbole (“for the first time”) and that every single round of standards embraced in the U.S. since the 1890s has come with the exact same set of claims (and then has always failed, thus a new round of “better” standards), the fundamental problem with chasing better standards is that standards may achieve equality, but not…
View original post 336 more words
Physical activity, such an important idea, yet students in our schools aren’t getting enough!
Backhand low serve
a Staggered stance
b Weight on back foot
c Racket back, wrist cocked
d Contact made at waist height
e Shuttle goes to diagonal box
Barbara Fredrickson, a psychology professor at the University of North Carolina, has studied the effect of positive feelings, including gratitude. Research tells us that cultivating gratitude can actually undo the effects of negative emotions, such as anger and anxiety. Her team has also found that feeling grateful can broaden our thinking, which in turn builds optimism. They have found that gratitude can broaden people’s mindsets and inspire future…
View original post 188 more words
Mindset again, amazing how it affects so much!
As usual, when you put a group of school staff into a room together, they come up with some great ideas. They are listed below under the…
View original post 906 more words
DHS drama teacher and occasional guest blogger Lesley Graney is back, thinking about beliefs, fromage frais and The Pygmalion Effect. Read on……
What do beliefs, fromage frais and the Pygmalion Effect have in common? Where is she going with this? Well…..I read a blog and watched a clip on ‘The Pygmalion Effect’ on the same week that my beliefs were shattered about a certain brand of … fromage frais.
This week I may have found out that I could have been a bad mother due to my beliefs! I have been giving my children this certain brand of fromage frais, REGUARLY!! Like every day, regularly.
Well, ‘What’s wrong with that?’, I hear you ask, surely you are saying, ‘it’s a healthy, fruit based yogurt providing one of your children’s 5 day; you should be applauded.’
No, it’s not. My belief was shattered this week as I read in a national…
View original post 359 more words