Researchers at the Institute for Aging Research, which operates within Hebrew Senior Life, the only senior health care and housing organization affiliated with Harvard Medical School, have studied how to prevent falls, a leading cause of preventable death among older adults.
The body’s ability to repair DNA damage declines with age, which causes gradual cell demise, overall bodily degeneration, and greater susceptibility to cancer. Experiments in mice suggest a way to thwart DNA damage.
The “Harvard Chan: This Week in Health” podcast sits down with Aaron Bernstein, associate director of the Center for Health and the Global Environment at the Harvard Chan School, to discuss how climate change will impact health and health care costs.
A study by Harvard Medical School faculty members at Brigham and Women’s Hospital is exploring the health benefits of cocoa in a massive, 18,000-person study that may provide answers hinted at in smaller studies.
Harvard researchers have developed a hydrogel that can be easily injected into blood vessels, helping to stop uncontrolled bleeding even in patients on blood-thinners or with bleeding disorders.
Researchers at Harvard’s Wyss Institute have developed an instrument that smokes cigarettes like a human, and delivers whole smoke to the air space of microfluidic human airway chips. The machine may enable new insights into how nonsmokers and COPD patients respond to smoke.
A new approach to manufacturing organs-on-chips developed by Harvard researchers could cut the length and cost of clinical trials significantly.
Scientists at Harvard Medical School and Technion-Israel Institute of Technology have built a giant petri dish to visually demonstrate how bacteria move as they become immune to drugs.
A new meta-lens works in the visible spectrum, seeing smaller than a wavelength of light. Because of this development, high-efficiency, ultra-flat, or planar, lenses could replace heavy, bulky ones in smart phones, cameras, and telescopes.
Researchers at the Wyss Institute at Harvard have developed a workflow that could diagnose a patient with Zika within two to three hours. The goal of developing the low-cost, rapid paper-based diagnostic system for strain-specific detection of the Zika virus is its use in the field to screen blood, urine, or saliva samples.
Sign up for daily emails with the latest Harvard news.
National health insurance is just a first step to solving the divide between America’s well-off healthy and its poorer, sicker people, Harvard analysts say.
Researchers have found that cancer begins after activation of an oncogene or loss of a tumor suppressor, and involves a change that takes a single cell back to a stem cell state. They believe this model may apply not only to melanoma, but to most if not all cancers.
A multicomponent, microfluidic small airway-on-a-chip model provides new opportunities to study human lung inflammatory disorders such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and asthma, and to test preclinical drug candidates outside the human body.
In a new study, the Wyss Institute’s human-gut-on-a-chip technology is used to co-culture gut microbiome and human intestinal cells, which could spur innovation of novel therapies for inflammatory bowel diseases.
Harvard-affiliated researchers are working on a procedure that will allow fully obstructed blood clots in the brain to be cleared using a device that opens a small channel through the blockage, which combines with a clot-busting drug to target the obstructed site.
Patients with trauma, stroke, heart attack, and respiratory failure who were transported by basic life support ambulances had a better chance of survival than patients who were transported by advanced life support ambulances, a study of Medicare patients in urban counties nationwide found.
Catheter aided by UV light allows repairs of heart holes without requiring surgery.
Research at Harvard and elsewhere has repeatedly tied coffee consumption to health benefits.
Lifestyle choices remain the best way to prevent heart attack, stroke, diabetes, cancer, and cognitive decline, panelists agreed.
Research led by Carolyn Eng delivers insights into how the IT band stores and releases elastic energy to make walking and running more efficient.
Until now, scientists thought that epithelial cells — which line not only the lung’s airways but major cavities of the body and most organs — just sat there motionless. A Harvard study shows that in asthma the opposite is true.
In the Wyss Institute’s inaugural podcast "Disruptive," host Terrence McNally spoke with Pamela Silver and George Church about today’s breakthroughs in technology and modifications to an organism's genome that can be conducted more cheaply, efficiently, and effectively than ever before.
The motor cortex is critical to learn new skills, but may not be needed to perform them, a new Harvard study says.
Heart disease is the leading cause of death in women in the United States, deadlier than all forms of cancer combined. The good news is that up to 90 percent of heart disease may be preventable.
Harvard faculty and researchers are using big data to answer society’s most challenging questions, and doing it with the help of FAS Research Computing (FASRC). Founded in 2007, FASRC had one goal: to provide Harvard faculty, students, and staff with leading-edge computational resources.
The recipient of a bilateral arm transplant and his surgeons appeared at a news conference on Tuesday to thank the donor’s family and to discuss the procedure.
Harvard stem cell researchers announced a giant leap forward in the quest to find a truly effective treatment for type 1 diabetes, a disease that affects an estimated 3 million Americans.
The fight to end the Ebola epidemic is not just about saving lives, it’s also about heading off a potentially broader humanitarian crisis, according to a Harvard Kennedy School panel.
Harvard scientists have developed a new test for sickle cell disease that provides results in just 12 minutes and costs as little as 50 cents — far faster and cheaper than other tests.
With a master’s from the School of Public Health, physician Darrell Gray hopes to use telecommunications to extend care to endangered groups in underserved neighborhoods.
Author and activist Eve Ensler, who opened Radcliffe’s two-day conference “Who Decides? Gender, Medicine, and the Public’s Health,” read from her new memoir, “In the Body of the World.” The conference brought together physicians, policymakers, journalists, and academics to examine topics such as how we care for our health and respond to disease.
Even the “healthy” fruit drinks that Americans sip are packed with the amount of sugar contained in six cookies. That love affair is making us sick.
A group of Harvard Medical School students is using the viral success of tongue-in-cheek video on the spleen to promote science education, launching a contest for younger students to make organ-themed music videos.
A cross-disciplinary team of Harvard scientists, engineers, and clinicians announced Sept. 6 that they have begun a Phase I clinical trial of an implantable vaccine to treat melanoma, the most lethal form of skin cancer.
A team at the Wyss Institute at Harvard has received a $5.6 million grant from the FDA to use its organs-on-chips technology to test human physiological responses to radiation and evaluate drugs designed to counter those effects.
The effects of stress on health, well-being, and even creativity were the focus of the Forum at Harvard School of Public Health (HSPH) this week.
The U.S. Supreme Court decision on Thursday upholding the basis of national health care reform is far from the last word on the topic, Harvard faculty members said, and merely raises the curtain on act two: November’s general election.