We want to support reading for pleasure, reading at home and reading beyond books.
So we have decided to start using Oxford Owl – a website that can be used to access e-books and online learning activities.
Oxford Owl is an award-winning website designed to help support children’s learning, both at home and at school.
How to Use Oxford Owl
- Go to: www.oxfordowl.co.uk/
- Click on the link at the top of the page ‘My Class Login’
- Enter your child’s class log-in and password (these can be found on a sticker in their Home Learning books)
Each week the teacher will give you a different title to write in the search box or the title of a group of books. For example: ‘Waiting for Goldie’.
On the website, some of the books you will be given have questions for you to do with your child and helpful hints along the way. Please take the time to do this with your child as it will help them to develop their comprehension skills and support their understanding of the books they read.
How to Use the Home Learning Book with Oxford Owl
The expectation is for your child to complete the given book each week and then for you or your child to comment in their Home Learning Book. This will keep the teacher up-to-date and informed about whether your child understood the book, enjoyed the book, didn’t like the book or found it too difficult or easy to read.
Some examples of how you could comment:
“Can you recommend more books like this? It was great!”
“The book was interesting, my child really enjoyed it”
“This book was hard for my child to understand. Is it the right level for them?”
“My son didn’t like this book”
“My daughter read this book really well”
Some examples of how your child could comment:
“I liked this book. It had a nice ending”
“This book was easy to read. It was too short”
“I found some words tricky”
If your child is reading other books, comics or newspapers at home or the library, please remind them to record them in their Home Learning Book. This shows the class teacher they are reading a wide range of literature.
We understand that children read other books at home and it would be great to see what type of books they enjoy.