Achilles Tendon Rupture
The Achilles tendon is a tendon that runs down the back of the lower leg and connects the calf muscle to the heel bone. This tendon allows you to extend your foot and point your toes and also raises the heel of the ground to facilitate walking. Achilles tendon rupture occurs when the tendon is stretched beyond its capacity.
- Swelling, tenderness, or sometimes intense pain when pressure is applied on both sides of the tendon.
- Pain, stiffness and tenderness within the tendon. Pain often occurs when you wake up in the morning or after a long period of rest.
- Difficulty flexing your foot or pointing the toes.
These symptoms require prompt medical attention. If you are unable to seek immediate medical attention, the R.I.C.E. method should be used:
Rest. Rest is important to protect the injured tendon from further injury. Avoid putting your weight on the injured part.
Ice. Use a bag of frozen peas or crushed ice wrapped in a thin towel and apply onto the injured area. This provides short-term pain relief and help reduce swelling by reducing the blood flow to the injured site.
Compression. Apply pressure to the injured site to help limit and reduce swelling. You can wrap a bandage around the swollen area.
Elevation. Elevate the injury on pillows to control swelling.
Treatment options are based on the severity of the rupture. Doctors may opt for surgical or non-surgical treatments to repair the ruptured tendon. Regardless of the treatment option, physical therapy is crucial to aid the healing process. Physical therapy strengthens the muscles and improves the range of motion of the foot and ankle.
Chronic Ankle Sprains
Chronic or repeated ankle sprains are results of incompetence for lateral collateral ankle ligaments. If the ligaments which function to support and control motion in the ankle joint are damaged, they lose the ability to restrain the ankle from its normal range of motion.
Symptoms include chronic ankle sprains and difficulty walking on uneven surfaces.
Non-surgical treatment include physical therapy, bracing and medication. Your doctors will recommend surgery based on the degree of instability or lack of response to non-surgical approaches.
Ankle fracture is amongst the most common bone and joint injuries. Any crack, break or chip in the ankle bone is considered a fractured ankle. A sprain on the other hand refers to a tear in the ligament.
An ankle fracture occurs when the ankle joint is stressed beyond the strength of its elements. Ligaments may also tear at the same when the ankle is fractured. Causes of fracture in the ankle include: twisting or rotating the ankle, tripping or falling, an impact during a car accident.
Signs and symptoms include pain, swelling, bruising, and inability to move the toes or deformities of the bone around the ankle.
A broken ankle is usually diagnosed by a physical examination and X-rays may be ordered. Non-surgical treatments include the R.I.C.E. method, immobilization (cast/ splint) or prescription medication to help relieve pain.
When is surgery needed?
Some ankle fracture require surgery to repair the fracture and other soft tissue related injuries. Your surgeon will select an appropriate treatment for your injury.