A longtime professor of Ethnic Studies at the University of California at Berkeley, Ronald Takaki wasrecognized as one of the foremost scholars of American ethnic history and diversity. When the first edition of"A""Different Mirror"was published in 1993, "Publishers Weekly"called it "a brilliant revisionist history of Americathat is likely to become a classic of multicultural studies" and named it one of the ten best books of the year.Now Rebecca Stefoff, who adapted Howard Zinn's best-selling"A People's History of the United States"foryounger readers, turns the updated 2008 edition of Takaki's multicultural masterwork into"A Different Mirror for""Young People." Drawing on Takaki's vast array of primary sources, and staying true to his own words whenever possible, "A""Different Mirror for Young People"brings ethnic history alive through the words of people, including teenagers, who recorded their experiences in letters, diaries, and poems. Like Zinn's"A People's History," Takaki's"A""Different Mirror"offers a rich and rewarding "people's view" perspective on the American story.
About the Author
RONALD TAKAKI (1939-2009) was recognized as one of the foremost scholarsof American ethnic history and diversity. He is the author of the multipleaward-winning books Strangers from a Distant Shore: A History of AsianAmericans and A Different Mirror: A History of Multicultural America. REBECCASTEFOFFspecializes in writing nonfiction for young readers, with a focus on scientific, historical, and literary subjects. She previously explored the subject of evolution inCharles Darwin and the Evolution Revolution(Oxford University Press, 1996) and the four-volume seriesHumans: An Evolutionary History(Marshall Cavendish Benchmark, 2010). Stefoff has also written on exploration, forensic investigation, and archaeology, among other topics. In addition to writing her own books, Stefoff has adapted several important nonfiction works for young audiences: A Young People's History of the United States, based on Howard Zinn's bestselling classic of progressive history; Before Columbus: The Americas in 1491, based on Charles C. Mann's ground-breaking new look at the archaeology of the pre-Columbian Americas; andA Different Mirror for Young People, based on a major work of scholarship by ethnic historian Ronald Takaki."
“This 375-page book would be an excellent way to include multi-ethnic materials in the classroom as a way to ensure that your students see their unique identities reflected in their coursework.” — Skipping Stones
“This is a great introduction to Takaki’s path-breaking scholarship.” — Good