By Allison Kerr
So, you're interested in going organic in your garden. If so, you're probably wondering where to start. You've come to the right place.
Here you’ll find a quick guide to going organic in your garden. Gardening organically is really about working with nature, rather than against it - it isn’t hard, but, as with most new things, it takes a little time and effort to make the switch.
Start small - pick one area of your garden to go organic with. Here I'm using vegetable gardening to explain the principles of organic gardening; the steps are similar whichever part of your garden you choose.
Let's say you love grapes, you might think they'd be great to grow in
your garden. Stop! You can waste a lot of money, water, fertilizers and
chemicals trying to grow the wrong kinds of plants in your garden.
Impulse buying at WalMart or Costco is not the way to go - do some research before deciding what to plant.
Good places to research the best vegetables for your area include: local, professional garden centers; regional seed catalogs; county extension offices; and gardeners and gardening organizations in your area.
One great way to learn about which fruits and vegetables to grow is to talk to farmers at your local farmers' market.
Soil is what makes your vegetables grow, but not just any soil.
You might be dealing with compaction, mineral imbalances, acidity, or
alkalinity. What you want is aerated and balanced soil for good
County extension offices usually offer soil testing and they'll give you a plan for any amendments you need to add - ask them to recommend organic amendments. Existing soil can be successfully aerated by hand with a spade and fork, or by machine using a roto-tiller.
You can plant into the soil as is, or build a new bed on top – a raised bed – bringing in quality topsoil. Raised beds are a popular way to go.
Going organic doesn't have to be hard work: for less back-breaking work you might be interested in no-dig gardening (a way to garden without the need for tilling).
When it comes to vegetable growing, going organic means you'll need an almost unending supply of compost and mulch.
Compost brings you healthy soil - worms, which feed on compost, have been shown to have amazing impacts on crop success.
Mulch, a protective covering spread on the soil surface, reduces the need for water and buffers plants from heat.
Compost and straw are the most common mulches to use on vegetable beds. Straw needs some know-how though if you don't want a lot of weeds.
The above 3 steps will make pest and disease problems a lot less likely.
When problems do arise, biological controls
are the best place to look for treatment. Simple methods work too -
some bugs, such as caterpillars on cabbage plants, can be simply removed
Don't be afraid to make mistakes. Going organic won't be perfect - gardening is science and requires some experimentation as part of the learning process.
Organic gardening is also an art and takes time to learn. Each year you'll learn something new. There's no better way to connect with nature than in the garden.
Welcome to organic gardening. Enjoy the adventure!
Alison Kerr used to publish a blog about organic gardening full of inspiration, advice, encouragement, information and reviews.
|"LIKE" THIS SITE!|
clicked to your site and found a great wealth of information. I'm about
the least tool oriented person there is around, but I'm passionate
about many of the topics you write about. And I find the writing to be
very well done and informative even for a non-handy person like me. Well
Prague, Czech Republic
I would just like to thank you for maintaining this resource. It's essential that information about environmental issues are easily and broadly accessible.
Thank you so much for sharing your exquisitely well-told stories! I have spent the last 2 hours reading the whole saga, and I appreciate all of the detail that went into your decision making. I hope you are enjoying your green home with cozy surroundings and energy efficiency.
Thank you for taking the time to write down your experiences. It is truly a valuable service.
Thanks for all the info on this site, it is very thorough.
Very well documented and I appreciate the work and the effort you have put into this.
Hey! Just wanted to compliment you on
your site! I'm a new, first time homeowner, with a dirt crawlspace and
have searched for hours on how to set it up.
Living here in Montreal, and the conditions aren't easy on a house and this site sure helped to answer some questions.
Thank you for displaying your work and experience!
Have to say I absolutely love your site. Really complete, well thought out, and has me clicking from page to page...
I just wanted to say I love your site! Well done!
Love your web site. You are an inspiration to me. I am 66 and I want to build a small green home on my land. [...] Your green home looks beautiful. I wish you luck in all your endeavors!
A few years ago, I bought this fixer-upper for $10,000.
It had been vacant for six years, had no water supply, needed a new roof, and was likely to conceal an unsuspected number of nasty flaws.
Don't believe me? See these "Before" pictures.
My intention was to turn it into as "green" as home as I could, within my physical, financial, and geographical limits – and to share this adventure with you, step-by-step and dollar-by-dollar.
I'm not quite finished, but I do have a few "After" pictures to show.
If you want to follow me on this exciting adventure, you can subscribe to this site by RSS feed -- see the box below the navigation bar on the left.