The first impression is very important in international business etiquette. The way one expresses oneself is a direct way of giving away their social and cultural status. Thus it is important to learn about international business etiquette. Today we are going to talk about same tips of manners by the table. Table manners are the rules of etiquette used while eating, which may also include the appropriate use of tablewares. Different cultures observe different rules for table manners. Each family or group sets its own standards for how strictly these rules are to be enforced.
First, arriving on time is appreciated while 5-15 minutes late for an invitation is generally fine, and do not arrive any more than 30 minutes late for a party or a big gathering. Some special can be brought to the host, such as flowers and wines, ect.
Second, it is rude to sit down in any seat before you have been invited to do so. The hostess is the one to lead in the meal – it is important for diners to allow the hostess or the oldest person to begin eating first. When eating, one should make sure to keep their plate tidy and not make it messy. It is necessary to use the knife and fork in an appropriate manner which would be considered to be polite. The guest of honor should respond to the toast.
Third, it is impolite to reach over someone to pick up food or other items. Diners should always ask for items to be passed along the table to them. In the same vein, diners should pass those items directly to the person who asked. It is also rude to take photographs while eating, slurp food, eat noisily or make noise with cutlery. However, one should take a medium amount and then ask for seconds if necessary. This is also a sign of appreciation.
The last, but not the least is that when you have finished eating, and to let others know that you have, place your knife and fork together, with the tines on the fork facing upwards, on your plate. Napkins should be placed unfolded on the table when the meal is finished. Leaving a very small amount of food on one’s plate is considered to be acceptable while large amount is considered to be a sign of disrespect.
It is really necessary for us to learn about basic table manners and improve our poor eating habits. For only in this way can we enjoy a harmonious dinner with our foreign friends and show our respect to them at the same time.