Click here to see: A
computer generated image of a Greek Theatre
7. From the above web site or this timeline
write out in what century BC, and in what year BC, the people in ancient
Athens in Greece started to build the Parthenon.
8. Study the masks at this web site: http://www.greekhandicraft.com/mask.html
(If this site has expired, type 'Greek masks' in an Image
Play this memory game based on Greek masks: http://www.mce.k12tn.net/ancient_greece/face_memory.htm -
site expired :-(
At the following site, find and then manipulate the 3D pictures of
Greek Masks and watch the movie clips. (Some are in Real Player, so you
can watch those at home if you don't have Real Player at school.) www.iah.arts.gla.ac.uk/
masks/gcip.htmlwww.iah.arts.gla.ac.uk/ masks/gcip.html -
site expired :-(
Class Group Work Activity:
Vaseline Petroleum jelly (to smear face first,
especially the eyebrows, so plaster mask comes off easily)
plastic wrap (to cover hair)
plaster gauze (buy from chemist or craft store) cut it to strips 5 -10
water dishes (warm water will speed drying)
Newspapers to cover surfaces
Large plastic gargage bags to cover clothes
Paper Maché Pulp ( to pack face for a nose or cheeks, or horns etc)
Damp paper towel (optional- some prefer to cover the face with one layer
of paper towels first)
acrylic paints - brushes - mixing trays
Assorted yarns - furs - fake hair - cloth
cord for hanging (leather cord would be nice)
What to do:
Work out what materials each member of you group will bring on the day
you start the group work activity
The teacher will show on one pupil how to do a mask. Afterwards work
in a group doing the masks on each other ( if you have bought enough
plaster bandage from the chemist!)
Ask the pupil to smear her face with vaseline, especially the
Cut the plaster of Paris into 5 -10 cm pieces.
Dip the plaster of Paris into the warm water, lie it on paper towel for a
second or so to get off excess water, and then place it over the face, one
piece after the other.
After each piece you´ve got to smooth the surface with your fingertips.
Don´t cover the eyes!
Use paper mache pulp or scrunched up bandage to make nose, cheeks, or an
Let the mask dry and lift it off your face.
Use water-colour to paint it the way you want.
Glue on hair etc
Make holes to attach cord or elastic
11. Optional Extra: Read and briefly summarise in
of extra information on Greek Drama.
Only make points on information you didn't record in doing the above