- Royal Defence Corps during the Great War -
Great War>Allied Army
If you enjoy this site please consider making a donation.
Add Stories & Photos
Day by Day
War in the Air
Prisoners of War
The Royal Navy
Training for War
Those Who Served
Life on Home Front
Central Powers Army
Central Powers' Navy
World War Two
Add Stories & Photos
Help & FAQ's
Our Facebook Page
Great War Books
Research your Family History.
World War 1 One ww1 wwII greatwar great
Royal Defence Corps
- Royal Defence Corps, 13th Observation Coy
- Royal Defence Corps, 7th Observation Coy
The Royal Defence Corps was a corps of the British Army formed in August 1917 and was disbanded in 1936. It was initially formed by converting the (Home Service) Garrison battalions of line infantry regiments. Garrison battalions were composed of soldiers either too old or medically unfit for active front-line service; the Home Service status indicated they were unable to be transferred overseas. Eighteen battalions were converted in this way. The role of the regiment was to provide troops for security and guard duties inside the United Kingdom; guarding important locations such as ports or bridges. It also provided independent companies for guarding prisoner-of-war camps. The regiment was never intended to be employed on overseas service.
If you can provide any additional information, please add it here.
Want to know more about Royal Defence Corps?
There are:13861 pages and articles tagged Royal Defence Corps available in our Library
Those known to have served with
Royal Defence Corps
during the Great War 1914-1918.
- Bathe William Harry. Cpl.
- Kettley George. Sgt.
- Murphy John William. Pte. (d.17th Oct 1917)
- Pretty Howard S.. Pte. 8th Btn.
- Riddell Albert Henry. Private 1st Battalion
- Riddell Albert Henry. Pte. 1st Battalion
- Young George. Pte. 24th (Tyneside Irish) Battalion
All names on this list have been submitted by relatives, friends, neighbours and others who wish to remember them, if you have any names to add or any recollections or photos of those listed, please Add a Name to this List
Looking for help with Family History Research?
Please see Family History FAQ's
We are unable to provide individual research free of charge, but do offer a paid service at competitive rates, the small profit from these services will be put towards the costs of keeping this website running. For more information please see our Research Services Leaflet
Can you help?The Wartime Memories Project is run by volunteers and this website is funded by donations from our visitors.
If the information here has been helpful or you have enjoyed reaching the stories please conside making a donation, no matter how small, would be much appreciated, annually we need to raise enough funds to pay for our web hosting or this site will vanish from the web. In these difficult times current donations are falling far short of this target.
If you enjoy this site please consider making a donation.
- The Wartime Memories Project is the original WW1 and WW2 commemoration website
This website has been running for 16 years and receives in excess of a million hits per month. The website and our group will continue long after the 2014-18 events are over. We hope that people will continue to support us by submitting material and stories in addition to submitting to the new websites set up for the anniversary.
- We are looking for volunteers to help with researching the activities of units of the Royal Artillery, Royal Engineers, Territorial Force, Regular Army, Pals Battalions, Kitchener's New Armies, Voluntary Organisations and the Ships of the Royal Navy. We currently have a huge backlog of stories and historical documents which need to be edited or transcribed for display online, if you have a good standard of written English, an interest in the two World Wars and a little time to spare online we would appreciate your help. For more information please see our page on Volunteering.
Wanted: Digital copies of Group photographs, Scrapbooks, Autograph books, photo albums, newspaper clippings, letters, postcards and ephemera relating to the Great War. If you have any unwanted photographs, documents or items from the First or Second World War, please do not destroy them. The Wartime Memories Project will give them a good home and ensure that they are used for educational purposes. Please get in touch for the postal address, do not sent them to our PO Box as packages are not accepted.
We are now on Facebook. Like this page to receive our updates, add a comment or ask a question.
If you have a general question please post it on our Facebook page.
Jun 2017World War 1 One ww1 wwII greatwar great
Please note we currently have a backlog of submitted material, our volunteers are working through this as quickly as possible and all names, stories and photos will be added to the site. If you have already submitted a story to the site and your UID reference number is higher than 231539 your submission is still in the queue, please do not resubmit without contacting us first.
Did you know? We also have a section on World War Two. and a Timecapsule to preserve stories from other conflicts for future generations.
Pte. George Young 24th (Tyneside Irish) Battalion Northumberland FusiliersGeorge Young was wounded in December 1916 and transferred to Royal Defence Corps.Lynne
Pte. Howard S. Pretty 8th Btn. Duke of Wellington West Riding RegimentI came across a diary that was passed down through our family. It was created by a family member in 1915/16 at a WW1 hospital called Grove House in Harrogate. Our family member was a nurse there and had servicemen describe their experiences through the diary. Entries include the Gallipoli experiences of Pte Pretty of the 8th Duke of Wellingtons West Riding Regiment. This man's descendants,I am sure would be interested, I hope it may reach the family at some stage.John Fison
Pte. Albert Henry Riddell 1st Battalion Royal Warwickshire RegimentAlbert Riddell was born in November, 1878 at Stoke upon Trent, Staffordshire, to John Riddell & Hannah Clarke. In 1891, he lived with parents at 20 Trent Cottage, Burton on Trent, Staffordshire. In 1901, they lived at a house named The Village, in Staunton on Wye, Hereford By 1911, the family were living at 103 Queen St, Burton on Trent, Staffordshire, and Albert was working as Colliery Hewer.
He enlisted on 4th of Sep 1914 with the 4th Battalion Royal Warwickshire Regiment 4/2271 and spent 6 months training. He then transferred to 1st Battalion Royal Warwickshire Regiment, an active service battalion part of 10th Brigade, 4th Division and was renumbered 50792. He saw service in France & Belgium between 7th of April and 5th May 1915, when he was wounded, probably gassed on 3rd of May at "Shell Trap Farm"
On 29th of April 1916 Albert was posted to 13th Observation Company Royal Defense Corp in Sussex then on 5th of January 1917 he transferred to 7th Observation Company Royal Defense Corps in Sussex stationed just north of Brighton. He was discharged on 6th of July 1918 as "unfit for service" and married on the 4th of August 1919 in St Michael's Church, Budbrooke, Warwickshire. He and his wife then lived at 11 Newdigate Place, Nuneaton, Warwickshire Albert died in September 1956 in Nuneaton.Gerald Southam
Private Albert Henry Riddell 1st Battalion Royal Warwickshire RegimentAlbert Riddell was born in 1878, the 3rd of 7 children. Of course, like any male coming from Burton upon Trent, he worked at a brewery. He served in France from 7th April was wounded and then served with the Royal Defence Corps. He married in 1919 and sired 7 children. His oldest daughter, my mother, said that he played on his war wounds and his only employment was drinking beer. Albert died in 1956.Gerald Southam
Pte. John William Murphy Royal Defence Corps (d.17th Oct 1917)John William Murphy served in the Royal Defence Corps and died age 53 on the 17th October 1917. He is buried in Jarrow Cemetery.
John was born in Jarrow 1864. His death is recorded at Grimsby. 7a.660. In the 1911 census he is living at 53 Blacketts street, Jarrow. John(46) is a platers helper in the shipyard and Ellen his wife of 17 years had 7 children with 5 surviving all single and living at home. Anthony(25) is also a platers helper, Jane(21) is a domestic servant, as is Rebecca(18) and Mary Ellen(15). Patrick is ten years old.Vin Mullen
Cpl. William Harry Bathe Canadian Ordnance CorpsWilliam Harry Bathe was born in Deptford, SE London, in 1879. He enlisted in the Royal Marine Light Infantry on 9 August 1897. Although he had signed on for 12 years, he spent 50 days in all with the Marines – and six of those were in hospital, suffering from cowpox, a bad reaction to his smallpox vaccination. On 29 September 1897, he transferred to the Army Ordnance Corps, and his conditions of service changing to seven years in army service and five years with A Reserve.
3653 Private Bathe W H started his duty with the AOC at Woolwich, but spent his first Christmas and New Year in the army in hospital. He was there for 34 days while being treated for rheumatism caused by exposure. He did not stay with his new unit for long, buying himself out of the army for £18 less than a year after joining the AOC, on 10 September 1898. On 28 February 1901, he volunteered to serve in the Second Anglo-Boer War, becoming a private in the 36th Company (West Kent) Imperial Yeomanry. In fact, before he joined the Royal Marines in 1897, he had been a member of 2nd Volunteer Battalion West Kent Regiment. He was a member of the second contingent of Imperial Yeomanry to go to South Africa, on 23 March 1901. On 29 July, his mother Evangeline was refunded £12, two-thirds of the purchase money paid to buy William out of the army three years earlier. William Bathe was awarded the Queen’s South African medal with clasps for his service in Cape Colony, Orange Free State and Transvaal, together with clasps to show he served in South Africa in both 1901 and 1902. At the end of the war, he returned to the UK on 27 August 1902 and was discharged at Aldershot on 3 September. Two years later, he was back in South Africa as a member of the South African Constabulary, serving with the SAC between 1904 and 1906 before returning to England.
In July 1907, he emigrated to Canada, a couple of months after his younger brother George had done so. He lived in Montreal and joined the local militia – the Royal Rifles of Canada. William Bathe enlisted with the Canadian forces soon after WW1 broke out, joining the 12th Battalion of the 1st Canadian Division with service number 23072. He was attested on 29 September 1914 and sailed for England on SS Scotian on 3 October. What William did in the first 11 months of his service in England is unknown, but it has been suggested that he may have been seconded to a civilian armaments factory to learn about modern weapons. He was certainly in Forest Hill on 19 May 1915, when he acted as a witness to his sister Florence’s wedding, but his military records do not resume until 16 September 1915, when he “returned to duty” and was based at Shorncliffe Camp. Later, in early March 1916 he was attached to Canadian Ordnance Corps at Ashford with the rank of Armourer Corporal. In August 1918, he was promoted Acting Armourer Sergeant and finally, in October that year, Acting Armourer Staff Sergeant. During his time with COC, he worked on repairing rifles, spent a few months with the machine gun section and also was based in Greenwich for six months to February 1917 with the Canadian Arms Inspection & Repair Depot. It was not until 27 October 1918 that William served in France, being attached to 2nd Canadian Infantry Battalion as armourer. He remained in France until May 1919 and then returned to the UK and was eventually demobilised in Britain on 2 September 1919.Peter Bathe
Sgt. George Kettley City of London YeomanryI have the Victory Medal of Captain George Kettley of the Royal Defence Corps plus service record and also a photograph. He served as 9939 & 300238 Sgt in the 1/5th London Rifle Brigade and City of London Yeomanry from 1898 to 1916, thereafter being commissioned into the Royal Defense Corps. In 1918 he was apparently C.O. of the POW Camp for German Officers at Ripon. I wonder if anyone has any further information on him ?Peter Leonard
Want to know more about Royal Defence Corps?There are:13861 pages and articles tagged Royal Defence Corps available in our LibraryThese include information on officers, regimental histories, letters, diaries, personal accounts and information about actions during the Great War.
Available at discounted prices.
Suggest a link
The Wartime Memories Project is a non profit organisation run by volunteers.
This website is paid for out of our own pockets, library subscriptions and from donations made by visitors. The popularity of the site means that it is far exceeding available resources.
If you are enjoying the site, please consider making a donation, however small
to help with the costs of keeping the site running.
Website © Copyright MCMXCIX - MMXVII
- All Rights Reserved