I found this interesting article by David Nagel on the Campus Technology website: Can Facebook Make Better Students? Here at Austin Community College, several teachers have Facebook pages for their programs, and students sometimes set-up class specific Facebook pages so they can share info (think study group, only virtual).
Is using Facebook helpful for education? Have you used it? How did it work for you?
Online Colleges (http://www.onlinecolleges.com/) has a list of their top ten must-have apps for college students. I would add Tempo to this list, but other than that, I can’t think of any. What other apps are essential for students?
This article – How Professors Are Using Your Favorite Apps – has some great ideas for using technology in the classroom in ways you might not have ever imagined. Using Skype for multi-university collaboration, using Twitter for reminders, and sharing documents via Dropbox are great ideas, but some professors are taking advantage of the tools to restructure learning and the delivery of information. Some professors have even designed their own apps to take attendance and provide interaction during lectures.
How can we apply this to our department? What things are you already doing?
I have always believed that one of the biggest barriers to using new technology may not be the lack of funds for new technology, but the lack of sufficient teacher training. Here are two interesting articles on that subject.
Teacher Training Needed to Meet Technology Needs in the Classrooms
Schools Turn to In-House Experts for Tech Training
And here’s some suggestions on how to integrate technology. I particularly liked tip #3.
Three Tips on Integrating Technology in the Classroom
I just had this conversation with a professor at work – she was bemoaning the fact that traditional instruction no longer seems to work. “They’re all on their phone and computers, and no one is listening.” How DO we address the learning styles of this current generation of students? Here an interesting article that tells the story of how it is. Later on, we’ll address how we may have to adapt.