Do You Know Nutrition: Where did those crazy names come from?
By Phylis Canion
Jan. 31, 2012 at midnight
Updated Jan. 30, 2012 at 7:31 p.m.
I wonder how food derived its name. Like 7UP, Hershey's Kisses, Heinz 57? Just wondering if you ever wonder that?
As you may know, I am a huge food trivia buff, so this is right down my ally.
7Up, the citrus soda was so named because the original container was seven ounces and the direction of the bubbles were "up."
Hershey's Kisses are so named because the machine that produces the kisses looks like it is kissing the conveyor belt.
The 57 on the Heinz ketchup bottle represents the number of varieties of pickles the company once had.
Did you know that Coca-Cola was originally green?
The can opener was invented 28 years after cans were introduced.
The first bar code was used on Wrigley's gum.
Most of those dust bunnies in your house are from dead skin.
It takes a plastic container 50,000 years to start decomposing.
About 70 percent of your body weight is water (which is why I keep telling you to drink water. Your body really does need it).
Your nose smells the best at about 10 years old.
You would have to walk approximately 50 miles for your legs to equal the amount of exercise your eyes get daily.
I have been counting carbohydrates since the first of the year. Can you share some carbohydrate facts?
Here are several things to remember about carbohydrates.
Carbohydrates are important nutrients that supply energy for your body. Except for carbohydrates like fiber (that are not broken down into glucose before they enter the colon), all carbohydrates end up as sugar.
Your body uses sugar for energy for your cells, tissues and organs and stores extra sugar in your liver and muscles for when the body needs it.
Most carbohydrates, found in grocery markets, are rapidly digested because the manufacturers have already begun the digestive process for us by refining, grinding and puffing grains. Non-starch vegetables, (for example sprouts, greens and herbs), are the best source of carbohydrates.
Whole grains make better carbohydrates choices, such a quinoa (pronounced keen-wa), since it is a grain that remains intact.
Fiber is a complex carbohydrate that cannot be broken down and passes through the body undigested. Consuming fiber also helps keep the digestive system work properly by regularly pushing food through the intestines and preventing a sluggish system.
Thought for the week: Get rid of anything that isn't useful, beautiful or joyful.
The next free nutrition class is Feb. 13. Call today, 361-576-2100, to reserve your seat.
Phylis B. Canion is a doctor of naturopathic medicine and is a certified nutritional consultant, email her at email@example.com. This column is for nutritional information only and is not intended to treat, diagnose or cure.