Hello parents and friends,
I have spent this week in classroom observations with our younger classes, and next week will be with our older students. It was refreshing to see things through the eyes of our students. Our students are bright and active in our classrooms. PreK not only knows letters and sounds, but are beginning to sound out small words. Kindergarten reached their final letter Z this week. In order to go from floor time to tables, they were required to have a “ticket to the table” by identifying Z words. Afterwards they diligently practiced writing upper and lower case Zs. In 1st grade students identified different types of sentences - declarative, interrogative, exclamatory and imperative. The students came up with their own examples of each type of sentence. In 2nd grade the students were involved with identifying types of adjectives. In all classes different learning styles are used through singing, music, dancing, movement, visual cues, verbal discussions, and written assignments. Our teachers are also very supportive and encouraging to the students, using statements such as “mirror me with words; oh class, oh yes; if you can hear my voice; magic pencil time; ask a friend to help; tootsie roll, lolly pop; I like the way that x student is doing). With small classes, without exception, every student had the opportunity to participate in classroom discussion and receive feedback from the teacher.
We have a lot of things coming up this next month. Here are some updates and upcoming dates to remember:
My Blog: http://www.sbridgeacademy.org/mr-hawthornes-blog
Head of School
Be Kind, Work Hard, Get Smart!
P.S. We want to make sure we keep our parents informed of all the important things going on. We do this through classroom newsletters, letters from me, our Parent Portal, Facebook, and website, email, and our text alert system. Communication is important to us! If you are missing out on important information, please see me and I will make sure to get you connected.
Mr. Hawthorne has over 17 years of experience in education, both in K-12 and college environments. He is a native Oklahoman and a graduate of Oklahoma State University where he received the Truman Scholarship. He completed his Master's degree at Harvard University's Kennedy School of Government, and is working on his doctorate in education (curriculum, teaching, learning and leadership) at Northeastern University in Boston. Mr. Hawthorne is the Founding Head of School of Stonebridge Academy.