The title page presents input in terms of "Clothes" vocabulary, as well as useful phrases for use in "Shopping" role-plays.
The function of "Giving Directions" is often characterized by lack of clarity and confusion, so the aim here is to present some simple guidelines for students. There are many ways of giving instructions, but the ones offered here will always be effective and unambiguous.
The first step is to direct one's partner through a maze, simply using "Go straight ahead", "Turn left" and "Turn right". Students night need to be reminded that "Turn right" does not mean "Turn right and go straight ahead"!
The second step (next page of the students' book) is to direct members of the group to one's home, using "Go straight ahead", "Turn left" and "Turn right", as before, but with the addition of "Take the first left/right", "It's on your left/right" and "You can't miss it".
Students choose one of the homes on the maze, then Student A directs the others to his/her home from "Main Road". Student B directs the others to his/her home from Student A's home, etc.
Students now perform another pair-work activity, directing each other around a City Centre. As they fill in the names of the buildings, there should be ample opportunity to practice prepositions of location.
A crossword-format encourages students to explain and internalize not only prepositions of location, but also the names of different types of shops and services that one might find in a town or city. Explanations should be in English if possible, but teachers do not need to be too strict on this. Positive encouragement and promotion of self-confidence will be more effective.
Students now ask each other how to get to and from places on the map of Seoul City Centre.
As a follow-up, students can think of making an informative map of their own town, including all the "best" sites (hotels. information agencies, travel agents, restaurants) for visitors. They can then make role plays in which they show foreigners around.
This activity appears in Chapter 4 as "It's the "Wh ... ?" game". Students will therefore be familiar with it game. The questions are a bit more difficult now however, dealing with "How much ... ?", "How many ... ?", "How often ... ?", "How long ... ?", "How old ... ?", etc.
This activity was performed inChapter 6, and it appears here once more, with different questions. Students therefore know what to do, and can proceed at once. The vocabulary is more difficult this time, so Part 1 is another "matching" exercise, meant to clear up problems about what terms "actually mean".
As before, students should be encouraged to follow-up questions, and to answer fully.
This activity (as with other suggested homework) gives students an opportunity to consolidate the content of the chapter by writing a short composition based on that content. In this case the students are asked to draw a map of their home and its immediate vicinity, and to give directions to their house from a nearby landmark.
In order to assess such activities, teachers might want to photocopy the relevant pages of the students' books.
Free Talking this time has a general theme of "Seasons/Weather", reviewing "Wh"-questions and likes/dislikes in relation to these topics.
Students and teachers might also like to look at the two Free Talking activities in the"Extra Activities" section.
Next Chapter of the Teacher's Notes
Links to the Students's Book
Contents | 1 | Skills | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 | 7 | 8 | 9 | 10 | 11 | 12 | Extra
Tell Me More - Task-based Conversation Activities
By Andrew Finch and Hyun Tae-duck