Renal failure is the severest result of Polycystic Kidney Disease. If it does not develop into renal failure, patients with polycystic kidney will live as normal people. Its clinical symptoms are relatively complex. Besides the normal symptoms of waist pain, belly tumor and hematuria, it also has many complications such as hypertension, polycystic liver, and kidney stone and so on. In its end stage, the symptoms of abdominal distension, breathing difficulty and urine infection, nausea and vomit and so on appear, which makes patients extremely pain. Patients with polycystic kidney should do regular inspection and pay attention to the early symptoms of renal failure. But how can we prevent polycystic kidney from developing into renal failure?
Prevent and treat the complication in early stage: Hypertension and urinary
tract infection are the common factors that induce and aggravate damaged kidney,
which should be treated and controlled timely. In the treatment, the effect of
renal toxicity should be avoided.
Polycystic kidney has 60%-70% genetic tendency, and the rate of getting this
disease between men and women is approximately equal. Therefore, there may be
several people getting disease at the same time in a family with medical history
of polycystic kidney. Patients with polycystic kidney usually have symptoms
during 25-35 years old, and even some didn’t detect the disease until renal
failure appear. Thus, people with medical history of polycystic kidney should do
general investigation and regular follow-up visit to find the disease early and
treat it timely. At present, the conventional means such as B ultrasound, CT and
MRI all can diagnose polycystic kidney. And serum creatinine and urea nitrogen
can reflect the level of damaged renal function and development stage of the
disease, so people should do regular inspection. Gene diagnosis method can show
the genetic situation of fetal in early pregnancy, which has some assistance to
enhancing the rate of eugenics.
Besides finding this disease as early as possible, effective treatment is the
key of preventing this disease progressing into Renal Failure stage. If you want
more information about related information, you can email to
email@example.com or consult us online.