What Are My Choices In Light Bulbs Today?
When Edison first invented the light bulb, no one had ever seen anything like it! Those Incandescent Light Bulbs lasted a long time, but they are not energy efficient, burned hot, and became impractical as new technologies developed. They are gradually being fazed out of production. The next generation of light bulbs was the greener Compact Fluorescent Light bulb (CFL). But CFLs came with some problems, too. The light was cold in color, but hot to the touch, and they contain mercury and they emit low-level radiation at close distances. Something better was needed. That’s why the shift to LEDs.
What Are LEDs?
Light-Emitting Diodes (LEDs) are a semiconductor light source, first appearing as practical electronic components in the early 1960s. LEDs today are used in applications as diverse as aviation lighting, automotive lighting, advertising, general lighting, and traffic signals. LEDs have allowed new text, video displays, and sensors to be developed, while their high switching rates are also useful in advanced communications technology. Infrared LEDs are also used in the remote control units of many commercial products including televisions, DVD players and other domestic appliances watches. Recently, 25,000 LEDs were used to produce a continuing art show on the northwest span of the San Francisco Bay Bridge.
Why Is Pearl Better Than Other LEDs?
Pearl’s light is omni directional.
Light from other LEDs shines in just one direction, making them basically glorified flashlights. Light from them shines in just one direction, often making it difficult to read a book, light up a room, or work at a desk—all at the same time. This is changing gradually, but the light is not as natural as the Pearl.
Pearl is cool and won’t overheat.
Other LED bulbs overheat and can cause fires. This makes them dangerous to the touch, unsafe for children to be around, and in the past, some LEDs have been recalled because they caused fires. Our LEDs are cooler than others, and our SureGuardTM patented technology solves the design flaws that caused fires and the resulting recall. SafeGuardTM actively monitors each bulb’s operating temperature in all environments. This eliminates the risk of fire from over heating by automatically turning off the LED bulb when it senses the danger—preventing damage. When our customers see LED SureGuardTM, they know they will be safe from harm.
Pearl’s quality of light is unmatched.
Other LEDs produce a cooler light, not a natural light like Pearl. It’s a very clean light, and the quality of he color is really great because it produces a more natural light, light that is like being outdoors.
Pearl is totally recyclable.
Pearl is also made of totally recyclable materials. We carefully chose the materials we use in Pearl. We actually went with high quality, expensive products like the highest thermal conductivity aluminum on the market. But we have kept the price low, because we were able to use a little bit of the aluminum.
Pearl is totally reusable.
This means that when it as the end of its life, you can mail It back to us, get a discount on the new bulb, and we will actually repurpose Pearl and create a whole new light bulb with it.
Why Choose Efficient Now LED Lighting Products?
It’s very clean light. It’s beautiful light. The quality of color is really great. When you can get a light bulb that is cool to the touch, safe from overheating, has no UV light, is mercury free, and is totally recyclable, why wouldn’t you choose it?
What Are Common Problems With CFL Bulbs?
Here are just a few reasons to think LED instead of CFL.
Limited warm color
CFLs produce blue white light that makes rooms look dull and people look pale or washed out.
Poor color rendering
Products under thefuorescent light ofCFLs look nothing like the products under natural sun light, resulting in dull, uninspiring environments.
Fluorescent products must operate on alternating current resulting in “ fickering lights”,particularlywhenyoufirstturnthemon.
Lifespan does not live up to claims
CFL manufacturers claim up to 10 years of life,butthis is only true in limited situations. In many cases, CFL lifespan is only 1 year or less.
When changing a CFL many individuals, with a simple twist, shatter the CFL releasing mercury and broken glass.
High operating temperature
CFLs operate at a temperature that can cause 3rd degree burns.
Produces harmful UV radiation
CFLs emit UVa and UVc radiation making CFLs dangerous to close proximity exposure for extended periods of time in close proximity.
Made of hazardous materials
Fluorescent products including CFL bulbs require mercury to function. It is impossible to make CFLs without hazardous materials.
Difficult to recycle
Fluorescent products need to be disposed properly. The majority of CFLs today are not recycled and end up in landfills.
What Are Common Problems Associated With Incandescent & Halogen Bulbs?
Here are some shortcomings for these bulbs.
Short life—frequently replaced
Incandescent and halogen bulbs require multiple changes per year resulting in high maintenance cost and general inconvenience.
Insufficient light sources – better at heating rather than lighting
Incandescent and halogen bulbs convert only 10% to 20% of electricity into light. The remaining electricity consumed is converted into heat.
Poor lighting choice for high ceilings
Short life, typically 1000 hours, means multiple changes a year making high ceilings difficult to manage and maintain.
Incandescent warm color limitations
Art containing cool colors such as blues and greens will not look as good under incandescent lighting as they will under lights with a higher color temperature.
Incandescent bulbs are made of thin glass that is easily broken when mishandled.
Unsafe operating temperature
Incandescent and halogen bulbs operate at a temperature that can cause 3rd degree burns
Conventional light bulbs cost time and money.
CFL, incandescent and halogen bulbs tend to fail before their expected end of life. Replacement costs add up.
How Safe Are LEDs?
Recently, over 500,000 LED bulbs were recalled from the US market. These were considered standard (even industry leading) products in the LED market.
Manufacturers of those LEDs were well known: Sylvania, Westinghouse and Lighting Sciences. The retailers are also well known: Home Depot and Lowe’s among others. These products were also UL approved; however, even UL approval did not catch the flaw in their designs, which caused fires in homes and businesses.
Our LED SureGuardTM patented technology solves the design flaws that caused the recall by actively monitoring each bulb’s operating temperature in all environments. This eliminates the risk of fire from over heating by automatically turning off the LED bulb when it senses the danger—preventing damage.
When our customers see LED SureGuardTM, they know they will be safe from harm.
Download this brief brochure to learn more.