The food of Israel has developed a wide mixture of flavors. Israeli cuisine can be divided into two categories: Ashkenazic and Sephardic, they are connected to the Jewish people. Ashkenazic is from east and west Europe while Sephardic from Middle East countries. Ashkenazic food carries sugariness in its flavor whereas the Sephardic is spicier and has a different aromatic flavor.
Some popular appetizers are Baba Ghanouj (Eggplant with Tehina), Burekas , Chopped chicken livers, Eggplant (Turkish style), Felafel (Chick-pea patties), Hummus, Tehina and Vegetable salad. Soups are Borscht (Beet Soup), Chicken soup, Ciorbă (Picante vegetable stew), Matzo Ball Soup, Meat borscht and Tarato (Yogurt soup). Snack foods that invented by the Israeli are "Bamba" and "Bisli". Bamba is a soft peanut-flavored and Bisli is crispy and comes in several flavors, including BBQ, falafel, onion and pizza. "Krembo" is popular in the country as an alternative to ice-cream, wrapped in aluminum foil, and has a round biscuit covered with a marshmallow coated in chocolate.
Some popular main dish in Israel are Shishlik (cooked with beef or lamp, salt, pepper, garlic, oil); Moussaka (prepared with ground lamp, eggplants, chopped onion, eggs, flour, vegetable stock, tomato paste, garlic, corn starch, oil and salt); Chicken paprika (ingredients are pullet, salt, flour, pepper, chicken fat, sliced onion, paprika and boiling water); Malawach (cooked with water, flour, salt, margarine, sour cream and tomato sauce); Kebob or small hamburgers (combine with ground beef or lamp, ground cumin, chopped parsley, water, salt, pepper and onion); and Latkes (ingredients are potatoes, flour, egg, oil, pepper, onion, apple sauce and sour cream).
Typical cakes and desserts found in Israel are Fruit salad, Honey cake, Kichlach, Sponge cake, Wonder cake, Rugelach and Baklava (honey and nut pastry). Some notable beverages in the country are Mint tea (prepared with sugar, mint leaves, lemon salt, boiling water and tea bags); Turkish coffee (ingredients are ground Turkish coffee, sugar, cardamom pods to taste) and Egg Cream (Chocolate milk soda).