The Author is speaking about literal hope and how it never leaves us. She talks about how it lingers in our soul and it will always be there. It then goes on to say that in our toughest times and when we think we have lost all hope because our pain or struggle is so extreme. You can still find hope because it never leaves your soul. At the end it talks about how hope will help you through the little storms or even big storms and it will never ask anything of you. It's like a person who gives and expects no favors in return.
In the first stanza of the poem it gives off a very good visual of what she is comparing hope to. She compares the feeling of hope to a bird. Her use of the word perches makes it very easy to imagine a bird sitting on our soul waiting to be called on. I think how the poem says "And sings the tune without the words-" helps that visual as well because birds can't sing the words but they can only sing the tune.
In the second stanza of the poem it shows a lot of imagery. On the second and third line it says " And sore must be the storm - That could abash the little bird" it gives you that good image of a bird being intimidated by something that's bigger than it. It's a great example of something that makes us loose hope in our selfs. Just like that little bird. It also says on the last line "That kept so many warm -" that gives feeling out of the poem because that bird (hope) was once so great and it helped everyone and it got you through it, But then the storm (struggle) makes it week and discouraged comes. It says that storm has to be sore or large to discourage the bird (hope). So I think it gives off a good vibe that our hope is always there and it's very hard for it to go away.
In the third and final stanza it once again gives off good imagery of you having hope through anything and everything. It says "I've heard it in the chillest land - And on the strangest Sea - " It gives off the feeling of our trials and hardships in our life. In the last two lines it says "Yet - never - in Extremity, It asked a crumb - of me." I think these two lines gives off like a little emotion because it makes you realize that hope is actually always there.