State Newspaper Supplements -- Holocaust Supplements
A special supplement from the Columbia Holocaust Education Commission.
Columbia Holocaust Education Commission -- Holocaust in SC Exhibit
The Commission has recently placed online their Holocaust in SC exhibit. For details click the link above.
South Carolina Council on the Holocaust Virtual Library -- Resource Guide
Currently under development, the South Carolina Council on the Holocaust Resource Guide contains materials, particularly for teachers, that can be used in educational programs. The guide is divided into three main parts: overviews, lesson plans, and student handouts. In addition, there is a Glossary, a time-line, and an annotated bibliography.
South Carolina Teaching Learning Connecting -- http://www.sctlc.com
A service of the South Carolina Department of Education in partnership with Marcopolo, the SCTLC search engine uses a local database of resources and a specially designed web spider that returns lessons plans from a select group of websites chosen by Education professionals in South Carolina.
Holocaust Memorial Museum -- http://ushmm.org/
This web site has many
pages of valuable information. You will find Academic Publications, Calendars,
the Center for Advanced Holocaust Studies, Collections & Archives, the Committee
on Conscience, Days of Remembrance, Education, the Holocaust Learning Center,
Holocaust-Era Assets, International Information, Internships, the Library, the Office of Survivor Affairs, Online Exhibitions, the Registry of
Jewish Holocaust Survivors, the Speakers Bureau, the United States Holocaust
Memorial, the Council, and Web Links
ETV Holocaust Forum -- http://www.myetv.org/holocaustforum/<
This web site was designed to provide access for teachers to a variety of resources in order to instruct their students about the Holocaust. It contains the curriculum package South Carolina: Lessons from the Holocaust and a description of videotaped interviews with survivors and liberators. You will also find information a bibliography, a Speaker's Bureau, and Other Curriculum Resources.
Charleston's Jewish Heritage Collection -- http://www.cofc.edu/~jhc/
This web site is from
the Robert Scott Small Library at the College, and it has information about the
collection. It also includes pages such as SC Jews Tell Their Stories,
Oral History Archives, Field Work Files, and Publications. This collection
is not specifically about the Holocaust, but it does contain valuable background
Council on the Holocaust -- http://www.ncpublicschools.org/holocaust_council
This web site is for
our sister organization in North Carolina, which is part of the N.C. Department
of Health and Human Services. It includes sections on Commemoration,
Teacher Workshops, Publications & Videos, and Speakers. Its mission
statement also appears on the home page, along with important upcoming dates.
Jewish Historical Society -- http://www.jewishsouth.org/main.htm
This web site is about
the Jewish experience in the American South from the Colonial period to the
present. There is information on previous and upcoming conferences,
information about the Society's journal, a Southern Jewish Travel Guide, and the
President's Welcome. You can also join their mailing list for web site
USC Shoah Foundation -- https://sfi.usc.edu
This web site is Dedicated to making audio-visual interviews with survivors and witnesses of the Holocaust and other genocides a compelling voice for education and action.