Steps to Calculus with 6 yo. Step 2
Today we explored the concept of "rectangles and a few more". Let me explain.
We started talking about measurements. And had fun drawing different objects and figuring out their measurements using our blocks. And recording them as factors of a rectangular. Here are a couple of our examples.
Measuring the door of the house and recording our results: (5)(3)
Measuring this cute chimney 🙂
Making lots and lots of fun stories along the way....
Then we talked again about modern architecture and of course one of its best examples -- Sydney Opera House (May be because we all want to visit it some day!). I printed out the simple outline of it (kids colored it, as we discussed tessellations a bit earlier in the day).
And we started exploring different ways to approximately measure the area of its domes using blocks. We had fun!
Kids measured different domes, and attempted to count all the little squares they managed to fit in.
They got pretty good results. But then I asked them to arrange their blocks into rectangles ( and some, if the number did not work for a perfect rectangle)
We continued discussing real life examples, doing more measurements, building more rectangles. Measuring and applying math to real life somehow always fascinates kids. They also came to conclusion that it is much easier to arrange the number into rectangle and write its factors in order to figure out total, rather then just count each little block. Here is what A. said about it:
And we did lots of real life modeling with blocks, building rectangles (plus any extra, that did not fit) and writing these as mathematical sentences.
To remember the order of writing the factors, I made a little sign:
Since last time we talked about Calculus being a fun math, that helps us to measure unusual things, like domes, or ski jumps. We imagined how a good mountain skier glides along the slope and then flies in the air. That little picture helped kids to remember to first count the horizontal units and then vertical ones.