Make a Donation
About The Author
Holy Day Calendar
Free Online Bibles
Bible Reading Plan
|Get Daily Bible Study on Facebook||Get Daily Bible Study on Twitter Follow @WayneBlank|
Tuesday, August 4 2015
Isaiah 47: What Happened To The Virgin Daughter Of Babylon?
"Come out of her, My people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues"
The English-language word "Eden" originated from the Hebrew word, pronounced ay-den, that meant pleasing, or delightful. It was first used to describe the area of the Tigris and Euphrates Rivers in which the Garden in Eden (see The Garden In Eden) was planted by the LORD (see The Identity Of The LORD God).
"2:7 And the LORD God formed man of the dust of the ground [see Dust In The Wind], and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living soul [see Leaving The Soul Behind].
While humans were put out of the Garden that the LORD planted in Eden (see Which Tree Will You Pick Fruit From?), humanity remained centered in Eden until the Flood of the time of Noah (see Why Did The Flood Happen?). Humanity thereafter began again, in Eden, where the first major cities of humanity were constructed (see The First Nations Of The New World). Among them also were the defiant and rebellious builders of the "tower of Babel." It was from then that the "virgin" Eden became known as Babylon the "whore."
Over and over, humanity began as the "virgin of Babylon," but then repeatedly made itself the historic and prophetic "whore of Babylon." The terms were consistently used by the prophets in referring to times past, as well as times yet future. Regardless of the time however, Babylon became more than just a physical place; it is a state of mind, for, or against, the Word of God. "Babylon" today can be anywhere.
"47:1 Come down, and sit in the dust, O virgin daughter of Babylon, sit on the ground: there is no throne, O daughter of the Chaldeans: for thou shalt no more be called tender and delicate." (Isaiah 47:1 KJV)
Isaiah's references to the "virgin daughter of Babylon" were also transcendent of his own time (see also The Time-Telescope View of Cyrus of Persia). The choice applied to all people, of all time.
"47:1 Come down, and sit in the dust, O virgin daughter of Babylon, sit on the ground: there is no throne, O daughter of the Chaldeans: for thou shalt no more be called tender and delicate. 47:2 Take the millstones, and grind meal: uncover thy locks, make bare the leg, uncover the thigh, pass over the rivers. 47:3 Thy nakedness shall be uncovered, yea, thy shame shall be seen: I will take vengeance, and I will not meet thee as a man.
This Day In History, August 4
70: Roman forces continued their siege of Jerusalem that resulted in the destruction of the city and the Temple (see What Did Jesus Christ Say About Those Stones? and A History Of Jerusalem: The Temple Of The LORD; also The Temple Vessel Prophecies Today).
1060: Henry I of France died and was succeeded by Philip I.
1265: King Henry III put down a revolt of English barons lead by Simon de Montfort.
1521: Pope Urban VII was born as Giambattista Castagna. He was elected Pope in September 1590, but died of malaria before his coronation.
1578: A crusade against the Moors of Morocco was routed at the Battle of Alcazar-el-Kebir (see also Constantine's Crusades In History And Prophecy).
1586: A plot to kill Queen Elizabeth I was discovered. Anthony Babington, supporter of Mary, Queen of Scots, planned to kill Elizabeth and her ministers and assume power with the aid of English Roman Catholics and Spanish soldiers. Babington and others were executed for high treason.
1704: During the War of the Spanish Succession, a joint Anglo-Dutch force attacked and captured Gibraltar.
1914: Germany invaded Belgium, causing Britain to declare war on Germany. By midnight of that day, 5 empires had entered the First World War: the Austro-Hungarian empire against Serbia; the German empire against France, Britain and Russia; the Russian empire against Germany and Austria-Hungary; the British and French empires against Germany. Many believed that the war would be "over by Christmas" (listen also to our Sermon The European World Wars).
1916: Denmark agreed to cede the Danish West Indies, including the Virgin Islands, to the United States for $25 million. The deal took effect the following March 31.
1927: The Peace Bridge between Canada and the U.S. was opened.
1944: After two years hiding in an Amsterdam back room, Anne Frank, her sister, her parents and four other Jews were discovered by the Gestapo (a German abbreviation for "The State Police"). The diary she kept was found after the war, published in over 30 languages and turned into a play and film.
1944: Royal Air Force pilot T. D. Dean became the first pilot to destroy a German V-1 "buzz bomb" (similar to a modern-day cruise missile) when he tipped the pilotless craft's wing, sending it off course.
1954: Britain's first supersonic fighter plane, the English Electric Lightning P-1, made its maiden flight.
1964: The U.S. warship Maddox reportedly clashed with North Vietnamese gunboats in the Gulf Of Tonkin, in North Vietnamese waters off the coast of North Vietnam, resulting in President Johnson ordering the first bombing of North Vietnam in the Vietnam civil war (Vietnam had been divided into north and south by colonial France in the 1950s). Later historians and investigators questioned whether the incident, and a similar reported incident later (called by some the "ghost" attack because there may have been no North Vietnamese coastal defense ships at all present the second time) actually happened, or whether it was merely a false or provoked excuse to begin bombing North Vietnam.
1997: The world's oldest person, Jeanne Calment, died aged 122 years and 164 days in Arles, France.