Car Air Conditioning Information
This section hopefully answers any questions you may have, such as how the system works, as well as some tips on how to get the best out of your car air conditioning system.
If you still have any nagging questions not answered, let us know and we’ll try and help.
Auto air conditioning systems consist of 7 main items:
- Expansion valve
Why is my car aircon not working?
Your car air conditioning may not be working for a number of reasons. It may not have enough refrigerant, it may have leaked out as it does over time or you may have a fault, such as the compressor no longer functioning, the pressure switch being broken or there not being enough oil in the compressor, making it noisy. A whole host of reasons. If it’s not working, then call a car air conditioning specialist, such as ourselves, to come and look at it, diagnose the problem and then fix it.
Air conditioning lines
The car air conditioning lines condense cold air (they work like a radiator), act like a filter, pump liquid gas through the system, create cold air intake through air vents and transport gas to each system
The aircon compressor is the heart of an air conditioning system. It takes refrigerant as a low pressure gas, pumps it up to a high pressure gas, and circulates it into the discharge hose. Compressors are much like little engines. Most of them have pistons, piston rings, a crank shaft and bearings, just like a car engine. They need to have oil circulated through them to lubricate all the moving parts. This oil is mixed into, and carried with, the refrigerant. That is why running an air conditioner without any refrigerant is like running your car’s engine without any oil. We have parts to fit all makes and models.
1. What are the benefits of air conditioning?
- Efficient cool air in summer!
- Warm dehumidified air in winter; easily demists steamed up windows!
- Filters pollutants/airborne particles, inc. pollen, helping allergy sufferers!
- Pleasant and odour free vehicle atmosphere at all times.
2. What causes the smell in my A/C system?
The origin of the smell is caused by fungus, bacteria and other microbes growing inside the evaporator core. The moisture-laden environment is very conducive to the growth of these organisms. As automakers downsize components to save space and weight this problem has increased. Because the automakers made the evaporator smaller, they added more fins and packed them closer together to increase the efficiency of the evaporator. While this has made the evaporator more efficient, it has also made it more prone to trap moisture that contributes to the growth of these organisms. We offer a full odour removal service using the latest research, tools and equipment. Contact us to find out more.
3. Does A/C use more petrol?
The answer to this is ‘yes’, it does, but not by much. But think of the alternatives. You could have the windows open, but that would increase wind resistance which can add up to 10% to your fuel consumption, especially at speed, and don’t forget the extra noise and pollution through that open window. Also, it’s worth pointing out that you should run your air conditioning at least once a week, especially in winter, as the seals can seize up through non use, potentially costing you more in future in new parts and repair!!!
4. Why does my car need an air conditioning recharge?
Your air conditioning system can lose up to 15% of it’s coolant every year, so a 3 year old car may have lost almost half it’s coolant, seriously impacting on the performance of the system and damaging the components involved. You should regularly have the air conditioning systems serviced to reduce wear and tear on the components and help avoid potentially big repair bills. We offer recharging and servicing.
5. Why should I get my air conditioning serviced?
As previously mentioned, through non use, seals can seize. Your car manufacturer, when they service your car, only tests to see if the air conditioning works, not that all the components are in full working condition. Regular air conditioning system servicing ensures the system is full of coolant, that there are no leaks, that the pressure is correct and that the hoses, seals and pipes are all in full working order.
6. What’s the best way to run my air conditioning?
Turn the air conditioning on, ensuring that it’s not set to ‘economy’ mode. When you first get into a hot car, open the windows, ensure that the air vents are set to face level and the system is set up to do the same, not pointed at your feet. Remember cold air falls. Turn the temperature as low as it will go, and the blower as high as possible. Also, make sure that the air is on ‘recirc’ mode and not taking air from outside. Better to cool already cooled air!! When the temperature is more comfortable, close the windows and increase the temperature to a more suitable level as well as decreasing the blower speed. You should also point the air vents upwards to ensure the cold air flows down again