Does it hurt to shake hands? More than 50 million Americans are living with arthritis, but there are still a lot of misconceptions about this disease—particularly when it comes to arthritis of the hand. Here are some surprising facts:
1. Arthritis isn’t just an old-person’s disease.
The truth is, two-thirds of those with arthritis are under 65, including 300,000 children.
2. You don’t have to “just live with it.”
People assume that arthritis is something you have to accept. But that’s false. There are many treatment options, ranging from conservative methods to surgical solutions.
3. More women than men get osteoarthritis.
Of those with osteoarthritis in the United States, about 60 percent are women. Before age 55, arthritis can occur more frequently in men—but after age 55, the number of women with it is far greater. Why? Reasons can range from biological differences to hormones.
4. Arthritis of the hand can be the same type as other forms.
The most common type of arthritis is osteoarthritis, a progressive, degenerative joint disease. This is the type of arthritis that can affect hips, knees, and hands.
5. If you’re right handed, your hand arthritis may be in your left hand.
You may assume that because you use your dominant hand more, it could be more susceptible to arthritis. But in some forms of hand arthritis, such as arthritis of the basal or thumb joint, it occurs more frequently in the non-dominant hand.
6. Hand surgery can rescue an arthritic hand.
“Hand surgery is more delicate and fine tuned compared to the bigger joints,” said Orthopedic Surgeon Ramin Pooyan, D.O., a hand and upper extremity specialist with the Institute of Clinical Orthopedics and Neurosciences at Desert Regional Medical Center. “I became a hand surgeon because I was fascinated by the anatomy and the intricacy of the hands — how all the tendons, bones, nerves and muscles work together. If one thing is off, it affects the entire function.”
7. Surgery isn’t always necessary.
“If a finger is deformed by arthritis, but there is no pain and the movement is good, that’s not a reason for surgery,” Dr. Pooyan said. For patients who don’t need surgery, there are several over-the-counter and prescription medications, as well as cortisone injections and occupational therapy.
Members of the editorial and news staff of the USA TODAY Network were not involved in the creation of this content.