Some people excel in traditional classroom environments. Others find that online classes benefit them more. If you’re one of these four types of people, you should give online classes a chance.
Most college professors use lectures to teach students. They stand at the front of the class and pontificate about a subject while students furiously scribble notes.
That approach does not work well for most visual learners.
Visual learners usually get the best results from charts, graphs, and pictures. A long lecture just makes them bored and disinterested in course material. Smart people often get poor grades because their brains don’t operate within the traditional lecture format.
While many online classes also use lectures, they also include elements that suit the needs of visual learners. Classes for the Case Western’s social worker degree use audio, video, and static images. Students also get the chance to ask questions and share their experiences. All of these features work together so all students have the chance to excel.
Self-motivated students are independent thinkers who need to move at their own pace. Many of them feel like their college courses move too slowly.
The traditional college classroom forces these independent thinkers to learn so slowly that they often lose interest. This type of person also runs the risk of forgetting course material before they get tested. When you finished reading a book a month ago, it’s hard to remember details during a mid-term.
Self-motivated people often go on to accomplish great things. Unfortunately, college can slow their progress. Online classes make it easier for these students to learn at their own pace. This lets students progress to more advanced material instead of getting bored.
Parents don’t have the luxury of setting their own schedules. The kids often do that for them. Whether it’s a newborn who wants to eat every 90 minutes or a 12-year-old who needs a ride to soccer practice, parents only have so much control over their own lives.
Unfortunately, only 5 percent of college campuses have childcare options for students. That makes it nearly impossible for single parents to attend college. Online classes offer the flexibility that parents need to raise their children while earning degrees. Your kids may dictate much of your life, but you get to set your own schedule when you learn online.
A lot of people enter the workforce shortly after completing their undergraduate degrees. They often need the money, and they probably need a break from school. Having a full-time job, however, makes it difficult to earn a graduate degree.
Even conveniently timed night classes can get in the way of work. When you get assigned to a big project, you never know when you’ll get to leave the office. With online classes, you don’t have to worry about it. As long as you keep up with the coursework, you get to study when you have time.
Have you thought about taking classes online? What qualities make you a good fit for earning a degree online?
134 total views, 1 views today