Optical distance sensors Arduino
08 january 2017, 22:22
The objective of the optical sensor to detect the object without engaging with him in physical contact. The detection area depends on the type of sensor a method of transmitting and receiving radiation settings. Optical electronic rangefinders are used to scan individual surfaces of objects, in whole or determining the position of a group of objects in the detection area. On the basis of optical sensors create an electronic tachometers. Photoelectric sensors are used in many industries. Sensors with discrete output signal used for calculating the detection and positioning of other tasks.
Devices with analog output set to optical finders locators. A variety of sensors combined with data processing node represents a primitive model of a technical vision.
The optical sensor senses the change of the luminous flux in the controlled area caused by moving parts of mechanisms and the lack of the appearance of objects. Or Vice versa, the sensor is on a movable object and determines its position relative to the surrounding space. The simplest case of application is the installation of the fact of presence near the sensor object without specifying the distance to him. The optical sensor is used in simple automation projects including using microcontroller.
For example, for mobile robots or security systems to detect movement. The device includes two semiconductor photodevices led and photodiode or phototransistor. Led light is reflected off an object and is perceived by the photodetector. The article deals with optical distance sensors Arduino contains the led infrared IR radiation. Presented here are examples of optical distance sensors Arduino category belong to the class of diffuse sensors. The name of the class arose from the distribution reflected in many directions of diffusion of the radiation surface obstacles.
The principle of operation consists in determining the illumination of photodiode infrared radiation reflected from the object. The electronics amplifies the current of the photosensitive element converting it into an output signal. If IR radiation is not returned then the output state will not change. Such sensors are inexpensive and easily installed solution. As they work with reflected light there is a measurement error of the distance of the reflection from objects of different colors made from different materials. High precision is only possible for relatively short distances.
This shortage is deprived of sensor GP2Y0A21YK0F is given in the last article. The GP2Y0A21YK0F sensor uses the triangulation principle and not a measurement of level of illumination of the photodetector. So it is used.
Save as PDF
Save as image
Tuning of weapons, rails for optics, collimators, Saiga, butts, forearm, teles
How to choose a scope?
Repair optical levels
FOCL - fiber optic communication lines FOCL
Section contains information about FOL
DVD Rom or optical drive
What's inside? CD-DVD
Classification of dyslexia
It is based on different criteria:
symptoms, the severity
Optical sight PSO-1
2Д450 machine coordinate of rastochnykh, description, specifications, characteristics
Pyrometer — what is it? Description of working principle and operating rules
The basics of control system and instrumentation - articles Ua.Automation.com
What is a 3D scanner? All about the application and device of three-dimensional scanners in one article!
The choice and characteristics of the drives
The device of microscope and its function
Optical sight PSO-1 is one of the basic domestic sight sniper weapons.
History of photography and cameras
The device of a film camera
Device digital camera
CHAPTER IV. ELIMINATION METHOD DYSLEXIA. BASIC PRINCIPLES OF SPEECH THERAPY TO ELIMINATE DYSLEXIA
ORDERING A CALL
Ethernet, E1, V. 35 STM-1 optics
The Converter interfaces
SDH multiplexers, STM 1, STM 4, Ethernet, E1
Modems over copper G. SHDSL
PCM multiplexer (FXO, FXS, E&M, RS232
Presentation-presentation on the theme of "Dysgraphia"
Protractor: the variety of tool how to choose and how to use
A classification of types of computer mouse
Science and technology
, , ,
How to lay cable in the sewer?
Optical communication has bypassed the High End side [translation]
the input optical cable to the building
Why do you need an optical drive in the computer?
Storage device information.
This video is not available.
How does it work? Fiber
The computer at home
Test methods of optical cable
The Magazine "Kvant"
The prize winners for physics
Jl. Optical phenomena
CSU-01(02,03,04) Device loopback control
The external storage device. The external memory of the computer. The optical drives. Flash memory. Flash drives.
190013, Saint-Petersburg, Moscow, Russia Ruzovskaya str., 21 Nagatinsky
Optical sights for carbines
How to choose scanner?
SVD — Dragunov Sniper rifle cal. 7.62 mm.
The coolest optical illusion
Promotion! Special offer up !
Order your M-AUTO and get the Tool to protect the glass AQUAPEL for free!
Protective optical Avtopribor-AUTO 100% save You teleplione of oncoming headlights and the sun.
Appreciate the difference!
Why are there accidents o