As recently as a few decades ago, any sort of whining about sleep was seen as just that: whining. It’s actually only fairly recently that scientists have appreciated the full importance of good, regular sleep, and in particular the deep biological basis for strict sleep schedules. Understanding of our need for regular rest is leading to questions about how to schedule public school, and how to deal with daylight savings time. Now, NASA is struggling to find a solution to its own looming conflict with the human sleep cycle, when it sends astronauts to Mars.
When you step off a plane in a new time-zone, your have merely shifted your place in an otherwise static schedule. In other words, the length of a day is the same no matter where you are on the planet, so jet-lag is just the byproduct of reorienting yourself within that reference frame. Traveling to Mars, however, puts you in an entirely different reference frame. On Mars, an hour (one 24th of a day) is almost 62 minutes long, making a day last roughly 24 hours and 40 minutes. That might not sound like such a big deal (the minimum time shift we care about on Earth is a full 60 minutes), but remember that that 40 minute difference gets compounded every day.
For every day spent on Mars, the astronaut’s daily rhythm shifts away from the Earth standard by a further 40 minutes. This is like traveling most of the way through an Earth time zone each and every day, without ever stopping. The result, according to one NASA test subject who spent a month under a simulated Mars schedule, is exhaustion. Total lack of sleep is, if it goes on forever, is always fatal, but even just a series of restless nights can have a measurable effect on performance in virtually every area.
Of course, the NASA test runs all actually took place on Earth, meaning the actual sun-rises and sun-sets were on Earth time — this made it all the more difficult to keep to a Martian calendar. On Mars itself, the thinking is that properly timed periods of light and darkness might be able to help astronauts adjust to the new schedule. Research keeping isolated patients to a strict Martian light schedule seem conclusive, though: human beings simply are not wired for more than a 24-hour day.
We really can’t have our astronauts getting loopy after just a few weeks on-planet, though, so researchers have been trying to find a way to re-program the body’s sleep cycle to the Martian standard. One method showing promise is the use of light-therapy — not just using bright light to knock the rhythm off kilter, but using the light’s specific wave-length as well. Extending the human sleep cycle might be as simple as exposing an astronaut to pale blue light at the end of their day. They hope to continue their research and determine which wavelengths have have an effect and what that is at different times of the day.
Even, if not especially, if NASA solves the sleep cycle issue, the differing length of a day could dramatically influence how any eventual Martian culture evolves. It’s not just the impact of having an extra 40 minutes per day (would that make us do more, or less in a day?), but how the culture as a whole counts time, and mark days. It’s a very simple example of the nuanced physical and psychological pressures space will exert on astronauts and space settlers, subtly directing their development as individuals and as societies.