The so-called environmental exposure chamber can be used to see what happens when the weather changes or a pollutant is in the air, according to Anne Marie Salapatek, PhD, of Cetero Research in Mississauga, Ont.
One early finding of the research is that not all patients with the condition respond to the same triggers, Salapatek said in an oral presentation here at the annual meeting of the American College of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology.
The chamber allows patients to be exposed to changes in air temperature and humidity, as well as to environmental triggers such as fragrances or ozone, Salapatek said.
After exposure, the patients rated changes in three nasal symptoms -- runny nose, postnasal drip, and congestion -- while the researchers used ultrasound to measure the openness of nasal passages and weighed nasal secretions.
Patients were defined as responding to a potential trigger if they had at least a 10% decrease in the cross-sectional area of the nasal passages, as measured by the ultrasound technique.
In a study of 41 patients exposed sequentially to a range of triggers, Salapatek and colleagues found:
- 51% responded to cold dry air
- 70% reacted to a change from warm humid air to cold and dry air
- 47% responded to a two-hour exposure to two parts per million of ozone
- 32% responded to a 15-minute exposure to 15 parts per million of acetic acid, which Salapatek described as "smelling like a fish and chip shop"
- 43% responded to a potpourri fragrance, with 6,000 parts per billion of volatile organic compounds
The research is similar to -- but more sophisticated than -- studies undertaken several years ago by John Oppenheimer, MD, now at the New Jersey Medical School in Newark, N.J. Oppenheimer is one of the conference organizers and was not involved in the research.
Oppenheimer said he and his colleagues used to put volunteers in a "cat house -- literally, we put them in a house full of cats" to try to test their reactions to cat dander.
The new method "is a really big innovative process," Oppenheimer said, and will help answer a host of questions about nonallergic rhinitis.
It could also be of help in testing new drugs, he said. "The next step is to see what we can do medically to help these people," he said.
The technique might also help tease out the differences between the two main types of nonallergic rhinitis, according to Gailen Marshall, MD, PhD, of the University of Mississippi Medical Center in Jackson, Miss., and editor-in-chief of Annals of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology.
Marshall said some patients have symptoms that are quite distinct from hay fever, but others have a syndrome that's indistinguishable from hay fever -- except that they're not allergic.
It may also, he said, allow researchers to characterize mixed cases -- where patients have both allergic and nonallergic rhinitis, responding to different triggers.
Lee had no disclosures.
- Reviewed by Zalman S. Agus, MD Emeritus Professor, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania and Dorothy Caputo, MA, BSN, RN, Nurse Planner
Annals of Allergy, Asthma, and ImmunologySource Reference: Lee JS, et al "Objective and subjective responses to simulated weather changes in non-allergic rhinitis (NAR) patients using a novel environmental exposure chamber (EEC) model" Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol 2009; 103(5): Abstract 25.