Cause of Varicose Veins
The cause of varicose veins can range from family history to weight problems. Varicose veins are enlarged raised blood vessels that are close to the surface and usually appear blue.
When the wall of the vein is weakened the blood cannot continue to flow properly. The blood pools and accumulates within the veins, which are burdened by the excess blood. They grow weaker and they begin to bulge.
Varicose veins are quite common. Over 50% of middle-aged people in the United States have them.
Cause of Varicose Veins
In many people the cause of varicose veins can be anything that puts excess pressure on the veins. If a diet is high in fat and low in fiber, this can put pressure on the veins because it contributes to constipation.
Inactivity, pregnancy, obesity and long periods of sitting and standing can also cause undue pressure on the legs and veins and result in varicose veins. A weakness in the veins as a result of genetics is also a common cause of varicose veins.
Women with a hormone imbalance, particularly women taking a synthetic hormone replacement, are prone to having varicose veins. Nutritional deficiencies also can be the cause of varicose veins.
Spider veins are smaller than varicose veins and closer to the surface. They look like a spider web with short jagged lines. They are found on both the face and the legs. The causes of spider veins are similar to varicose veins.
Varicose Veins Treatment
Varicose vein treatment can be quite effective at reducing the pain and the swelling. The veins can also be strengthened thereby preventing the condition from getting worse.
A high fiber diet is the best way to fight varicose veins. It reduces your risk of constipation when you eat fresh vegetables, fruits, whole grains, nuts and seeds. Consume 1 to 2 tablespoons of ground flaxseed daily, along with 10 ounces of water, to obtain healthy fiber also.
Supplements are an excellent way to treat varicose veins along with a high fiber diet. Horse Chestnut strengthens vein walls and valves. It also improves circulation and reduces swelling. Butcher’s broom is an herb that contain ruscogenins which reduce inflammation of veins.
Grape seed extract and bilberry also improve circulation and strengthens the wall vein. Vitamin E is a natural blood thinner that promotes blood flow and reduces inflammation of the veins. Witch hazel has an astringent effect on external varicose veins.
Other treatments that help or can help prevent varicose veins include not crossing your legs when sitting, exercising regularly, elevating your legs when sitting and getting up every 30-40 minutes to stretch your legs.
If you have a job where you stand for long periods of time, try to shift your weight from one leg to the other every few minutes. Avoid tight clothing as it can restrict easy blood flow.
If you have varicose veins that are swollen, red, tender and warm to the touch it is very important to see your physician. If there are sores or a rash on the leg or near the ankle, there could be circulation problems in your feet and you need to see the doctor immediately.
Doctors perform Sclerotherapy if they feel it is necessary. This is where a solution is injected into the vein that causes the lining of the vein walls to swell, stick together, seal shut and in a few weeks the vein will fade. (Sometimes more than one treatment is required.)
Nutritional Supplements Guide home page