Pendleton Indian Blankets – for many generations a part of the daily life and ceremonials of the American Indian – have been adopted for their picturesque beauty and utility by all outdoor’s folk.
“Pendletons” are servicable companions for any outdoor adventure – no hardship being too severe for the strength of their weaving or the performance of their dyes.
You will see countless “Pendletons” on the beaches this Summer – a flash of bizarre coloring – an all-protecting robe. You’ll meet them, too, when motoring, camping, canoeing, picnicing; on the verandas and in the homes. They’ll be accompanying the young folks to college next Fall – to make their appearance on the sleeping porches – at the big football games – for all Winter sports.
Ad in Vogue, July 1, 1926
Last week the Pendleton company announced it was laying off some workers and cutting the pay of others in an attempt to cut costs and to weather the economic storm. Company spokespersons cited a slowdown in sales as the root of the company’s current problems.
Pendleton is one of the last remaining American woolen mills and is still run by the family that founded it 100 years ago. It would be a really good idea – if your finances allow such an extravangance – to buy a Pendleton product or two. The blankets are pricy, but they make all kinds of gifty things such as journals and CD holders from the fabric.
A little history from the VFG Label Resource:
The Pendleton Woolen Mill opened in 1909, producing blankets with Indian designs . In time, the blankets were used to make bathrobes and coats. By 1924 the company started making the famous Pendleton Man’s wool shirt, and by 1929 they were producing a full line of menswear.
In 1949, Pendleton first made women’s clothing. Most notable was their ’49er jacket – hip length, long-sleeved casual jacket with wide collar, patch pockets and large shell buttons down the front. The 49er is still being made by Pendleton today.
For many years, Pendleton raised their own sheep and spun and wove the wool. They sold the fabric as well as the blankets and finished clothing. At one time, Pendleton used 1% of all the wool produced in the US.
Pendleton worked exclusively in wool until 1972, when they produced their first spring line. Blue Pendleton labels indicate men’s clothing, and white labels are on women’s.