The Salisbury Zoological Park is committed to enhancing our quality of life by providing a friendly, relaxing environment where educational and recreational opportunities come together through participation and interaction. With its animals, staff, volunteers, and park-like setting, the zoo encourages an appreciation of wildlife and inspires conservation of our natural world.
Tours are available for schools and civic groups, and need to be pre-booked. Call 410-546-3440 or go to the education section in our website.
[showhide type=”typeA” more_text=”School Group Trips and Programs- Click Here” less_text=”Hide Information” hidden=”yes”]
Salisbury Zoo for School Group Pre-k to 12th Grade
The Education Department offers a variety of programs. We are sure you will be able to find something to meet your needs.
We offer our Wildlife Encouter Classroom Program that is a hands-on (inquiry based) lesson. In creating a setting where students interact and physically use the information being taught, science concepts presented will be reinforced and bring those ideas to life in the student’s hands.
Choose from several theme-specific, interactive programs that utilize the zoo’s education animal collection. Topics include adaptations, food chains and classification. Approximately 45 minutes in length.
This presentation of three animals generally includes a bird, mammal and reptile, but can be tailored to your topic of study. Topics can be discussed with the education department at time of booking. Approximately 30 minutes in length.
LEAF (Local Ecology, Animals and Forests)
Program for 4th grade students focusing on local forests, their animals, uses, ecology, and threats. Approximately 2 hours in length.
Topic specific trainings are available for homeschool, preschool and classroom teachers. These trainings give a variety of ideas and ways to incorporate science across the curriculum. Approximately 2 hours in length.
We bring the zoo to you. Several of our Wildlife Encounter options are mobile. If you cannot come to us, we can come to you. With each of these programs we utilize the zoo’s education animal collection. Several programs offer a hands-on component. Approximately 45 minutes in length.