In conjunction with the opening of the World Science Festival in New York City, the Kavli Foundation announced the winners of this year's Kavli Prizes, which honor researchers in fields that really didn't exist as organized disciplines when the Nobel Prizes started: astrophysics, neuroscience, and nanoscience. The prizes are handed out every other year, and were first awarded in 2008. The first time around, it was hard to escape the impression that they were simply given to people who did significant work in the three fields, but this year's prizes seem to have focused on a single, coherent area where significant advances have been made.
This is most evident in the prizes for astrophysics and neuroscience. The Kavli Prize in Astrophysics went to a trio that did the tough engineering work that has let us overcome what once seemed like hard physical limits on the construction of telescopes. Instruments based on their work have allowed us to overcome the obstacles that made building bigger primary mirrors a practical impossibility and, in the process, enabled us to better observe the objects that are governed by the rules of astrophysics.
Jerry Nelson is honored for his work in developing segmented mirrors, like the hexagonal arrays that comprise the 10-meter Keck telescopes in Hawaii. Raymond Wilson is cited for his work in developing adaptive optics, in which flexible mirrors are rapidly adjusted to cancel out the impact of atmospheric distortions. Roger Angel pioneered the use of a stiff honeycomb backing to radically reduce the weight of primary mirrors. All of these advances have revolutionized ground-based observations, as they've enabled us to image objects that couldn't previously be resolved, such as the first exoplanets directly observed from Earth.
A similar theme prevails in neuroscience, where three researchers—Yale's James Rothman, Genentech's Richard Scheller, and Stanford's Thomas Südhof—are credited for their work in determining how signals between nerve cells are generated. Nerve cells contain a large collection of small, membrane-encased pouches of neurotransmitters, and an incoming nerve impulse will trigger them to fuse with the cell's membrane en masse. The trio of researchers have been instrumental in identifying the proteins that enable this fusion, most of which are also used by cells with less-specialized needs.
The final category, nanoscience, would seem to be themeless, as it honors Don Eigler of IBM for his work with scanning-tunneling microscopy (STM), and NYU's Ned Seeman for his development of DNA as a nanostructure scaffold. These seem to be unrelated, but it's all about control of things that are far smaller than we can see with even the best light microscopes. Eigler first recognized the potential of STM to control the placement of individual atoms, and built atom clusters that showed specific quantum effects. Seeman figured out how to use the base pairing rules of DNA to craft sequences that would allow molecules to self-assemble into various geometric shapes.
Scientific prizes are always a little odd, in that almost all research is a team endeavor, so there are probably hundreds of people behind the work that is being recognized. Still, the people who lead that work have a special combination of insight and managerial skills that is often rare, and the prize itself can be a way of highlighting how work that might have seemed incremental or trivial at the time has had a profound influence on its field.