Merry Christmas Happy New Year 2017 both are the major festival. Merry Christmas is the festival that celebrated on 24 December to observe the birth of Jesus Christ. Happy New Year is the day that celebrates the end of a calendar year to start of a new one. Merry Christmas and the happy New Year are frequently closed mutually that holiday usually starts from 24th December to 2nd of January. Have Merry Christmas and Happy New Year 2017 is what consideration a lot during this time of the year and it is a very ordinary cheer to wish somebody a Happy Holidays. However, the only comparison between Christmas and happy New Years is that they fall around each other.
Merry Christmas is a festival that is celebrated on 24th December to observe the birth of Jesus. Son of God. Celebrations during mid-December can be dated back to still before the birth of Jesus Christ. About this time, the Scandinavian people celebrated a time known as Yule. Fathers and sons would take a trip into the woods and gather as much firewood as they could. They would then flame these logs and feast until the logs died down. This lasted a good 10-12 days. The tradition of burning a Yule log is now included in Christmas. Christmas is also now related to a cheerful guy with a huge stomach that brings presents to the children over the world, known as Santa Claus.
New Years is a day that celebrates the end of a calendar year and the start of another new one. The date on which New Years is prominent differs for each culture or religion, as they all go after their own calendars. For example, Chinese New Year’s is celebrated sometime in March; while Hindu happy New Year is celebrated in October, and so forward. Merry Christmas and the New Year are celebrated all over the world people starts their celebration from the merry Christmas evening till the Happy New Year. People celebrate these festivals with full of joy and happiness and wish to each other on this special occasion. Santa Claus distributes the gifts to children n the day of Merry Christmas.
The Happy New year hat celebrated regard today’s on 1st January is according to the broadly use Gregorian calendar, which is based on old Roman calendar. Merry Christmas is celebrated with a dinner and family members, friends giving each other gifts, even as New Years is more often celebrated with Party bash, fireworks and counting down the time to the Happy New Year.
Merry Christmas Wishes“There are a lot of gifts I want to give to you this Christmas. Peace, love, joy, happiness are all presents I am sending your way.”
“Christmas time is always so hectic. That’s why I’m so glad I have a friend like you to help me out during the holidays.”
“I want to wish you and your family all the happiness and joy of Christmas. I hope we can get jointly this holiday season and use quality time together.”
“I know we are always busy this holiday season but I want to get the time to wish you and yours, happy holidays. I hope we can spend time together soon.”
“On Christmas, there’s a cause to be happy and a reason to smile, and there’s a reason why I’m sending Christmas wishes your way. You’re it.”
“The tree is decorated, the cookies are made, the gifts are wrapped; now all that’s left is to wish you a Merry Christmas.”
“Christmas is all about sharing love with your loved ones. That’s why I am attractive the time to share love with you and I hope to acquire some love back.”
“May your home be filled with the delight of the Christmas season? Here’s wishing you a holy Christmas and Happy New Year!”
Merry Christmas Status“Christmas is a time for cherishing those who fetch so many blessings to our lives. May your heart feel that love this Christmas and throughout the New Year ahead?”
“Christmas brings family and friends mutually; it helps us appreciate the love in our lives we can often take for decided. May the true meaning of the holiday season fill your heart and home with many blessings?”
“May this holiday season shine and shine, may all of your wishes and dreams come factual, and may you feel this happiness all year around.”
“During this season of generous, let us take time to slow down and like the simple things. “
“May this magnificent time of the year touch your heart in a unique way? Wishing you much pleasure today and all through the New Year.”
“Having you as my friend makes me think as if it is Christmas every day. The heat and comfort that comes with this season reminds me of you.”
“May the message of Christmas fill up your life with delight and calm? Best wishes to you and your family during this holiday season.”
“Wishing you calm joy, and all the best this wonderful holiday has to present May this absurd time of giving and spending time with family bring you joy that lasts throughout the year.”
“Take time during the hurry of the holidays to take pleasure in the things in life that actually matter. Take in the serene moments useless with friends and loved ones, and may the speculate of Christmas surround you throughout the holiday season.”
“During this time of trust and family, may the true meaning of Merry Christmas fill you with joy? Wishing you a Merry Christmas.”
Happy New Year 2017 Wishes“It’s time the to unfold new pages and start a new chapter in your life because it’s a New Year.”
“Each age has deemed the new natural year the fittest time for festal cheer.
May the coming year bless you with life’s every wealth.”
“Hello! I am bowled over by your presence, need it next year too. Happy New Year!”
“As the New Year dawns may all darkness remove from your life and fill it up with bright hues instead.”
“Wish you all a very happy and fun filled New Year, expect there is no end to the world, there is motionless lot to be seen.”
“You are an expert when it comes to my life. Be with me forever. Happy New Year! “
“The sun has set on a whole year but it is about to rise on a brand new one. Happy New Year!”
Happy New Year 2017 Status“New Year may you expel all your fears, doubts and worries as you make room for dreams, aspirations and joys.”
“As this year is stuffing its bag, I wish for you that all the pessimism and troubles also do likewise, and the New Year bring success and coveted results for you.”
“Every New Year we dream of a better world for us and ours. This Year let us take up the responsibility to make the world a better place for you, me and everyone else.”
“This New Year may you have the power to rewrite the story of your life the way you want it to be.”
“This New Year never let sadness and disappointment cloud your clarity and positivity, for it is the latter virtues that would help to bring in sunshine to your life. “
“Remember that no New Year can be perfect. But you need to ignore the negative and embrace the positive.”
“This New Year may you dive into your soul and form an everlasting friendship with yourself.”
“May each day of the New Year be special with you bounded by those who care.”