Good drainage is key to keeping plants healthy, including potted plants. Without it, roots may suffocate, burn from salt buildup or rot from water that doesn't flow through the soil. You can ensure your soil drains well not only by making sure your plants' pots can drain, but also by amending the soil to make it more porous.
Importance of Good Drainage
Plants require well-drained soil, which allows the water to flow through the soil without waterlogging. Because plant roots also require aeration to thrive, the soil should be porous enough to allow air pockets for oxygenation. Together, these factors ensure that roots don't rot. Soil should also drain well to ensure salt from fertilizer and hard water doesn't build up in the soil and burn plant roots.
If your soil doesn't drain well, you can work coarse sand or perlite into it to improve drainage. Just as important as the soil is the container. Make sure the pot has at least one hole at the bottom to allow excess water to leave the soil. Alternatively, you can fill the pot with water and give the soil a few minutes to absorb it before tilting the pot sideways to let out the excess water. If you prefer a decorative pot without holes, place a holed pot inside the decorative pot and remove it whenever you water.
Symptoms of Poor Drainage
The easiest way to tell your soil suffers from poor drainage is puddling on the surface, which indicates too much water. You may also spot white salt deposits on top of the soil, which happens when salt builds up from a combination of too much fertilizer or hard water and too little draining.
One of the main reasons for repotting houseplants is salt buildup on the surface of the soil, which indicates a need for soil that drains better. During the active growing period -- usually in spring or summer -- turn your plant's pot upside down to empty it of soil, securing the plant in place between your fingers so it doesn't fall. Once you shake the soil free, clip away brown, soggy roots that are victims of waterlogging and rot; leave only the firm, light-colored roots. When you prepare fresh potting soil for a new pot, work coarse sand into it to make it porous. Place a layer of soil at the bottom of the new container, put the plant inside and fill the pot to the brim with soil. Watering immediately afterward can help settle the well-draining soil around your plant.
- Jupiterimages/Creatas/Getty Images