A thin, typically rectangular piece of wood or glass forming or set into the surface of a door, wall, or ceiling
A thin piece of metal forming part of the outer shell of a vehicle
body panels for the car business
A flat board on which instruments or controls are fixed
a control panel
A decorated area within a larger design containing a separate subject
the central panel depicts the Crucifixion
One of several drawings making up a comic strip
A piece of material forming part of a garment
A small group of people brought together to discuss, investigate, or decide on a particular matter, esp. in the context of business or government
we assembled a panel of experts
A list of available jurors or a jury
The soft underside of a saddle, typically of foam or wool
decorate with panels; "panel the walls with wood"
sheet that forms a distinct (usually flat and rectangular) section or component of something
empanel: select from a list; "empanel prospective jurors"
jury: a committee appointed to judge a competition
(law) a group of people summoned for jury service (from whom a jury will be chosen)
a group of people gathered for a special purpose as to plan or discuss an issue or judge a contest etc
A panel is an individual frame, or single drawing, in the multiple-panel sequence of a comic strip or comic book. A panel consists of a single drawing depicting a frozen moment.
In graphical computer software a panel is : * A widget commonly packaged as part of a Widget toolkit for a graphical user interface. See toolbar and dialog box
The Panel may refer to: * The Panel (Australian TV series) * The Panel (Irish TV series)
The Panel was an Australian television talk show broadcast by Network Ten and its affiliates; it was also simulcast on the Triple M radio network. The show was produced by Working Dog Productions and included several members of the former D-Generation and The Late Show casts.
A (usually) rectangular section of a surface, or of a covering or of a wall, fence etc; A group of people gathered to judge, interview, discuss etc. as on a television or radio broadcast for example; In the comics medium, individual frame or drawing in a multiple-panel sequence; to fit with panels
(panels) The uScript Editor is made up of several key panels that provide specific functionality to the editor. These panels include; uScripts Panel, Nodes Palette Panel, Graph List Panel, Properties Panel, and References Panel.
(PANELS) Modular furniture sections used to define the limits of a workstations. Panels do not extend from floor to ceiling.
(PANELS) The spaces formed by the divider strips.
(Panels) A permanent representative sample maintained by a market research agency from which information is obtained on more than one occasion either for continuous research or for ad hoc projects.
(Panels) Fabric (usually coated ripstop nylon or polyester) sections, which are sewn together top to bottom, and attached on each vertical side to load tapes to form a gore. See diagram. ...
(Panels) Five and six-panel caps. Six panels sewn together from the crown of the cap creating a seam down the front of the cap. Good for embroidery, but not a good choice for printing. A five-panel cap has five panels sewn together to form the crown of the cap. ...
(Panels) In the context of binding, panels are engraved metal blocks used to impress a design on a large part or the whole of a book cover, producing either a blind or gilded impression (see tooling). Panels were first used in the thirteenth-century Flanders. See also blocked.
(Panels) The basic unit of storytelling in a comic book. Usually square or rectangular, panels frame the action of a comic book and graphic novel. The placement and construction of panels on a page can represent anything from movement to time.
(Panels) The different segments that make up the outside of the ball -- varies for each soccer ball design. For more information on soccer ball construction, click here.
(Panels) The images that are usually laid out within borders are known as panels.
(Panels) The panel is either captured in a groove made in the inside edge of the frame members. Panels are made slightly smaller than the available space within the frame to provide room for movement. Wood will expand and contract across the grain. ...
(Panels) The separate sheets of neoprene that are joined together to make the wetsuit. As neoprene technology has moved on, the number of panels used to make a wetsuit has reduced, meaning less seams and a more flexible suit.
(Panels) The viewing areas in which you work. Orthographic views and a perspective view panel.
(Panels) These are the smaller windows in Flash that have all the options and parameters for making work in Flash. For example, the text panel, for making text, or the swatches panel for choosing color.