How to get started
The first step towards successful breastfeeding is to make the decision before having your baby. It's a good idea to talk to someone with experience, seek information, read books and magazines or surf the Internet.
Breastfeeding can begin immediately after the baby is born. In most maternity wards babies are put on their mother's stomach straight after birth.
This first close contact greatly promotes breastfeeding. Immediately after birth, the baby is often awake. It eagerly searches for the breast and wants to suckle.
The baby can be helped by carefully supporting it under the soles of its feet, so it can crawl or push itself up from the stomach and all the way to the breast. It will search for the breast and start suckling as soon as it is there.
It's important that the breasts are stimulated, as soon as possible, because the quantity of milk partly depends on how often the baby suckles.
How is the baby placed at the breast?
Firstly, the mother should sit up as comfortably as possible, so that the back and arms are well supported, with pillows behind your back.
Then the baby should be laid close to the mother. The baby should be lying with its stomach facing its mother's stomach, with its head bent a little backwards. This way its nose is automatically free of the breast. The baby can be supported on a pillow as it lies 'tummy to tummy', so that baby is level with the breasts and not straining to reach the nipple.
How to get the baby to suckle
Most babies are eager to suckle, as soon as they feel the nipple against their cheek.
If the baby is not reacting, or is too sleepy, the suckle reflex can be stimulated by gently stroking the baby's cheek and lips with the fingertips. The baby will then turn its head and search for the nipple with an open mouth. Do not stroke both cheeks because it will confuse the baby!
The same sort of stimulation can be used if you find that the baby is either drinking slowly or is falling asleep at the breast.
There are two types of breast milk: the thin watery milk that satisfies the baby's thirst – and then after a few minutes, the richer, creamy, protein-rich milk comes through.
The baby needs both types of milk, so the baby should be at one breast for a reasonable time before moving on to the other breast. Many people say that 20 minutes is long enough before switching sides.
Is the baby suckling as it should?
For the baby to suckle properly, the nipple has to be well inside the baby's mouth. The whole nipple, and its brown circle, has to disappear into the baby's mouth, or the baby will not be able to create a vacuum between its tongue and the soft back part of its palate.
If the baby only suckles the tip of the nipple, it will not empty the breast and the nipples will become sore. Carefully put the tip of the little finger in the corner of its mouth. Then the baby will let go of the nipple and feeding can start again.
Let the baby open its mouth wide (stroke its cheek) to begin suckling. This correct 'latching on' is most important to successful feeding, so do persevere and ask for help, if you're struggling.
How do you get the baby to let go of the nipple?
If you're not happy that the baby is correctly 'latched on', with the whole of the nipple and surrounding area well in to its mouth – don't be afraid to gently take the baby off and try again.
If the baby is pulled away in the middle of feeding, the mother's nipples will become sore quite quickly. Instead, put the tip of the little finger in the corner of the baby's mouth and he or she will automatically open his or her mouth. This will break the vacuum that the baby creates in its mouth to suckle.
How does the milk get produced?
The amount of milk produced depends on how often the baby suckles.
When you feed the baby, the suckling motion causes hormones to be released into your bloodstream from the pituitary gland in your brain. The hormones released are oxytocin and prolactin.
Oxytocin causes the mammary glands in the mothers' breast to contract, so milk is released and flows to the baby. Many women experience this as a pulling sensation or a tingling in the breasts, when the baby begins suckling. The prolactin controls the amount of milk produced.
How often your baby suckles controls the amount of milk produced, but this does take a few weeks to settle down.
In the early weeks, it can feel as though you have too much or too little milk. This is normal and if the baby is allowed to suckle regularly, the 'supply and demand'' system will settle down, until your body is producing exactly the right amount of milk for your baby.
How do you know if the baby is getting enough milk?
Good clues to be aware of include:
- the baby wets six to eight nappies a day.
- the baby gains 100 to 200g each week (around 400 to 800g each month).
- the baby looks normal, has a nice colour and smooth skin, reacts normally, is strong and moves normally.
If the baby is gaining weight properly and wets the right number of nappies every day, there's no need to worry – even if he or she wants to be fed often. All babies are different and some have a greater need for feeding and contact.
Many new mothers are worried in case they don't have enough milk.
The amount of milk is not dependent on the size of your breasts, as both small and large breasts contain almost the same amount of mammary glands. Only the fatty tissue varies.
On the other hand, it's important to believe in yourself and to want to feed. Your body has the capability to feed, so if feeding is difficult, don't give up. Be confident that with support, you can overcome any outside factors causing difficulties.
Remember to eat a well-balanced diet yourself, to make the best quality milk for your baby.
A good lunch is especially important: lean meat, wholemeal breads or pasta, fruit and vegetables, dairy and lots of water and plenty of rest.
What if the baby is sleepy and doesn't want to drink?
Some babies want to sleep all day. They drink a little at a time and not very often. If the baby doesn't gain weight and does not wet six to eight nappies a day, discuss the options with your midwife or doctor.
Change the breast every 20 minutes to maintain the baby's interest and to get them to drink as much as possible. It helps to hold the baby a lot, stroke its entire body and massage him or her gently. Caressing or talking to your baby stimulates them to wake up.
Other people also read:
Breastfeeding or formula?: is it all right to use formula?
Sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS): which babies are most at risk?
Vitamins, minerals and supplements: which vitamins do we know about?
Allergy tests: listed here are the most commonly used tests in dermatology.