The evaporator coil behind the cover on the back wall inside the freezer will ice up under normal conditions. Every 8 to 10 hours for around 20 minutes the electronic adaptive defrost control) will turn the defrost heater on to melt the built up ice. There is a defrost thermostat which prevents the heater from overheating the freezer by breaking the heater circuit when the temp reaches close to 32 degrees F. The entire cooling system shuts off during the defrost cycle and starts back when the timer advances through the cycle.
If this ice is not melted it will continue to build up until the air can’t flow over the coil to circulate the cold air through the freezer and into the fridge. The temperature change in the fridge is usually noticed first followed by the freezer.
If the defrost thermostat is bad, it can prevent the heater from coming on OR it won’t turn the heater off when it gets too warm. It is clamped to the evaporator coil at the top to sense the temp.
With an ohm meter it should show continuity when cold and none when warm.
you have an adaptive defrost control instead of a timer, replace it if the heater and thermostat test good. It is located on the back. It's part 801 in this diagram and parts list.
Based on the other diagrams you have a fan in the freezer (evaporator fan) and one underneath near the compressor. Condenser fan. here is a link to your diagrams. The sealed system and motherboard is where the control is.
Suggested Questions/Answers :
It is recommended you read all this kind of situations
GE Profile Mdle PSC25SGSC SS Ser #FL410278
about 4 years old.
Problem: Freezer gets warm - ice melts in ice tray and drips down and freezes in big icecle as the system recovers by itself and freezes again. It will then make ice and a day or less later, start to melt and drip then repeat again with no apparent timing cycle. It may make and keep ice for two days and maybe not. Of course the refrig gets correcspondingly warmer at the same time. The temp readings appear false as it may
The evaporator coil behind the cover on the back wall inside the freezer will ice up under normal conditions. Every 8 to 10 hours for around 20 minutes the electronic adaptive defrost control) will turn the defrost heater on to melt the built up ice ...
I bought magic chef refrigerator (3.6 c.c ,model MCBR360HW) two days ago,but the freezing compartment does not make ice.Acc. to instruction manual they said to keep the temperature setting at # 5 for ice making,don't you think it will make ice at setting 3 and 4 also,if not then how long should I keep it for making ice at max.temp.setting and then reset to the previous setting.Is there any manufacturing fault or not.
Fridges work at +2C to +5C which should be setting #1 through 4,you only need to use the lower settings for very warm/hot climates,so no it wont make ice at thes settings and if you set it too low you will frost damage your salad/greens.\012muc ...
Magic Chef Refrigerators
I have the top/bottom model. 7yrs old.
The fridge is on but not very cold.
The freezer is cool & keeps ice solid but will not freeze meet or frozen veggies.
Fan will not turn on.
The fridge was turned off at one point and vaccumed any dust.
I ran the ice maker 3 days in a row which I normally do not. And then one day it quit making ice and from then on does not get cold. It reminds me of my car air cond/it needed freeon. Does it sound similar?
I could be a bad control board, relay, fan, or poosibly thermostat not turning the compressor on, or you're right, the compressor could be a little low on freon. Here is a general troublshooting aid:\015\012 ...
I have a Kitchenaid refrigerator that the coil in the back of the freezer will freeze up and not make ice or keep things cold. Had this problem a few years ago,after a power outage and a service tech checked it out saying because we didn't let it defrost all the way that it would cause the defrost control to fail. Anyway I replace the control two weeks ago and the fridge works fine for about 2 or3 days before it start doing this all over again. Can some one give me a hint of what to do to fix
KitchenAid Model: KSSC42QTS
My fridgedaire side by side freezer's condensor is freezing over and warming the fridge side, I defrosted it the fridge side is keep cool enough to keep food but the freezer side will not get cold to freeze items nor make ice. The fan for the evaporator works but the ice maker no longer turns I thought it might be the thermostat but I just wanted to get some advice before trying to fix it myself or calling a repairman
Hello,\012This is a type of faulty you can handle yourself, most times this is a bad cold control, but there are other things to check for. Make sure the condenser fan is working and the coils are not covered with dust. A separated heat exchanger ( ...
The water tube in my GE (side by side refrig) ice maker keeps freezing. When the ice tray does not get the water, it calls for more. the water ends up spraying all over the inside and freezing because the tube keeps freezing up. If I take the tube out once a day I can sometimes prevent this. I can never leave the ice maker on for extended periods of time. I have lowered the freezer temp and reduced the water feed to try and help but this has not helped.
I'd say that micbeth1981 has some good thoughts on this one. I'd also suggest checking to make sure the tube that extends from the exterior of the freezer into the icem ...
My Frigidaire FRT21NRG gets cold in the refrigerator, the freezer also gets cold (i put a bag of ice in there and it has remained in ice form for a couple of days), but it wont make ice or it wont freeze whats already in there (ice cream, pops, icemaker wont come on). I'm assuming its not quite reaching its lower temp needed? I lost power for about 1 day recently and the problem started after the power was restored to the home...prior to that everything was working perfectly.
Frigidaire FRS3R5EMB Side by Side Refrigerator
Fridge will work for one or two days after defrosting. Ice starts to build up in the fridge and after a day of this stops making ice and a day later stops cooling properly. We have to defrost it again to get it working for two days again.
Remove the far back panel in the freezer. There is a vent between freezer and the fridge. Ice can build up there really really bad and should be cleaned out thoroughly when defrosted. ...
Amana Bottom Freezer BX21TE, P1196515WE. I clean exterior coils - everything - 2-3 times a year and cleaned unit again several days ago. Two weeks ago, noticed ice cubes were slippery. Had house power outage for 18 hrs. last week. Refrig. nows cools at 38-40 degrees and freezer at 32-36 degrees. Only get one batch of slippery ice every 24 hrs. Ice is slippery and bread does not freeze (my two indicators freezer not fully freezing). Had a thermostat that is located beside interior coils on the ri
Amana ABB1927DE Bottom Freezer Refrigerator
The Ice Maker on my GESL25JFXLB is frozen over at the opening to the shoot. The water dispenser works fine, except that when you push the paddle back to get water, you have to pull it back towards you manually to shut it off. The ice maker makes ice just fine. The ice just cant get through the shoot because of the block of ice that builds there (typically within 3 days). It gets so iced up its hard to pull open at times. I break it apart and it just keeps coming back. What can I do?
GE GSL25JFXLB (250 cu ft) Side by Side Refrigerator
Fridge will work for two or three days after defrosting. Then ice starts to build up on the freezer evaporator cover and after a couple of days of this the ice maker stops making ice and a day later the fridge stops cooling properly. We have to defrost it again to get it working for a couple of days again. Fridge model Whirlpool ED5FHEXVQ00.
The auto defrost timer of your fridge is faulty and must be changed.\015\012The auto defrost timer works with about an 8 hour cycle where the forst in the cooling coils gets defrosted by the help of an heating coil placed below the evaporator.T ...
The water line to my freezer flows fine. My problem is when making ice the water tube inside the freezer freezes up and eventually blocks water from entering the ice maker. I have cleaned and melted the water tube 5 times now and it works for a day or two then freezes up again and blocks the water from making it to the icemaker. HELP!
You need to replace the water valve. It is not sealing completely. Also make sure you have good water presure to the valve. ...
I have a JSD2789AES Jenn-Air. The ice maker has worked well for years but a few days ago it abruptly stopped making ice. Everything else works ok, Water feed, defrost, etc. I even unplugged and reconnected the ice maker using the connector inside the freezer. Also there is no ice buildup of any kind on the cube making mechanism.
I couldn't get the ice maker mechanism out of the freezer to inspect and test it. After removing an anchor screw there are two hooks on the side that look like
Hello,If your ice maker has stopped producing ice completely, check these, in this order:\015\012 \015\012 \015\012 \015\012 \015\012 \015\012 \015\012 \015\012 \015\012\015\012\011 ...
Jenn-Air JCD2295HES Side by Side Refrigerator
New (3 days old) Kenmore Elite refrigerator model 795.7103 with ice maker. Water supply line to the ice maker immediately froze up so won't fill tray to make ice. Serviceman came out and melted ice blockage in line which allowed flow (injected warm water into line). He told us to keep fridge temp at 38 or higher. With setting at 39 the line froze again. Do we keep messing with this - is there a solution that doesn't involve repeatedly thawing out the water line? Or do we tell them to take
First of all, your freezer should be much lower than 38 degrees. For the ice maker to even work proplerly it has to be below 10 F. Some models have a heater that goes around the fill tube to keep that from happening, but in my opinion, if its only th ...
Manitowoc Series 250 ice maker stops making ice after a day or two. I have to keep back flushing in order for it to make ice again.
Check the water inlet valve for a sticky solenoid. ...
Maytag model LRTD17A (16.5 cu ft) runs constantly 24 hous a day. The freezer gets cold but takes forever to freeze solids like meat, hasn't frozen a bottle of vitamin water in three days. Supposed to be frost free but has snowy ice buildup. I can feel a faint current of air from the freezer fan though I can hear the fan running strong. The refrigerator compartment barely gets cold at all. I can find no air flow into fridge compartment (should there be?)
If I unplug it for two days and plug
Normal\015\012 0\015\012 \015\012 \015\012 \015\012 \015\012 \015\012 \015\012 \015\012 MicrosoftInternetExplorer4\015\012 \015\012\015\012\015\012\015\012\015\012\015\012 /* Style Definitions */\015\012 table.MsoNormalTable\015\012\011 ...
My freezer is building ice and building in the freezer and behind the panel where the fan is. then it will not freeze. sometimes 3 days to make 1 ice tray. The refrigerator is not cooling and there is condensation dripping down. i haven;t seen any water in the drainage cup behind refrig. i have unplugged it overnight cleaned it up and made sure no more ice and it will work so-so for a day or two. i noticed the freezer gasket is cracked in a couple [places. i used silicone to seal the cracks
Sound like you have a defrost problem. The evaporator is behind the panel where the fan is. YOu will need to remove the panel, and test some of the defrosting components. Behind that panel are the heater and bi-metal. ( Bi-metal is also called def ...
The side by side freezer compartment water keeps freezing up in the bottom of the freezer - i took the back panel off and tried to melt the ice which has been accumulating and thus causing the water which would normally drain to freeze up. within a day it was back to the same problem - dont want to have to pay another $150 for a repairman. Also in the refrige door - the bottom shelf panel which holds items in, keeps breaking - i have already ordered two replacements - any other ideas?
Your evaporator coils frost up in normal use\015\012and every eight hours or so the entire unit shuts down and the defrost heater\015\012comes on to melt the frost. This cycle last about 20 minutes. The melted frost\015\012drips into a dr ...
Jenn-Air JCD2389G Side by Side Refrigerator
Over a period of days the freezer gets warm then cold. Ice begins to melt then freezes together. Ice cream gets soft, then hard. I removed the panel in the back of the freezer. Unlike other defrost thermostats, this oneclips on one of the coils but only has two wires that connect together, meaning that this device has never served a purpose, ever. The freezer fan just above the coils runs periodically, as it should.
Hi,The refrigerator is sticking in defrost mode...\012Check out these tips...they can help you figure out what is going wrong with your refrigerator and why it is not cooling ...
Amana Side-By-Side Refrigerator 26 cu. ft - ASD2628HE
My Hotpoint CTX-18E refrigerator has been doing some weird things and I don't know how to fix it (or if it can be fixed). It alternately melts everything in the freezer, then freezes everything hard as a rock. The ice maker has also more or less stopped working, cranking out maybe ten ice cubes in three days...and the main fridge section obviously isn't getting cold enough because my dairy products keep spoiling in a matter of days. Can anyone diagnose the issue(s)? Thanks!!
I bought the fridge in 2006. In 2008 it began making a loud vibrating noise. Repairman replaced the fan motor blade.Took 30 days to get part! It was never quite right after that. Had problems with defrost not working properly. Lately it is struggling to keep the fridge side cool. It will get very hot, chocolate melts! then return to normal. Finally turned it off because it is making the same noise it did the first time I had it repaired two years ago.
Could all be in the fan motor. If it's bad again, I would change the motor and blade. Then fire it back up and test for correct cycling.\015\012That may take a week of running until you get a true picture of whats happening, but they do have a ...
There is a burnt smell emanating from my freezer. The ice maker isn't making more ice. My freezer had been left ajar and there was freezer burn on several items. We shut the freezer and after two days I noticed the ice in the ice maker had solidified into a big lump when it refroze. When I tried to take it out I had to pull on the ice container to get it unstuck. After this I noticed the lights in the freezer flickered a few times, and then the smell started. I cannot turn the ice maker of
Pour about 1/2 cup of water into icemaker . If it dumps the cubes , then replace the water valve . If it doesn't , replace the icemaker . Also make sure the refrig coils are clean and free of dust , lint , pet hair , etc.... ...
Frigidaire FSC23R5D Side by Side Refrigerator
We own a RF267AARS/XXA refrigerator. Ice maker works slow. Hardly ever makes a full tray of ice in 24 hrs. Then for no reason quits making ice for 2-3 days. I the pull the ice-tray out a couple of times and then within 6-10 hrs it'll start making ice slowly. We always get ice from the dispensor located on front door. We only pull ice-tray out when it quits making ice.
Samsung RF267AABP i get one batch (about 6 pieces) of ice a day. somebody help.
You'll have to read my in depth review on Epinions.com for answers. Sounds like you bought the updated version that over corrects the "too much" ice which jams the mechanism to where it breaks the unit. This is my second friggen Samsung as my 1st 4 d ...
I have a fridgidaire model frs6r5esb side by side refridgerator. the freezer stopped keeping my ice cream frozen and eventually quit making ice. i checked the temp in the freezer and it was way too warm (barely freezing)
i pulled off the back panel of the inside of the freezer and found that the silver coil was frozen solid in a block of ice. i defrosted as much of it as i could and got about 60% of the ice off and started everything back up and it worked great for about 3 days then i saw it
Ok well believe it or not your problem has to do with a little heater... that keeps things free of ice like that, also check any drainage channels aren't blocked up where the excess drains away. it;s either not working, or the thermostat that contro ...
Where is the 690s ice maker fill tube? I am not getting ice and think the tube may be clogged with ice and needs thawing with hair dryer. Former owner says one day it just stopped making ice.
You can do that, but if it does it again you will need to order a new inlet valve. This where your water line is connected in the back. Rate me if I helped. ...
Sub-Zero 690 Side by Side Refrigerator