The soils of Asia are marked by the combined effects of climate, topography, hydrology, plant and animal life, age, and economic activities. All of those factors vary considerably from one part of that vast continent to another, from north to south, and from lower to higher elevations in mountainous regions. The soil also shows a horizontal zonality that is especially clearly defined in the continental plains.
The Arctic zone
In the Arctic, where glacial and Arctic deserts predominate, the processes of soil building occur only in rudimentary form. The soils are skeletal and low in humus. The subarctic north of Asia is occupied by a timberless zone of tundra vegetation. The subarctic climate and tundra vegetation give rise to specifically tundra-type soils, which are characterized by poor drainage (due to permafrost) and only a short period in which it is possible for organic substances to decompose. Those conditions result in the accumulation of undecomposed organic residues in the form of particles of peat. The poor drainage creates an oxygen-free medium in which a bluish substance known as gley is formed. Thus, peaty-gley soils are most characteristic of the tundra. There are widespread occurrences of movement by solifluction (or mudflows), heaving of the ground because of frost, settling or caving in of the ground from thawing, and formation of stone rings around central areas of debris in regions covered with boulders.
The forest tundra
Farther south stretches the transitional belt of the forest tundra, where tundra and sparse forest alternate with regularity. Tundra soils alternate with the soils of the taiga (boreal forest), the cold, swampy forested region. The soils below the frozen taiga are called cryogenic (influenced by frost action). In the mountainous regions the peaty-gley soils are replaced by mountain tundra and weakly developed, often embryonic soils of detritus and stony fragments.
The forest zone
The forest zone occupies the largest part of the temperate zone. Characteristic of soil formation in the forest zone is the leaching process. The forest leaves and needles that fall, together with dead remains of the sparse grass cover, are subjected to decomposition by organic acids in the litter of the forest floor. The duration of the summer season and the amount of precipitation are sufficient for complete decomposition of the soluble soil components, and the soil solutions transport them and leach them into deeper soil horizons (layers). The undecomposed quartz grains remain in the upper horizon, which is therefore infertile; that layer resembles light-gray ashes, which is the reason soils of that type are called podzols (Russian: “under ashes”). Different degrees of leaching occur in the various subzones of the forest zone. A dense rusty brown horizon of wash-down (deposition in an underlying layer of soil) underlies the podzolic portion of the soil profile (or layer); its colour is related to the accumulation of iron and aluminum oxides. That layer, called orstein, or iron pan, is impervious to water and contributes to the self-swamping of the taiga forests. East of the Yenisey River, where permafrost occurs across the entire breadth of the forest zone, soil drainage (and consequently the leaching process) is made more difficult, and the typical podzols are therefore replaced by specific cryogenic taiga soils. Marshes and bog-type soils are widely distributed over a considerable part of the taiga subzones.
Test Your Knowledge
History Buff Quiz
The deciduous forest subzones of Asia form two distinct areas. In western Siberia there are small-leafed (primarily birch or aspen) forests on gray forest soils. They are more gray in colour than the podzols because of the greater amount of organic substances—such as tree leaves and a more abundant grass cover—feeding those soils. That explains their higher humus content, as well as their greater fertility. The second section of the deciduous forest subzone has survived in East Asia, stretching from the Xiao Hinggan Range in the west to the Japanese island of Honshu in the east; in that subzone abundant warmth and moisture intensify chemical weathering, and iron oxides accumulate even in the surface soil horizons. In that manner brown forest soils, known as forest burozems, are formed.
The forest-steppe and steppe
Soil cover in the forest-steppe region is formed when the ratio of precipitation to evaporation is in equilibrium and as the leaching process of the wet season alternates with the upward flow of the soil solutions during the dry period. Under those conditions, with organic material resulting from the dense vegetation abundantly available, humus accumulation in the soil is considerable, and dark-coloured soils are formed that are the most fertile in all Asia; known as chernozems, they are the thickest of the forest-steppe and mixed-grass soils. Characteristic of the wooded-meadow plains of the Amur River basin (the “Amur prairies”) are meadow soils that are dark, moist, and often composed of blue gley. In the drier steppes, where vegetation is sparse, the amount of humus is reduced and the content of unleached mineral salts is increased; transport of the dissolved salts to the surface by the upward flow of soil solutions is also intensified. Associated with that process is a bleaching and salinization of the soil. The drier steppes thus form a transitional zone from the shallow southern chernozems to the chestnut soils. Broad expanses of the forest-steppe and steppe are under cultivation and serve as rich granaries. Severe wind erosion occurs during the hot, dry seasons. In many areas surface washout and gully erosion have also impoverished the soil, despite preventive efforts.
Semidesert and desert
Through inner Kazakhstan and Mongolia stretches a zone of semidesert, and in Middle Asia, the Junggar (Dzungarian) Basin, the Takla Makan Desert, and Inner Mongolia, there is a belt of temperate-zone deserts. A belt of subtropical deserts extends through the Levant, the Iranian highlands, and the southern edge of Middle Asia. Beneath the semideserts, with their mosaic of desert and arid-steppe vegetation, light chestnut and light brown semidesert soils form; those are low in humus but contain an abundance of strongly alkaline soil. Beneath the deserts, where the supply of organic substances, as well as the humus content, is extremely low, gray-brown soils form in the temperate zone, while gray desert soils (sierozems) develop in the arid subtropics. A great deal of saline soil is present there, and agriculture is possible only with the use of irrigation, which gives rise to specific cultivated types of sierozems.
Only in western Asia is the tropical desert zone clearly defined. Broad expanses of that area are characterized by embryonic soils and desert crusts, as well as by blowing sands.
The Asian Mediterranean
In the maritime areas of the Asiatic Mediterranean—Anatolia and the Levant—xerophytic vegetation (vegetation structurally adapted to exist with very little water) of the Mediterranean scrub-woodland types, known as maquis (evergreen), shiblyak (deciduous), and frigana (low-growing thorny, cushionlike bushes), is prevalent. The predominant soils under such vegetation are brown; they have accumulated iron as a result of the intense chemical weathering during the wet Mediterranean winter and of the upward flow of soil solutions during the dry summer. Frigana vegetation is widely represented in the West Asian semidesert highlands. Here soils have developed that are transitional between the brown soils and the sierozems.
The subtropical monsoonal regions
Typical of Asia’s monsoonal subtropics are soils that formed beneath the evergreen forests that once occupied the southern portion of the Korean peninsula, southwestern Japan, and southeastern China. Intensive chemical weathering during the warm and wet summer monsoon season results—as it also does in the more southerly torrid zones—in the decomposition and leaching of many soil minerals, the accumulation of residual iron and aluminum oxides, and the consequent predominance of red and yellow soils as well as of podzolized soils. Agriculture is especially widespread on the alluvial soils of the plains and on terraced slopes in hilly terrain, in both cases dominated by irrigated paddy-rice cultivation.
The subequatorial and equatorial regions
Savannas (grassy parklands) and dry-tropical deciduous forests predominate in the rain shadow on the leeward slopes of hills, and wet-tropical evergreen forests grow on the rainy windward slopes of hills. Intensive leaching followed by evaporation is characteristic of those soils. Under the wet-tropical forests, red-yellow laterites (leached and hardened iron-bearing soils) predominate; beneath the savannas and dry-tropical forests, there are red lateritic soils that change, with increasing aridity, to red-brown and desert brown soils. Beneath the dry savannas of peninsular India are unique black soils called regurs that are thought to develop from basalt rock.
In the equatorial zone (southern Malaysia and the Greater Sunda Islands), typical tropical rainforests have developed. In southwestern Sri Lanka and on the Indonesian island of Java, they have been almost entirely replaced by an agricultural landscape in which mountain slopes and hills are covered with plantations of tea, coconut palms, and rubber trees. The soils are lateritic and are red-yellow or brick-red, with marginal degrees of laterization.
In the valleys of the subequatorial and equatorial zones, alluvial soils predominate; they have been developed by thousands of years of cultivation and irrigation of the rice fields. Artificial terracing of the slopes is practiced on a large scale in the mountainous regions, both for purposes of irrigation and to prevent soil erosion.
In the mountains zones of different soil types are found at different elevations. As a rule they are skeletal, underdeveloped soils, clearly reflecting the differences in rock structure and origin and in the degree of exposure of the slopes. The boundaries of the vertical zones become higher from north to south, and the number of zones increases. Mountain soils also correspond to the different vegetation zones that occur at different elevations.
The vertical soil zones correlate with the landscape zones as elevation increases. A zone of forest, followed higher up by meadows and with snow cover at the highest altitudes, is characteristic of the western maritime regions. On lower slopes in the western Caucasus, for example, broad-leaved mountain forests occur on brown mountain-forest soils; above those are coniferous forests on mountain podzolic soils, followed by stunted trees, followed in turn by subalpine and alpine meadows on mountain-meadow soils, while the highest ridges are covered in perennial snow and glaciers. Associations of desert, steppe, meadowland, and snow zones are widespread in the interior of Asia and sometimes include mountain-forest zones. Characteristic of the Tien Shan, for example, is the predominance of mountain-desert and semidesert landscapes, which occur in association with gray-brown and brown mountain soils in the foothills of the ranges, while higher up are mountain steppes associated with mountain chestnut soils and mountain chernozems. Under parts of the mountain forest-steppe and the mountain forests, the soils are podzolized.
Typical of the mountains of eastern Siberia are the taiga-tundra spectra that occur in vertical zones. Thus, mountain taiga on taiga-cryogenic soils is followed by a zone of dwarfed trees, then by mountain tundra, and finally by bald peaks.
In eastern Asia the subalpine and alpine meadow zones with mountain-meadow soils sometimes disappear; instead, mountain-forest landscape extends as far up in elevation as the vicinity of the crests and is succeeded only by a zone of stunted trees and shrubs. The spectra of the alpine regions of South Asia (notably the Himalayas) are distinguished by the most complex variety of vegetation and soil types.
Effects of human activity on the soil
Virgin soils have been greatly transformed in the areas where agriculture has long been practiced. Sometimes primary soils are buried under a thick cultivated layer that is high in humus, nitrogen, phosphorus, and trace elements. The irrigated soils of valleys and deltas of the Murgab (Middle Asia), the Tigris and Euphrates, and the Indus rivers have a layer of agricultural deposits 10 to 15 feet (3 to 5 metres) thick. The “black-land” (heitu) soils of the Loess Plateau in China consist of a fertile layer 1 to 3 feet (30 to 90 cm) thick of organic material accumulated by local farmers. Rice cultivation in the monsoonal regions of Asia has a particular impact on primary-soil cover. The upper layer of those so-called “rice soils” is degraded as a result of regular flooding and is subject to the gleying process. The basic properties of those soils remain constant for centuries, but the soils do not exhibit high fertility.
The most harmful and extended phenomenon among the effects of irrigation on soil cover in Asia is that of secondary salinization. That process, which is a result of improper agricultural practices, is widespread in the soils of the arid, semiarid, and subhumid zones of Asia that are irrigated without appropriate drainage. Salt-affected soils account for large areas in Central Asia, South Asia, and Southwest Asia.
Soil degradation from erosion has also hurt agricultural production. The areas of most significant erosion have occurred in the Ganges (Ganga) River basin, the lower elevations of the Himalayas, the Huang He basin, and the Loess Plateau. Severe soil erosion has resulted from year-round cultivation of the plains and from deforestation of water-catchment areas in the mountains.