GOI UNDP DRM Programme
Tripura is prone to various natural and human induced disasters both in recurrent and non-recurrent features. The entire geographic area is prone to Earthquake which is situating on seismic zone V. Because the State is surrounded by Bangladesh and aerial distance to Bay of Bengal is less than 100 KM, the entire landmass of the State is also prone to high wind and cyclone zone-A which is very high damage risk zone. The State faces recurrent flood during monsoon and flash floods in hill areas. The rivers which have come from hills, the river beds are rising due to continuation situation. Due to this, the floods become furious and causing wide disruption to lives and property. Better part of the State is having hills and hill ranges which is prone to landslides. 60% of the State is covered with forests. During summer season, there are high risks of forest fire which affects both lives and properties. Jhum cultivations also badly affected due to forest fire and some times, the fire goes beyond control and affects the habitations nearby the forests. In the State, drought is not a common disaster, but there are incidents of dry spells during summer season. Besides the natural disasters, there are noticeable human induced disasters like insurgency, underground activities, ethnic classes, bomb blasts in the State. The GoI-UNDP Disaster Risk Management Program in Tripura initiated in November 2003, by signing MoU between Government of Tripura and UNDP. Earlier it was called as “NON-DRM STATE” because, there was no dedicated HR support at State and District level also there was provision of limited funds for few components as compared to full fledged DRM States. The programmed was implemented by State Government and monitored by UNDP Orissa Hub Office. The programmed covers all the administrative divisions in the State along with Agartala capital city for the period of 2003-08. As per the MoU, the overall outlay of the programmed is US$ 466,000.00. Total fund of Rs.190.59 lakh received from UNDP in 5 different installments.
Subsequently, several activities like constitution of Disaster Management Committees and Disaster Management Teams upto the community levels, awareness and sensitization programmes, training and capacity building, preparation of disaster management plans, mock drills organized at all levels.