Extremely weird, extremely old, extremely fast, extremely poisonous, tiny, odd, slimy, or tall animals. Your extremely reluctant math students will be extremely motivated to read about really cool animals and solve Common Core aligned math word problems related to the animals. Students will read interesting facts about their extremely awesome animals. Students need to use the information about the animals to answer the math questions.
There are a total of 20 different animals. Each animal has a total of 4 math questions related to the animal. The questions get increasingly harder, with question #1 being the easiest and question #4 being the most challenging. I assign my developing math students questions 1 – 2 and my more advanced students all four questions.
Math concepts covered – making a number line, creating groups, adding, subtracting, comparing, measurement at the second – forth grade level, all skills are align with the Common Core. These real life math word problems could also be used at the fifth grade level depending on the level of students. Please see the preview of the pages to make sure the word problems and reading level will fit the range of math abilities in your class.
There is a black and white student work mat for students to show and prove the answers to the four math questions asked about each animal. This work mat is easy to copy and can be used with each of the animals. There is plenty of room in each of the boxes for students to show their work prove their answers.
Here is what you get with this download:
Pages 1 is the cover page
Pages 2 – 21 feature 20 different extreme animals
Page 22 – work mat to be copied and used for each animal
These real life math problems strengthen so many skills. Students have to reread to find the information they need to solve their math problems. Reading skills such as vocabulary and fluency are increased since the subject matter is high interest. One animal can be used for morning work or sent home as homework.
Ideas on how to use this activity – Assign a small group or pair of students to work together on one animal. Each group has a different animal.