Recommended Method Books
Method books, also called etude books, are filled with exercises that cover the techniques needed for good overall musicianship. Below are some of the books I use in my private lesson studio for euphonium and trombone players. There are many more, of course, but these are the foundations of the comprehensive musicianship I teach my students. For more information or other recommendations, including books for tuba, please Contact Me. Lyric Etude Books: My belief is that we should strive for a vocal approach to everything we play. These books help develop that aspect of our playing. The three volumes of Marco Bordogni's vocal studies that former Boston Symphony Orchestra trombonist Joannes Rochut transcribed are still standards and are the first books I go to for lyric studies. Melodious Etudes for Trombone Book 1 Melodious Etudes for Trombone Book 2 Melodious Etudes for Trombone Book 3 Also recommended is Simply Singing For Winds (link takes you to the author's website) by Brad Edwards, DMA. This relatively new book has many folk tunes and melodies by Dr. Edwards in a variety of keys. These are shorter and more concise than the longer etudes in the Rochut books. Dr. Edwards is Associate Professor of Trombone at the University of South Carolina. Technical Studies: These books help us develop the technical facility we need to perform complex music. They also reinforce scales and key concepts that are critical to being able to play music. Arban's Famous Method for Trombone - Arban's method has been a standard for decades and will remain one of the best way to develop technique. In addition to general technique-building exercises, it contains information and exercises for lip-trills, multiple tonguing, and ornaments.
Sixty Selected Studies for Trombone, Book 1. These etudes by Kopprasch (originally for horn) are another staple. Though this book and its second volume are less comprehensive than Arban, I find the technical exercises to be more interesting.For Younger Students: My studio includes younger students as well. Below are the books I recommend for them. These venerable titles have been around for a long time, but are still very useful for students looking for studies in between their beginning books and the titles above. Rubank Elementary Method For Trombone or Baritone (Euphonium) Rubank Intermediate Method For Trombone or Baritone (Euphonium) Rubank Advanced Method For Trombone or Baritone (Euphonium), Vol. 1