Haring e-Bon has the answers to all that and more.
It’s free, and conveniently sent to your inbox once a month. By subscribing, you gain access to exclusive articles, content and photos on Haribon’s website. You’ll get to follow Haribon’s latest movements both on and off the field and stay updated on the efforts of some of the communities, organizations, governments and other NGO’s that Haribon works with.
What are the names of some of the coral that we typically see in tourism campaigns? Are most of them endangered? What is it about Philippine rainforests that make them unique? Where in the Philippines do some of the world’s largest flowers live? And what do they smell like?
This month, Haring e-Bon brings readers to the island of Polillo in Quezon province.
Gregorio dela Rosa Jr. from the Research Department shares how it’s like to work with seven communities in the area, trying to increase awareness of three coral species that are slowly disappearing due to the damaging results of cyanide fishing, the collection of corals for the aquarium trade, and the high influx of sedimentation coming in from inland areas due to logged forest shedding off loose soil into local rivers.
Learn more about Haribon’s “rainforestation” efforts, a word derived from the term “reforestation,” emphasizing the reforesting of land with trees native to the tropical rainforests of the country. Specifically Haribon’s own two-hectare nursery in Laguna province called Buhay Punlaan. Charlyne Gaile Tabaranza of Haribon’s HR department writes about how Haribon staff members worked to prepare 1,144 seedling bags that will make a temporary home for 1,144 of the Philippines’ future trees.
Get updates from the island of Panay where Haribon is working side by side with the Department of Environment and Natural Resources, local governments, and upland communities to protect the Panay Mountain range and improve the livelihoods of the people living around it.
Five threatened species, the Uroy flower (Rafflesia speciosa), the Dulungan Hornbill (Aceros waldeni), the Visayan Warty Pig (Sus cebifrons), the Visayan Spotted Deer (Rusa alfredi), and the Panay Monitor Lizard (Varanus mabitang), all live along Central Panay Mountain, alongside its unique biodiversity. Haribon, in conjunction with its partners both national and local, are working to ensure that both the communities and the biodiversity that surrounds them can support each other in a sustainable manner.
Albert Balbutin Jr.