There are a number of causes for weight gain and obesity, but the two most prominent ones are consumption of too much food rich in calories and lack of regular or sufficient exercise. When food, mostly carbohydrates that have plenty of calories are consumed, the excess calories get stored as fat throughout the body. The body stores this fat within fat cells that are also referred to as fat tissue. It does this by creating fat cells or enlarging the ones found within the body. This scenario can be altered if one decreases their food intake and consume fewer calories than the ones they burn, or by having frequent exercises to reduce some of the fat stores. If this happens, fat stores shrink together with the waistline.
In brief, the most common cause of obesity is calories that are not burned. Apart from this, other factors may lead to obesity like genetics or inherited fatness, environmental factors, use of some medication like steroids, psychological issues, physical inactivity due to injury among others. While some weight issues like those as a result of genetics may not be solved, the rest can easily be managed when one begins using garcinia cambogia Dr Oz. This natural weight loss supplement has helped a number of patients who had given up hope of ever becoming slim once again.
As much as weight loss supplements are helpful in containing your weight, it can achieve double results if used with an exercise regimen. Some of the exercises that can help a patient on garcinia cambogia supplements include; aerobics with strength training. If you are a beginner, you may start with light trainings like jogging, swimming, hiking, cycling and brisk walking. Remember not to over-exert your muscles within the first few days as this may lead to muscular pains that may kill your morale for more exercise. These exercises can be performed for at least 30-40 minutes five or four days a week.
The plyometric is also good training for someone intent on losing weight while on garcinia cambogia. These involve jump exercises that exert pressure to the muscles. Workouts such as jump squats allow a patient to utilize body weight and give high fat burning. In brief, one can readily burn fat within a very short time with the right plyometric.
Another type of training is Muscle confusion. A person can increase weight loss if their bodies become accustomed to regular exercises. The confusing technique is recommended as it adds a little spark to the regular exercise schedule. There is also the interval training which involves alternating moderate and intense exercise. A number of patients who tried exercise with garcinia cambogia were able to reduce their weight by more than double. While exercising, it is also important to consider your diet. Of course a combination of this extract and training at the gym may work well, but it is still prudent to observe what you eat. Try to consume more vegetables and fruits, reduce carbohydrates and increase the intake of fiber in the diet. If possible, one should avoid over drinking or smoking as they impede weight loss efforts.