Acnes are skin infections which may formlasting scars and marks on the face if not treated early and properly.
The more you try pestering them, the more they begin to multiply. However, they are not without their cure. Aside its skin related causes, they may be caused by hormonal actions, stress, blood issues as well as some genetic causes. There are several options available for getting rid of acne.
HOW TO GET RID OF ACNE
You may get rid of acne by doing some basic preventive exercises andusing very good treatments.
1. STOP THE TOUCHING
The temptation to pop the fluid out of acnes is one which is very difficult to resist. However, it is the touching that complicates the matter. Most people who developed acnes aggravated the situation because of continual pestering of the bumps. Touching and pressing of acnes introduces more bacteria from the hand to the skin which causes more damage. Therefore, one of the ways to get rid of acne is by not touching them. Not touching them means; no squeezing, popping, scratching or caressing.
2. REGULAR BATHING
Bathing will do three very important things for you; it kills bacteria which worsen acne, it reduces oil production that feed acnes; and it washes away dead skin cells which may host bacteria. Always remember to take your bath, especially after a sweaty activity, to remove the dead cells the body may have shredded off through sweating.
3. DAILY EXERCISE
Exercise helps in getting rid of acne that is bloodstream related. Endorphins which are released during exercise reduce stress levels which consequently reduce oil production. The sweat that is produced also wipes off dead skin cells that may harbour bacteria. Try exercising at least thirty minutes each day to get your problem solved.
4. BETTER YOUR SLEEPING HOURS
Sleeping does not only get your body relaxed and refreshed. It is the period where your body gets massively detoxified.More sleep helps your body create and replenish old cells. The old skin cells which serve as the home for these bacteria will be gradually eradicated. Science recommends that, people sleep a minimum of eight hours a day to enhance the body’s natural metabolism and functioning.
5. PROPER DIETING
Oily and fatty foods increase oil production in the body which leads to rampant acnes. Most processed foods must be avoided as they contain large volumes of oil. Properly balanced diet must be consumed as a way of getting rid of acne. Vegetables, whole grains, fruits and proteins help the skin to replace old cells and reduce or prevent excessive oil production.
6. MORE WATER
Why should we be getting rid of acne with water? Water aids the body in detoxification which also leads to the purification of the skin. General science researches have propounded that a daily intake of about 8 to 10 glasses of water a day is needed for the body’s normal metabolism.
Various chemical and herbal treatments are available to get rid of acne. Some of these are:
7. FACIAL WASH WITH OIL
Dermatologists usually advice that, people with sensitive skin types should resort to facial cleansing with oil. As commonly termed as Oil Cleansing Method, it is a gentler cleaning method. Oils recommended for this purpose are egg oil, olive oil, castor oil and grape seed oil.
8. HONEY TREATMENT
Applying honey to the skin gives it a clean and glossy touch. Its pH ranges from 3 to 6. The best exfoliating honey ranges from pH 3 to pH 4. You may get rid of acne by gently rubbing honey on the affected skin area and allowing it about half an hour to settle into the pores. Then, wash off with some warm water. Do this regularly for maximum effect.
9. EXFOLIATION WITH BENZOYL PEROXIDE
One of the ways to get rid of acne is by applying Benzoyl Peroxide. This chemical cleans dead skin cells and helps regenerate newer cells faster. Benzoyl Peroxide is contained in some soaps and lotions. Products containing more than 3% benzoyl peroxide may cause skin irritation. Use products containing less than 3% Benzoyl Peroxide to get rid of them.
10. USE TONERS
After whichever exfoliation method you may use, you should always apply a toner to your skin. This makes the skin pores tighter, hence, making it difficult for oil and dirt to be trapped in them. Acne toners are common in many drug stores; you can always get one. Apply toners on your face and allow them to dry without washing them away from the skin.
Acne is common among people with very oily skin. However, a dry skin also leads to production of sebum in the skin. Therefore, using skin moisturisers will counter-act this process and this serves as one of the best solutions as well.
This information should prove helpful in getting the job done. You may want to try other ways to get rid of acne such as using a retinoid, products containing azelic acid, getting a facial from a spa and using laser treatments.
I wish you the best in your quest.