In English this term, year 9 students have been honing their debating skills. They have been building on their speaking and listening skills and learning how to present arguments effectively. The whole year debate has now become an annual event and all staff were invited to watch the final.
The final consisted of Set 1b vs Set 2. The debate topic was 'Oscar Pistorious is receiving a fair trial'. Set 1b started the debate for the proposition. Their hard work and detailed research proved to be invaluable as they made a number of excellent points and despite set 2 injecting with challenges and rebuttals, set 1b held their own.
Set 2 as the opposition, were equally as well prepared, with Connor Eblett not only presenting a strong line of argument but handling challenges very well. Despite it being a difficult debate to judge, Set 1b finally took the lead and won on points. Well done to Mrs Crawford and her 'dream team'.
Our Year 12 Literature students had the opportunity to understand fully the conventions of comedy through a modern adaptation of Shakespeare's Much Ado About Nothing, which they are studying as one of their coursework texts. The all female cast did a wonderful 80s version of the play, though still spoken in Shakespearean language. Afterwards students met and questioned the cast.
On Monday 3rd February the Celtic storyteller Jim MacCool came into school to deliver a session to our Year 7 students and some Year 6 students from Almond Hill. This celebrated National Storytelling week and inspired students to create their own narrative poems, which they are studying this half term. The morning was filled with songs, laughter and, of course, stories!
The English department runs a Gifted and Talented programme for students in Year 7-10. The top five achieving students are invited to join the sessions, which run once a week during form time.
Students are given the opportunity to work together on projects, which are designed to encourage creativity, independence, promoting deep learning and allowing students to broaden horizons beyond school into the wider learning communities. This term's project was to create and deliver interactive drama workshops to local primary schools- both Almond Hill and Woolenwick got involved.