Aries is an astrological sign transited by the Sun from March 21st to approximately April 20th. Its name is derived from the astronomical constellation Aries, which in Latin means "ram". The sign of Aries is associated with the myth of the Golden Fleece. Phrixus and Helle, the children of King Athamas of Boeotia and the goddess Nephele, were raised by their ruthless stepmother Ino. She was the second wife of Athamas, and wanted to ensure that the sovereignty would pass to her natural children. Through a ply, Ino was able to convince the women of Boeotia to dry the seeds to be planted. Thus, with the arrival of spring, earth’s plants did not sprout. Worried, Athamas dispatched ambassadors to consult the oracle of Delphi. Ino corrupted the ambassadors and they lie to the king, instructing him to sacrifice the gods Phrixus and Helle in order to make the Earth fertile once again.
Nephele, birth mother to Phrixus and Helle, was furious about the deception and sent her children a golden fleece to help them escape. Similarly, those born under the sign of Aries despise lies. They are loyal and prepared to fight injustice. Moreover, just as nature springs to life with the arrival of spring, those born under the sign of Aries are perceived as instinctive, spontaneous and adventurous. Phrixus and Helle flew to the land of Colchis on the back of the ram with the golden fleece. On this treacherous journey to seek salvation, Helle loses her balance and falls into the sea and drowns. Despite the pain of this loss, Phrixus arrives safe and sound. Phrixus sacrificed the ram to the gods to thank them for protection. In honor of the animal’s magic and generosity, Zeus places the animal in a constellation in the sky. The brave journey of Helle and Phrixus represents the courage and tenacity displayed by those born under the sign Aries. Helle’s tragic fate in the sea symbolizes an Aries always striving for new challenges despite appearing naive and reckless in their confidence. The golden ram represents an Aries tendency to unselfishly sacrifice for others.