There were many breaks in his education, caused by the migratory habits of his tribe, but even when removed from his books his active
brain continued to search out the mysteries of his fascinating avocation.
The two active young men were brothers who lived in the next village to his, and the pig had been theirs--so Kwaque narrated in atrocious beche-de-mer English.
As for King William Island, the Makambo, on the former run of the Cockspur, stopped there every ten weeks; but the direst threat Daughtry ever held over him was the putting ashore of him at the place where the two active young men still mourned their pig.
When I saw her, as long as two years ago, Lady Malkinshaw's favorite delusion was that she was the most active
woman of seventy-five in all England.
From such special adaptations, the similarity of the larvae or active
embryos of allied animals is sometimes much obscured; and cases could be given of the larvae of two species, or of two groups of species, differing quite as much, or even more, from each other than do their adult parents.
At home he is said to have suffered from the coldness or more active
antipathy of his three daughters, which is no great cause for wonder if we must credit the report that he compelled them to read aloud to him in foreign languages of which he had taught them the pronunciation but not the meaning.
Had he believed that a union was necessary to the happiness of both, or of either, or had he known how fervently I loved her, he would have acted differently; but seeing me so calm and cool, he would not for the world disturb my philosophy; and though refraining entirely from any active
opposition to the match, he would yet do nothing to bring it about, and would much rather take the part of prudence, in aiding us to overcome our mutual predilections, than that of feeling, to encourage them.
principle may perhaps be said to constitute the most essential barrier between us and our neighbours the brutes; for if there be some in the human shape who are not under any such dominion, I choose rather to consider them as deserters from us to our neighbours; among whom they will have the fate of deserters, and not be placed in the first rank.
He was well built, active
, strong-jawed, good-natured and rising.
Now Nietzsche believed that the first or the noble-morality conduced to an ascent in the line of life; because it was creative and active
What is the secret mesmerism which friendship possesses, and under the operation of which a person ordinarily sluggish, or cold, or timid, becomes wise, active
, and resolute, in another's behalf?
Though turned seventy, I possess an active
memory, and legs to correspond.
The pause was only momentary, however; and long before the drowsy eyes of the sentinel, who overlooked the spot where she stood, had time to catch a glimpse of her active
form, it had glided along the bottom, and stood on the summit of the nearest eminence.
Many of this class had deserted their usual occupations on the Saturday morning; some had been seen by their employers active
in the tumult; others knew they must be suspected, and that they would be discharged if they returned; others had been desperate from the beginning, and comforted themselves with the homely proverb, that, being hanged at all, they might as well be hanged for a sheep as a lamb.
Philip winced under this allusion to his unfitness for active
sports, and he answered almost peevishly,--