To commemorate World Water Week, we’re showcasing three powerful “Every Bottle Has a Story” films from around the world. These mini documentaries highlight Coca-Cola’s global commitment to water stewardship, and to building sustainable communities.
Take a look:
92, lives in a remote village on Borneo Island in the Malaysian state of Sabah.
Until recently, getting fresh water required a daily
trek to a river several kilometers away since she did not have a suitable
source of water near her home. Gunsarob's life changed as a result of a community
water project led by Coca-Cola and Raleigh International, a British youth
development organization. Coca-Cola
Malaysia collaborates with volunteers from Raleigh International to provide
villagers with a sustainable supply of clean water through gravity-fed water supply systems. Water is transported by pipes
to tap stands near villagers’ homes. Community members are fully involved in the
installation of the tanks and pipes, and are taught how to maintain the system.
This simple technology saves Gunsarob and her fellow villagers from their daily
trek up and down the mountain to access water. Through
Project Catalyst, Coca-Cola, World Wildlife Fund (WWF), Reef Catchments, the
Australian government and local development partners are working with
local landholders to develop and test progressive farming practices to
improve the quality of the water runoff in the area surrounding the Great
Barrier Reef. Read more. In 2009, The
Coca-Cola Africa Foundation launched the Replenish Africa Initiative (RAIN), a
$30 million program that is on track to provide at least 2 million Africans with safe water by 2015 and to fund water projects in every African
country. RAIN-funded projects improve sanitation and hygiene, increase
productive use of water and protect watersheds.
Take a look:
More on Journey
- Beyond Water: Coca-Cola Expands Partnership with WWF, Announces New Environmental Goals
- Coca-Cola, Water and Sanitation for the Urban Poor (WSUP) Launch Partnership
- Grower-Led Partnership Takes Progressive Steps to Preserve Great Barrier Reef
- Can America’s Biggest Consumer Goods Companies Help Boost Recycling in Cities?
- EKOCENTER: The New Buzzword On College Campuses