No problem! Here are some of the most popular hiking trails near Saratoga, Wyoming.
1. Medicine Bow Peak Trail - This 3.4-mile out-and-back trail is the shortest of the three routes to Medicine Bow Peak. It's a moderately challenging route that takes an average of 2 hours and 20 minutes to complete. The best times to visit this area are May through October. Dogs are allowed, and they may be off-leash in certain areas. The trail begins at Lewis Lake, then climbs to the saddle between Sugarloaf Mountain and Medicine Bow Peak. From the saddle, the trail consists of steep switchbacks toward the peak, ending in a 0.1-mile scramble through a boulder field to the 12,013-foot summit. Medicine Bow Peak is the highest point in the Snowy Range and offers incredible 360-degree views of the surrounding region. 
2. Treasure Island Bridge Trail - This easy 1.8-mile out-and-back trail along the North Platte River takes an average of 30 minutes to complete. The trail crosses a suspension bridge onto Treasure Island, a long islet in the river. Dogs are welcome but must be leashed at all times. 
3. Silver Lake and Meadow Falls Loop Trail - This 3.8-mile loop trail takes you around Silver Lake to a secluded waterfall in the Medicine Bow National Forest. It's a moderately challenging hike that takes an average of 1 hour and 40 minutes to complete. You'll enjoy a wide variety of alpine forests and wildflower meadow scenery. The area is lightly trafficked, so it's unlikely that you'll encounter many other people here. The trailhead is located near the Silver Lake Campground.
4. Lewis Lake, South Gap Lake, and Snowy Mountains Trail - This 2.9-mile out-and-back trail takes an average of 1 hour and 10 minutes to complete. The trailhead is located at Lewis Lake, near Sugarloaf Campground in the Medicine Bow-Routt National Forest. It's a moderately challenging route that takes you past Lewis Lake and South Gap Lake. There is some moderate rock scrambling to get to South Gap Lake, but overall the trail is well-maintained. Dogs are welcome but must be leashed at all times.
