1. Switch to LED Lights 
Although LED lights may cost more than traditional light bulbs, they will help you save tons of money on your energy costs over time. Switching to LED bulbs is an excellent way to conserve energy and save on your electric bill. LED lights will not just help you save on your energy bill, but they can also help you save money on your overall lighting costs since they last at least 25 times longer than traditional bulbs. That means you will not need to replace your light bulbs as often. 

2. Do Not Leave Your Refrigerator Door Open 
We all look inside our fridge as we decide what we want to eat. But did you know that doing so can cause you to waste a lot of energy? It takes more time for your refrigerator to cool back down after the doors have been open for several minutes. To eliminate this extra cost, try deciding on what you want to eat before you open your fridge doors to help reduce the amount of energy used. 

3. Keep Your Oven Door Closed 
If you frequently open your oven door while cooking, it will take twice as long to get back to the cooking temperature. Instead of opening your oven door all the time, consider using an oven light if your oven has a window on the door that allows you to peek inside. 

4. Shut Down your Electronics 
One of the easiest things you can do to help save on energy costs is to shut down your electronics when they are not in use. We all tend to leave our devices such as our TV and laptop on making it more convenient than waiting for it to boot up again. But leaving your devices on while they are not in use can contribute to your high energy costs. When we leave devices plugged into an outlet, they are still using power. This is something known as "phantom power". To help reduce your energy use and costs, try connecting everything to a power bar and turning that off whenever you leave the house. 

5. Decrease Energy Use During Peak Hours 
These days, many homes are now equipped with smart meters that keep track of when you are using the most energy throughout the day. If you are interested in conserving energy, you should use most of your electricity during non-peak hours. By doing so, you will save as much as 10 cents per kilowatt. 

6. Make Use of Small Appliances 
If you are cooking a small meal, you will want to make good use of your smaller appliances instead of firing up your large electric oven. Toaster ovens, electric skillets, air fryers, and other countertop appliances are now versatile enough to help you create a full-course meal without using a ton of energy. 

7. Wash Laundry in Cold Water Only 
If you have any delicate items in your wardrobe, you may already know about the benefits of washing your clothes in cold water. Doing so can help your clothing last longer and the fabric is less likely to shrink. Another great benefit of using cold water while doing laundry is that it will help keep your electricity bill low. It is estimated that as much as 90% of the energy used by your washing machine is spent on heating your water. Therefore, many consumers have caught on to the benefits of using cold water to wash their laundry.
