A multidisciplinary database for academic institutions powered by EBSCOhost, providing thousands of full-text, peer-reviewed journals to support scholarly research in key areas of study.
Education, History, Kids, Teens, Languages, Reference
Comprehensive, easy to navigate information on 175 countries including culture, language, history, national symbols, geography and more.
Search for ancestors in 300 years of newspapers, books, pamphlets and government reports.
U.S. news from local, regional, and national sources, including printed and online newspapers, blogs, journals, newswires, broadcast transcripts and videos. Explore a specific issue or event through the detailed coverage provided by local reporting or compare a wide variety of viewpoints from across the country on topics such as politics, business, health, sports, cultural activities and people.
Complete, original, thorough, unbiased information on 350 career fields and thousands of jobs Username: 715w Password: future
Books, Teens, Kids
Unlimited access to thousands of digital graphic novels and comics, no holds or waiting.
Search authoritative reference content including encyclopedias, dictionaries, and other ready-reference books covering a range of topics, such as art, business, literature, and science.
Designed for the needs and search abilities of middle school students, this EBSCOhost research database contains age-appropriate materials, lots of images and videos, and topic overviews that provide students with a starting point for research.
Designed for the needs and search abilities of high school students, this EBSCOhost research database contains age-appropriate materials, lots of images and videos, and topic overviews that provide students with a starting point for research.
Online research and reference sources for high school and college students, including the databases World News Digest, Today’s Science, and Issues and Controversies.
Student and homework help on topics in today’s headlines.
Education, Employment, Teens
Achieve educational and career goals with practice tests with complete answer explanations, tutorial courses, and eBooks, including High School equivalency exam prep, ACT and SAT prep, many career-specific tests, and more.
Gives in-depth explanations of important advances in biology, chemistry, environmental science, space, physics, and technology through feature articles, interviews with scientists, suggested research topics, curriculum tools, and more.
Education, News, Teens
More than seven decades of authoritative news summaries and background articles, with topic-based research support, interactive navigation, primary sources, and curriculum tools.
2017 Summer Reading Program
The Christian County Library summer reading program runs May 15-July 31 this year, with registration…
Programs for Kids and Teens Top Priority for CCL Staff
In Christian County, more than 27 percent of the population is under 18 years old. Among Christian County…
Nothing from Friday, June 23, 2017 to Sunday, July 23, 2017.