Domesticated cats have been with humans for over 1,500 years and even the Egyptian Goddess Bastet was depicted with a cat head. They have helped us to exterminate rodents from our crops for hundreds of years and that’s one of the first reasons why cats were domesticated in the first place. Its common names are very similar in several languages: English: cat; French: chat; German: Katze; Spanish: gato; Latin: cattus; and Arabic: quttah.
In comparison to other household pets, cats are extremely mysterious and independent. They generally have no problem just hanging out alone, or with other cats the whole day. Hopefully the facts presented in this article will you better understand your cat better.
Cats spend a great deal of their time sleeping. The average cat sleeps for 14-18 hours a day. The number can change depending on the cat’s age and personality. Newborn kittens spend most of their time sleeping. In fact, this is nature’s way to make sure that the kittens do not wander out of the nest, or make noise that might attract predators while the mother cat is away. As the weeks pass, the kittens’ sleeping hours gradually change to match those of the adults. Cats that spend the day alone at home tend to sleep throughout the day.
A young, healthy cat is capable of jumping six or even seven times it’s body length in one leap. Their unique jumping talents are due to their strong leg and back muscles. Also contributing to their acrobatic finesse is their good calculating and estimation skills.
When it comes to reproduction, cats are quite prolific breeders. One female cat has the ability to produce an average of about 12 kittens each year if not spayed. Once a kitten reaches puberty, typically between 5 months and 9 months of age, he or she will be able to reproduce.
Men and women frequently differ in their influence over the cat. When humans and cats first meet, women tend to vocalize to the cat more than men. Cats tend to approach women more often than men. Studies also show that women tend to interact more with their cats than men do. In response, the cats approach female owners more frequently and initiate contact more frequently. Researchers believe that female owners have more intense relationships with their cats.
Cats pupils dilate when they are angry or about to attack, and cats smile at us and other cat friends with appreciative eyes by squinting. Your cat will slowly, almost, but usually not quite, close her eyes and reopen them while looking at you. When almost closed, the eyes are held at the lowest point for a second. You can return the sentiment by gently squinting back, mimicking the cat’s pattern. If a cat closes her eyes all the way for more than a split second, that is absolute trust in action. It would be rude to do anything less.
The life expectancy of a cat is typically 12–15 years. However, some cats may attain the age of 21 years or more. By comparison, the average life expectancy of humans at birth is 67.2 years. A one-year-old cat is roughly comparable, in developmental terms, to a 15-year-old-human. Subsequent years of a cat’s life add progressively fewer years to its human age equivalent, so that a 15-year old cat is roughly comparable, developmentally, to a 76-year-old human.
About 10% of a cat’s bones are in its tail. A cat’s tail is a wondrous feat of engineering and the cat depends on it for balance. Cats’ tails are marvelous instruments to behold, and they often signal the emotion of the cat. You can tell a lot about a cat’s mood by watching the tail. A happy cat will walk with tail held high. An angry cat will signal her mood by lashing and twisting her tail. A cat will greet you or another cat by raising it’s tail high. A very happy cat will demonstrate joy with a quiver at the tip of the raised tail. However, if you see a male cat backed up against a vertical surface with tail a-quiver, he’s spraying, or marking his territory with urine.
This is probably the least known fact about cats, most kittens start off having blue eyes, but most cats eyes do change when they gradually get older. as soon as the kittens are born their eyes are bright blue, and when they get older their eyes can change colours with three options. to go brighter, go darker, or change colour completely.