Can we predict Earthquakes - Unusual Animal and Ocean life behaviour - Earthquake Clouds and Solar Flares
So can we predict Earthquakes??
Sadly the simplest answer here is No - at least not yet
Having said that I have found some interesting information about a couple of Scientists - one is retired who have 75% success rates in predicting earthquakes using differing methods.
It appears that they have been ostracised because of their predictions. Let’s face it predicting earthquakes are not yet an exact science. Really though what was in the beginning stages.
I bet when people were starting to try to learn how to predict tsunami's their theories were poo poo’d and they were also ostracised until they had a breakthrough that could be measured and accepted by the other scientists of the time.
I do hope that in my time there is one of these breakthroughs in relation to predicting earthquakes. Throughout history there have been people predicting earthquakes to differing degrees of success. For more info on Earthquakes including the richter scale in relation to dynamite click here
I offer my support to those brave scientists and others who have taken up this task and thank you for the insights you have all provided openly and freely.
Ocean life Animals and Earthquakes
Thousands of sardines, anchovies, striped bass and mackerel surged along the coast of the Mexican resort in an event believed to be linked to the devastating Japanese tsunami.
Delighted fishermen rushed out in wooden motor boats, abandoning their rods and nets and simply scooping the fish up with buckets. Experts believe the phenomenon is directly related to the Japanese tsunami
Some types of animals have an innate sixth sense which enables them to detect when a tsunami is going to occur: they will then head inland in the opposite direction.
What animals am I talking about?
Cats - statistically there are over 2 times as many cats reported missing during the week leading up to an Earthquake.
Dogs - statistically there are over 2 times as many dogs reported missing during the week leading up to an Earthquake - let’s be honest dogs would find it harder to get away as well.
Elephants - There are many reports of elephants stampeding away from areas shortly before an Earthquake hits it.
Frogs - have been reported to try to leave an area before an earthquake hits it.
Is there any correlation between Animals Ocean life and Earthquakes? ....
Earthquake and Tsunami 2004 - it was learned that the Jarawa tribesmen of the Andaman Islands suffered no loss. They noticed that the birds and animals were behaving a little strangely and when they saw the big animals heading up the hill so they evacuated the village and followed the animals.
there may be a relationship between the beached deaths of whales, dolphins and other fish and an impending earthquake... For more info on Tsunami's including how many we have a year
Friday 9th, May, 2008 just hours before the quake struck thousands of frogs cross roads near earthquake area - (basically the frogs wanted to get as far away from the quake area as they could)
Friday 9th may 2008 there was a magnitude 6.7 earthquake reported in the Guam Region at around 21:51 UTC
March 8th 2011 an earthquake magnitude of 7.2 struck off the coast of Japan. The quake, at a depth of 10 kilometres, struck at 12:45 p.m. local time. Depth: 87.6 km
March 9th 2011 Millions of fish have been found dead floating in the King harbour in Los Angeles south at Redondo Beach. The fish were a mix of ... sardines, anchovies and mackerel — have carpeted King Harbour at Redondo Beach.
Why are so many fish dying?
The theory given by one scientist is that the earth may be releasing gases, toxins or some sort of geomagnetic waves that are driving the fish inland toward the coast as they try to escape.
Well really I came to this same reasoning before finding the above statement and I have only been learning about tsunamis since the Earthquake in Christchurch New Zealand this year 2011. Come on Scientists how about actually studying this stuff more thoroughly
Are there always marine deaths after an Earthquake?
No I believe it would depend upon if the earthquake sends out noxious gases and if the currents take those gasses to a populated marine area before they get dispersed. If you really look for the evidence I believe you will find some unusual animal or marine occurrence to most decently sized earthquakes
Clouds - will they help us predict Earthquakes
505 – 587 A.D. - Earthquake clouds - An Indian scholar called Varahamihira discussed a number of signs warning of earthquakes, including extraordinary clouds occurring a week before the earthquake. He drew correlations between terrestrial Earth, the atmosphere and planetary influences. He described the Earth as "A mass floating on water and spoke of unusual cloud formations and abnormal animal behaviour as precursors to earthquakes."
I have read that historical records have indicated a possible correlation between clouds and earthquakes in the ancient civilizations of Rome, India and China. I sadly have not found what or where this info is otherwise it would be here.
So Earthquake clouds have been around and studied for nearly 2000 years. It really does look like modern scientists need to take a good look at ancient history and study up on what they had learnt. Earthquake clouds are called by some scientists now days Earth transient clouds (ETrC).
What do we know about Earthquake clouds?
Earthquake clouds form in seconds – between 10-15 seconds (this is important as there are similar looking cloud formations but they form slowly)
The patterns of the clouds are the direct result of physical subterranean faults
The clouds can cover a wide area
There are 3 types of Earthquake clouds that I’m aware of –
1) A long thin singular cloud that looks like a snake. – This can run the length of the fault.
2) A series or smaller torpedo clouds that are parallel to each other and run 90 degrees to the fault.
3) Rainbow Earthquake clouds (these clouds are often said to look like they are glowing)
A Chinese photographer took the first picture 2 hrs. Before 12th May China earthquake. 2008. The picture shows a rainbow Earthquake cloud (some people say these clouds seem to glow)
12th May 2008: An Earthquake measuring 7.8 strikes near Chengdu, Sichuan's provincial capital in south western China
The Full Moon and Earthquakes?
Do more Earthquakes happen during the full moon?
The Scientific evidence says actually Yes there are more Earthquakes during the full moon than at any other time of the month. It is important however to note here that they are mostly all small Earthquakes with a magnitude somewhere between 1 and 2 on the Richter scale. Every now and again you will get a large one that will cause mass devastation however this is not the norm.
Ancient cultures beliefs about full moons causing Earthquakes
In some West African cultures, they believed that life existed on a giant’s head-the plants and trees were his hair and the people and animals were the insects who wandered around on his scalp. They explained that earthquakes happened when the giant sneezed or turned his head suddenly.
In Japan, they believed that the ground floated on a sea of water and a monstrous catfish named Namazu kept the ground afloat. Whenever the catfish would move or flip around the ground would shake.
In some Indian cultures they believed that the earth was a giant platform that was supported by eight mighty elephants. Earthquakes were caused by one of the elephants getting tired and lowering its head thus disrupting the balance of the earth.
In Greece, they believed that wild animals were trapped in caverns under the ground. Earthquakes were caused by the animals running around trying to escape.
In New Zealand they believed that Mother Earth had a child (the god Ru) inside her womb. Earthquakes were caused by the baby stretching and kicking.
There is no evidence that I can find of ancient civilisations believing that the full moon is linked to Earthquakes.
What about solar flares and Earthquakes
According to scientists at NASA's Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO), "The sun is waking up from a deep slumber, and in the next few years we expect to see much higher levels of solar activity ... One needs to go back over 8,000 years in order to find a time when the sun was, on average, as active as it is at present! NASA also admitted on their website "spacequakes can cause Northern lights and magnitude 5 or 6 earthquake".
So the answer seems to be a big Yes Solar Flares can cause earthquakes.
Solar Flares in History
The earliest surviving record of sunspot observation dates from …
364 BC based on comments by the Chinese astronomer Gan De. From the State of Qi reportedly discovers the moon Ganymede, belonging to Jupiter, and makes the earliest known sunspot observations.
Nostradamus, Solar Flares and Earthquakes
So basically it sounds like a solar flare created either an Auroras or bolide explosions in areas that don’t normally get southern lights. And there will be an earthquake 3 days after the start of this occurrence.
February. 15th 2011. We had a Class X solar flare. The flare hit the earth on February 18th 2011.
On February 22nd 2011 the deadly 6.3-magnitude Christchurch earthquake struck
Large Solar Flares cause Auroras during class X flares
Astronomers watch solar flares with their spacecraft and know that these explosions usually eject huge clouds of electrically-charged particles into space. When these strike the Earth, they produce the aurora in the atmosphere and cause technology to malfunction.
In 1989, millions of North Americans were blacked out when a solar storm damaged the Hydro-Quebec power station in Canada.
In October 2003, a Japanese weather satellite died during a solar storm.
Earthquakes can be attributed to increased solar activity.
“The Aurora event peaked about the same time as the earth quake in Japan before Midnight local time in Minnesota.”
So what can happen when one of these solar flares hits the earth
Solar flares facts -
- They cause Environmental disturbances: (Geomagnetic storms, solar radiation storms, radio blackouts: xrays, cell phone, GPS, satellite interruptions.)
- Large solar flares cause Auroras (during x class flares, auroras may be seen very far south)
- Earthquakes can be attributed to increased solar activity.
Large Solar flares can cause shockwaves or bolide explosions (large fireballs in the sky these can also sound like explosions)
Ice can fall from the sky
Birds can fall dead from the sky (if there hit by a shockwave or bolide explosion) and they may affect marine life.
For more info on Solar Flares please click here.