Thanksgiving– Letter U and Number 11
Monday and Tuesday
Practice writing names
Introduce Theme and Letter and Number of the Day
Music Circle Time
Social—Over the River and Through the Woods—Let each share something they are grateful for and what they like about Thanksgiving (pass bean bag and when music stops they share something—play “Thankful” by Josh Groban
Counting-10 little Indians
Music Appreciation/Readiness—Blue Jellos
Small and Large Movement Skills—Five Fat Turkeys- Five Fat turkeys were sitting on a fence. The fist one said, I’m so immense The second one said, I can gobble at you The third one said I can gobble too the fourth one said I can spread my tail the fifth one said, Don’t catch it on a nail A farmer came along and stopped to say Turkeys look best on Thanksgiving Day (use hand to point to all the turkeys)
ABC/Reading-A Hunting We will Go (Rhyming with different animals)
A hunting we will go, A hunting we will go, Heigh-ho the dairy-o A hunting we will go.
Singing—Child Chooses Songs
Creating Project (arts and crafts) Handprint Turkey’s Cut out hands and write one thing we are grateful on each feather.
Writing assignment (numbers and/or letters)
Group Motor Activity-Turkey Tag—Jump on the Blanket
Math/Science Skills—Thanksgiving Bingo
Announcements: We only have Preschool on Monday and Tuesday next week because of Thanksgiving. Hope you have a fun and Happy Thanksgiving!
Thank you so much for your feedback from the surveys. This has been helpful already. If you haven’t had a chance to do it I would still love your feedback when you can. Thanks!! Next week I will share some of the comments.
It is cold outside! We still go outside everyday for about 10-15 minutes. Please send a coat everyday with your child. It would also be helpful to have a pair of gloves and hat in the backpack. I will do my best to get those back in the backpack so they come home. I do have a lost and found basket so if you are missing something it might be in there.
For the 4-5 year olds–reading packets are getting back to me! Yea for everyone! I really think this will be a fun and learning experience for you to start some simple reading with your child. If you find this frustrating for your child please talk to me and I will give you some suggestions to make this a good experience. Thanks for taking time to do this with them. It will pay big dividends!
Some may ask is it really that important to go to preschool? I say, for sure. I’m not only saying this because I am running a preschool =) but all four of my children and I benefited greatly from preschool. Here are some reasons I think preschool is important.
1. Preschool is good socially for your child. Preschool often times is the first time child and mom or dad are away from a child for an educational experience. I’ve seen Kindergarten children out in the hall for months with mom because they didn’t want to leave her. Children need to know mom and dad will come back, and preschool is a great time to practice this. The transition to kindergarten will be much easier if practiced in preschool years.
2. Preschool is good to learn to play with children their own age. Learn how to share, take turns, contribute to conversations, and answer questions in a group setting.
3. Preschool can help prepare your child to be a student. Music, dance, and gymnastics are great but preschool teaches children how to be students. Raising hands, not talking out of turn, sitting tall in their chair, listen to teacher, etc.
4. Preschool can increase your child’s school success. Studies have shown early education improve chances for children’s academic success. This is why there are many state funded preschools available throughout the country.
5. Preschool encourages independent learning and exploration. Children learn so much from each other, through play and observation of other children their own age. If they see one child writing their name, they start thinking, “Hey I can do that, or I want to do that.” Preschool can foster creativity and learning by just being with each other.
I’m sure there are many other reasons preschool is important. Add your own ideas in comments if you’d like.