The stresses of life including limited spare time and a hectic schedule can become an increasing burden on individuals as time goes on. Busy careers and strenuous daily routines may leave people little time to look after themselves. People become stressed, tired and drained; this has a significant effect on women in particular as they juggle the pressures of work life, along with preserving their looks and maintaining their youthful energy.
All these environmental factors can take a toll on the whole body, most notably on the largest organ, the skin. Wrinkles become more prevalent, skin becomes looser and the body and mind are consistently fatigued. Individuals can look and feel aged and depleted from energy; preventing them from making the most of life and the small portions of time they have to pamper and look after themselves.
It has been established through research that there are, in fact, two distinct types of ageing. Ageing caused by the genes we inherit is intrinsic (internal) ageing, whilst ageing caused by environmental factors is known as extrinsic (external) ageing.
A number of extrinsic, or external, factors often act together with the normal ageing process to prematurely age our skin. While you cannot stop or even slow down the intrinsic ageing process, you can prevent signs of premature ageing by protecting your skin from the sun, quitting smoking, and eliminating facial exercises.
Effects of ageing you can control
Sun damage to your skin can result in the development of fine lines and wrinkles, discolouration and textural changes. These cosmetic effects of sun damage can make your skin look prematurely aged and visibly damaged. Over time, the sun’s ultraviolet (UV) light damages certain fibers in the skin called elastin. The breakdown of elastin fibers causes the skin to sag, stretch, and lose its ability to snap back after stretching. Including sun protection in your everyday skin regime can aid in the skin repairing itself.
Smokers tend to have more wrinkles than non-smokers with the same age, complexion, and history of sun exposure. One puff of cigarette smoke emits 40,000 free radicals, which deplete the body of vitamin C and accelerate ageing. Vitamin C, which is a key ingredient for keeping skin plump and moist, contributes to collagen production.
Free radicals are also prevalent in the atmosphere in the form of pollution, which occurs when molecules undergo a photo-dissociation process. This reaction plays a key role in smog formation and naturally also wreaks havoc on the skin. A good defence against these elements is a natural blocker like zinc.
Diet and Exercise
Poor diets lacking in the protective, antioxidant vitamins found in fruits and vegetables lead to unhealthy looking skin. Too much sugar consumption over long periods of time has been shown to age skin prematurely due to a process in the body called glycation which harms the good collagen in the skin; leading to wrinkles and loss of elasticity. A healthy diet rich in antioxidants, supported by skin care formulas containing essential vitamins such as A, C and E along with ingredients such as ascorbic acid and goji berry will help firm, tone, tighten, refine lines, and give skin an overall glow.
The Jivesse Youth Regime
The Jivesse Marine Collagen Range is a regime that adopts a multi-dimensional approach to anti-ageing. The combination of a topical and ingestible product solution aims to combat the ageing process from the inside and out. The Jivesse Marine Collagen Cream is a topical product which increases collagen production and hydration on the skin’s surface while the Jivesse Marine Collagen and Herb Elixir and Marine Collagen Capsules provide over 5g of collagen, vital vitamins and nutrients to stimulate collagen production directly to the dermis and combat ageing from within.
Jivesse products are formed to deliver a multitude of benefits and contain the most natural, effective active ingredients. The active ingredients in the Jivesse range are carefully selected to work in helping re-invigorate the natural functions of the body and reverse the internal and external signs and effects of ageing.
Step 1 – Energy and Collagen Boost
For an energy and collagen boost as soon as you wake up, Jivesse Marine Collagen and Essential Herb Elixir contains an abundance of minerals and herbs which will revitalise and energise your body. The elixir contains 5g of Peptan collagen peptides, a clinically proven amount when taken orally, to ensure dermis moisture levels are maintained, collagen structure & density is supported and skin ageing is prevented. Herbs such as Ginseng and Chamomile will aid in improving concentration levels while providing stress relief.
Step 2 – Moisture and Sun Protection
Applying the Jivesse Marine Collagen Cream after washing your face will ensure that you have essential UVA sun protection and that your skin remains hydrated. The Kakadu Plum Extract in the cream boasts a Vitamin C content of up to the value of 50 oranges. Vitamin C aids the growth of cells and blood vessels and contributes to the strength and firmness of the skin. Vitamin C also contributes to the normal collagen formation for the normal function of the skin.
Step 3 – Free Radical & Toxin defence
For a continued measure to help fight against the damage caused by pollution and free radicals we encounter through the day make sure that you take a serving of the Jivesse Marine Collagen Capsules which are packed full of essential vitamins and antioxidants. Free radicals cause dryness and increase fine lines and wrinkles to the epidermis. With 100% Vitamin C and 120% Vitamin E of the ECRDA plus Zinc and Co Enzyme Q10; cell growth is promoted and skin is rejuvenated, while collagen production is also stimulated. The probiotics found in the capsules will help to defend your body against the toxin build up and can help support a healthy digestive system.
Using the products as a regime and incorporating this within your day will maximise effectiveness of the products and can increase results. You will see that incidences of deep wrinkle formation are reduced; skin appears firmer, with improved elasticity and moisture, providing more luminosity in skin tone and a youthful looking glow. The ingredients in the Jivesse Youth Regime, when used in conjunction with each other can help to fight effects from free radicals, provide natural UVA sun protection and boost collagen production.
Jivesse Youth Regime products are formed on the basis of individuals maximising the small pockets of time they can find throughout the day to help prevent physical signs of ageing. The Jivesse Youth Regime can deliver over 5g of collagen a day, preserving your youth, self-esteem and vitality by making your wellness a priority.
The skin is the largest organ in the human body. It acts as a protective barrier against an environment which is possibly hostile.
There are three layers that make up the skin: the epidermis, the dermis and the subcutaneous tissue. For the purposes of collagen production and understanding the process of ageing the focus should be on the epidermis and dermis.
This is the outer most layer of the skin, which can vary in thickness.
There are three types of tissue that are present throughout the dermis:
- Elastic tissue
- Reticular fibres
Layer of Dermis
- Upper papillary layer – thin arrangements of collagen fibres
- Lower reticular layer – thicker, made of thick collagen fibres arrange parallel to the surface of the skin
The effect of Anti-Ageing/ Anti-Ageing Process
On the Epidermis:
The Stratum Corneum is the upper most layer of the epidermis and is responsible for acting as a barrier. This layer is the most important with respect to how the skin looks. The corneocytes which are the protein complexes are made up of a keratin organized matrix has the function of holding large amounts of water. The lipid layer that surrounds the corneocytes help to seal and prevent the loss of the natural moisturizing factor that is present.
As you age the epidermal cells of the stratum corneum in your skin become thinner. There is a reduction of effectiveness of the barrier function, and thus moisture is released instead of being kept in the skin. As you age the number of epidermal cells decreases at approximately 1% a year from the age of 30.
On the Dermal Layer:
As you age less collagen is produced in the dermal layer of the skin, and the elastic fibres that provide elasticity wear out. There are changes in the extracellular matrix of the skin that cause it to wrinkle, sag and become dry. Excessively dry skin can emphasise wrinkles that are already present.
The skin ageing process occurs in the connective tissue, this tissue is mainly made up of collagen.
Collagen is a fibrous protein that forms the extracellular fibres in almost all tissues of the body. It is responsible for skin firmness, moisturisation, suppleness and the constant renewal of skin cells. Collagen is synthesised by cells which can be found in the connective tissue e.g. fibroblasts. In order for collagen to be produced your body needs Vitamin C, Lysine and Proline (essential amino acids).
Collagen production can be stimulated using topical treatments and ingestibles.
The Story of Peptan®
Jivesse Marine Collagen products contain a hydrolysed collagen, named Peptan. Peptan peptides are tiny little particles that the body believes are broken pieces of collagen. Introducing peptides, through the use of the Jivesse Range, causes the body to make more endogenous collagen; the body then replaces it because it believes it’s damaged.
The Peptan used in the Jivesse range are Type 1 Collagen Peptides, this is the same collagen that is found in human bones and skin. In order for the collagen to make an impact on the signs of ageing in a person, the peptides introduced would be most effective if they mirrored that which is already naturally occurring in the body.
The collagen peptides when present in human fibroblasts (cells which synthesise the extracellular matrix and collagen) cause the stimulation of hyaluronic synthesis. Ingestion and absorption of the peptides result in the enzyme Hyaluronan Synthase 2 (HAS2) being created, which in turn mediates the production of hyaluronic acid.
Peptan is a highly bioactive product which contains 18 amino-acids, and is easily digestible by the human body. A bioactive substance is one which has an effect on a living tissue. Having an extremely digestible collagen in the Jivesse Marine Collagen products, results in a shorter time taken for absorption. Thus the collagen will work faster to cause chain reactions internally and boost collagen production in the skin.
The Jivesse Marine Collagen Cream contains the highly effective humectant, Glycerine. Humectants are known as being hygroscopic which means they attract and retain moisture from the atmosphere via absorption, drawing the water vapour into and beneath the skin’s surface. Glycerine maintains the skin’s water balance leaving it feeling softer, suppler and overall healthier. The glycerine in the Jivesse Marine Collagen Cream draws up moisture through the skin layers and prevents excessive drying. This keeps the skin elastic and thus plumps up and tightens the epidermis.
Anti-oxidants are molecules that can interact with free radicals to stop a chain reaction which can lead to damage of vital molecules in the skin. In order to understand the role of antioxidants we first need to look at free radicals.
A free radical is an atom that comes singularly or in a group and contains an odd number of electrons. Free radicals are produced when food is digested or you are exposed to external pollutants such as cigarette smoke. Once a free radical is formed a destructive chain reaction could start. Free radicals cause dryness and increase fine lines and wrinkles on the epidermis. The damage to cellular components is dangerous, and in order to prevent this from occurring, the body uses antioxidants.
The Jivesse Marine Collagen Range uses multiple anti-oxidants throughout. One of the main antioxidants found in all three products that will counteract the damage on the body is Vitamin C. The human body cannot produce Vitamin C, and so it must be introduced via external means.
The Kakadu Plum, in the Jivesse Marine Collagen Cream, contains the largest amount of Vitamin C found in any plant. As well as protecting the skin against free radicals, Vitamin C aids the growth of cells and blood vessels and contributes to the strength and firmness of the skin.
Co Enzyme Q10 is another antioxidant present in the Jivesse Marine Collagen Capsule. This works to counteract oxidative damage to cells caused by UK sun rays, pollutions, toxins and stress. Co Enzyme Q10 is found in every cell in the body; it is used to promote cell growth and energizes healthy cells. The enzyme is multifunctional; it rejuvenates the skin cells and simultaneously stimulates an increase in collagen production.
Essential Plant Extracts/ Oils
The Jivesse range also has numerous essential plant extracts that provide a natural form of benefits.
The Jivesse Marine Collagen & Essential Herb Elixir includes one of those essential herbs, namely ginseng. Ginseng is known for its ability to contribute to rejuvenating the skin. Within the Jivesse Elixir the extract has a dual functionality, it treats existing wrinkles and aged skin, while also acting as a preventative technique to delay ageing symptoms for younger women.
It is in the Jivesse Elixir that you will also find Aloe Vera plant extract. Being high in vitamins and minerals such as Vitamin A, B12 & E, Magnesium and Zinc, aloe vera is a versatile skin remedy that is used in the nutricosmetic world. The extract hydrates the skin and promotes skin renewal, giving the dermis youthful luminosity.
The Jojoba Seed Oil increases elasticity levels in the skin as well as minimizing fine lines and wrinkles. Whilst the extract in the Jivesse Marine Collagen Cream works to reduce the more apparent signs of ageing, it is also a common ingredient used to treat skin problems such as acne, blackheads and pimples. The extract also adds stability to the product to ensure longevity.
The Jivesse Marine Collagen Range contains a number of the Vitamins that your body uses to function to its best ability. The following Vitamins can be found in abundance in a full dose of the Jivesse Marine Collagen Capsule. Vitamin A is an antioxidant, which can help reduce the appearance of dark circles under the eyes.
Vitamin B6 specifically is most commonly known for its ability to catabolize (break down molecules into smaller units, releasing energy) amino acids found in the cells. Amino acids are vital nutrients that nourish skin, hair and nails. They work to sustain the smoothness of the skin and increase skin elasticity. Vitamin B3, also known as Niacin, increases the skin’s ability to retain moisture, and acts as an exfoliant to help skin regenerate. As the newer skin cells move towards the surface skin will have a natural youthful glow.
It is vital to have the right amount of Vitamin D in the body as it regulates fibroblast growth factor, which determines the ageing of skin. The Vitamin D3 in the Jivesse Capsules, works to improve skin texture, and thus reduce the signs of ageing.