BEVELED GLASS: Extra-thick glass, (usually 3/16" or 1/4") the edges of which have been ground down, or beveled, at an angle from an established margin along the perimeter. One face of the glass is beveled, and the other remains flat. Beveled glass has a three-dimensional quality.
BRICK MOULD: Outside casing around window to cover jambs and through which nails are driven to install window.
CAME:The lead strips which separate individual pieces of glass in a leaded glass panel. Came in Art Glass Millworks entry doors is available in lead color, shiny brass, or chrome-look.
CASING: A decorative strip of wood with mitered corners, which is nailed to the interior and exterior edges of a door or window frame to cover the joint between frame and wall.
COTTAGE DOUBLE HUNG: A double hung window in which the upper sash is shorter than the lower sash.
DUAL GLAZED: Also called Insulated Glass. A glass option for windows, sliding patio doors and swinging French doors in which two pieces of glass separated by a peripheral metal spacer and sealed on the edges with rubber, are glazed into the opening. The dead air-space between each piece of glass increases sound-absorption and energy efficiency.
EXTRUSION: The process of producing vinyl or aluminum shapes by forcing heated material through an orifice in a die. Such product is called extruded aluminum, etc.
FRENCH DOOR: A hinged door with a large center glass. The wood sides of the door are generally 4 inches and the bottom 9 inches wide. Available in up to 4 units (12 feet width). Side lites (either operable or fixed) are common for the 8 foot width. Also available in vinyl, fiberglass, aluminum, and steel.
GLAZING: A general term referring to any type of glass installed in a door or window.
GLAVINZ BEAD: A molding or stop around the inside of a window frame to hold the glass in place.
GRIDS (internal): In dual-pane vinyl unit, the placing of a white-painted aluminum hollow (flat or sculptured) bar between the two panes. It is used to create the appearance of the divided lites of a single pane window.
HEADER: A heavy beam extended across the top of the rough opening to prevent the weight of the wall or roof from resting on the window frame—also called head board.
JAMB: The frame which is fastened into the rough opening, to which a door or window is hinged or otherwise attached.
JALOUSIE: Window make up of horizontally-mounted louvered glass slats that abut each other when closed and rotate outward when cranked open. LITE: Glazing framed by muntins and/or sass in a window or door.
LOW-E GLASS: A coating on the interior surface of the glass (generally only available in dual-pane units) which blocks about 80% of the ultraviolet light, and thereby prevents bleach of objects exposed to light, and is more effective than tinting at reducing heat. As a coating upon the glass, it also inhibits the transfer of heat or cold by conductivity. Low-e squared refers to application upon both panes of glass.
MORTISE & TENON CONSTRUCTION: A centuries-old method of locking wood together involving the cutting of a mortise, or hole in one piece of wood and the formation of a tenon, or projecting part on another. The pieces are then fit tightly together to form a secure bond between the two components--also called finger joint.
MOULDING or MOLDING: A decorative trim piece, usually made of wood, which serves a dual function, to hold in place a wood panel or piece of glass in a door and, in the case of raised molding, to add a three dimensional quality to the surface of the door.
MORTISE: A slot or rectangular cavity cut into a piece of wood to receive another part. MULLION: The vertical or horizontal divisions or joints between single windows in a multiple window unit.
MUNTIN: A short bar used to separate glass in a sash into multiple lites; also called a window-pane divider or grille.
MAILING FIN: An integral extension of a window or patio door frame which generally laps over the conventional stud construction and through which nails are driven to secure the frame in place.
PLATE GLASS: A rolled, ground, and polished product with true flat parallel plane surfaces affording excellent vision. It has been replaced by float glass.
PANEL: Refers to either a piece of glass (glass panel) fit into an opening in a wood door, or to a wooden piece (wood panel) inserted into an opening in a wood door.
PATIO DOOR: A sliding door on a track which has one or more fixed units. A French patio door has a thicker frame to give somewhat the illusion of a French door.
PREFINISHED: Door or window products which are professionally stained and clear-coated before delivery to the sash & door dealer.
PREHUNG OR PREHANGING: A term which applies to an entry or French door unit in which the door or doors come hinged, weather-stripped and with a complete jamb or frame, sill and molding. Lockset is not included.
PRIVACY LEADED GLASS PANELS: Leaded glasses panels for entry doors in which relatively opaque textured glass is used instead of clear glass, to provide privacy inside the home. No beveled glass is used in Privacy leaded glass panels.
RAILS: The horizontal members of a window sash or door panel.
SIDELITES: Side panels which look like narrow doors and flank the entry door. Sidelites usually have glass and are inoperable. The design of the sidelights generally reflects the design of the door or doors. Can only be used in door openings with widths of 48" or more.
SILL: The bottom horizontal component of a doorframe. It is the part one walks over when passing through a doorway, sometimes called a threshold. Sills are available in a variety of materials such as oak and bronze or brass anodized aluminum.
SIMULATED DIVIDED LITE (sdlt): In dual-pane windows, methods of constructing windows in which the muntins are affixed to the inside and outside of a panel along with the spacer bar between them to create the appearance of a true divide lite.
SINGLE & DOUBLE HUNG: windows in which the panel moves vertically; single just the bottom panel, double both panels.
SLIDER: A window in which one or more panels (called X panels) slide within the frame of the window—the fixed is an O panel. Double slider (XX) has both panels slide. And for wide openings, over 6 feet, the two side panels slide and the center is fixed (XOX).
SOUND TRANSMISSION CLASS (SCT): The rating of a material over a selected range of sound frequencies. The higher the number the less sound that is transmitted.
STILES & RAILS: The vertical and horizontal structural members of a door or window.
STUD: Vertical wood framing members which form the frame wall. In home construction they are normally 2 x 4 inches and 8 feet long.
TEMPERED GLASS: Glass, which has been heated, then cooled, creating a "safety" glass which when broken, shatters into very small pieces instead of long shards. The glass is 3 times more resistant to impact and significantly heavier. It cannot be re-cut after tempering.
TRANSOM: A fixed sash unit, rectangular or radius that is placed above a doorway to allow light into an entry or room. The glass design generally reflects the design in the doors and sidelites below.
ULTRAVIOLET LIGHT (UV): Invisible light rates just shorter than the visible spectrum. Capable of causing fading.
VAPRO BARRIER: A watertight material used to prevent the passage of moisture into or through floors, walls, and ceilings.
WEEP HOLES: a small opening in a wall or window sill member through which water may drain to the building exterior.
WIND LOAD: Force exerted on a surface by moving air. Windows and doors are rated for wind load.
TRIPLE GLAZE: A glazing method used in entry doors with leaded glass panels. The leaded glass panel is sandwiched between two pieces of clear tempered glass separated by metal spacers along the perimeter. The outer edge of this unit is then sealed with rubber, to create a fully sealed glass unit with an overall thickness of 7/8". Benefits: reduction in sound transfer, energy efficiency, easy cleaning. In colder climates triple-pane windows are available.
U FACTOR: A measure of heat transmission through a wall or window. The lower the number, the better the insulating value.
New and Innovative design of Bassra sealing robot is highly praised by customers.
WE ARE EXHIBITING AT
GLASSTEC DUSSELDORF 2014
OCT 20TH-25TH HALL STAND NO: 17C63