The world of numbers can be such a fascinating thing to preschoolers and kindergarteners. Once they know how to identify numbers, they try to find them everywhere. Suddenly books and the world around them have new meaning. The numbers on their clothes have new meaning- they know that size 2 is for them while size 5 is for their older sibling. This fruit themed hidden number search is perfect for kids working on numbers 1-20 and makes a great math center!
Pair this with our printable number pack for even more number learning fun!
Hidden Number Search
Before doing this activity you will want to download and print off the hidden number pages (below) and make as many copies as you need for your students. If you are using the color version, print a few copies and then laminate them for extended use.
You may also want to grab some clear color counters. These are optional, but make this extra fun if you are using the color version in a small group setting.
To complete the coloring version, you can either call out numbers, or you can make it an independent math center by providing number flashcards to 20. Kids can pick a number and find its match to color. This is great for kids to also practice holding and using crayons – coloring skills are sometimes overlooked, but they are important in building fine motor!
You can differentiate this and make it harder by showing the numbers in ten frame form or written word form too. This doesn’t have to take long – just hand written on flashcards will do!
If you are leading a group and using the color version, we enjoyed using the clear colored counters. These are great because they allow you to see through them to the number (which helps you also see if they covered the correct number without having to move their manipulative).
We played the activity as is for the first few rounds. We found the numbers and covered them while calling them out. Eventually our game evolved. We started trying to find the numbers in order– which proved a little bit harder but my son loved the challenge.
More Ways to Play
- Have students find 2 numbers with the counters and either add them or subtract them
- For every number found, create a set of counters. For example when the number 5 is found, let them also place 5 counters on the flat surface. This allows them to work on one to one correspondence as well as counting.
- Count forward or count backwards by ones
Grab the Printable
More Number Activities
Looking for more counting games and activities? Here are some of our favorites!