Epigenetics; In genetics, epigenetics is the study of cellular and physiological trait variations that are not caused by changes in the DNA sequence; in laymans terms, epigenetics is essentially the study of external or environmental factors that turn genes on and off and affect how cells read genes.
Nothing new under the sun, a lot of people already know this, hence the expression 'like father like son'. Look at the work of Jodorowsky, he calls it 'psycho-genealogy'.
Moreover some words of Luciferian 'wisdom' by Rofschild:
There is "noise" in every bloodline! The real question is how the patriarchs deal with the "noise"!
Remember that suspension bridge in Oregon USA, Tacoma Narrows I believe...so that would be Washington USA then.
Any matter, resonant frequency reduced it to rubble as engineers watched. They were unable to suppress the self-feedback loop and the whole thing came apart. Watch the video!
Consider the same forces genetically. DNA. Bloodlines need to be pruned and tended for the long haul. No way around that, but tell that to your average person! The perfection of the bloodline and the individual ARE one and the same since there is no differentiation between the two. Therefore it is AXIOMATIC! How would YOU prove the two are unique entities...DNA testing??
You exist to learn survival tools and pass those, and DNA, to your progeny.
YOU alone, will set their trajectory and define their life. Choose wisely!
Memories are accumulated experiences, without the timeline component most assign. You survive because you ALREADY access these data, although you may be unaware. Think of all the functions the subconscious manages without your conscious thoughts (respiration, muscle movement, heart beat, etc). Subconscious also regulates your stored experiences and DNA history. Sad that the subconscious * is an ALIEN aspect of your being!
*Subconscious: existing or operating in the mind beneath or beyond consciousness: the subconscious self, which effectively means some one else IN control of your mind and thus your 'ego' indeed OUT of control, hence the madness in 'the world'.
PS 'Self' of course in reality doesn't exist, it simply has no inherent existence, it's a construct! Why else do you think that Christians are ought to 'die' to self and Buddhist suggest you better overcome the self?
Women absorb and carry living DNA and cells from every male they have sexual intercourse with: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/m/pubmed/16084184/
Try to link that to the Biblical story of Adam and Eve (why did Eve com FROM Adam and NOT the other way around?), the sexes and symbology of Sun and Moon.
How can eating healthy be a disease at the same time? How can two object occupy the same space at the same time? IT CAN'T. We are looking at a contradictio in terminis so don't be fooled.
Of course one could argue that some people obsess over food, are too fanatical about it but that has NOTHING to do with the difference between healthy and unhealthy food.
Roughly there are 4 types of food, from 'good' to 'bad':
Now go figure which food items belong to which category, decide if you want to live healthy or not and determine your diet accordingly. Simple.