Bushfire prone land is an area of land that can support a bushfire or is likely to be subject to bushfire attack. The Sutherland Shire Bush Fire Prone Land Map is certified by the NSW Rural Fire Service. It shows all land considered to be at risk from bushfire.
Is my property in bushfire prone land?
View bushfire prone land - Shire Maps
What do the colours on the map mean?
Orange - Vegetation category 1 - this is the most hazardous vegetation category.
Yellow - Vegetation category 2 - within the Shire these are smaller, isolated pockets of vegetation that are of a lesser hazard than Vegetation Category 1.
Red - Vegetation buffer - these are areas in which developments and people are most likely to be affected by a bush fire. The red area extends for a distance of 100 metres from the category 1 areas and 30 metres from category 2 areas.
What does it mean if my property is located in bushfire prone land?
If your property is located within a red, orange or yellow area on the bushfire prone land map, bushfire protection measures are likely to be needed when designing a development. Council must also take into account the bushfire risk in the assessment of a development application or bushfire certificate application for that land.
Special building setbacks, landscaping and construction requirements may apply. This will depend on the type of development, the degree of bush fire hazard and the distance from the hazard.
Further information is available from the NSW Rural Fire Service.
What are the construction requirements in bushfire prone areas?
Planning for Bushfire Protection is the NSW Rural Fire Service bushfire protection measures to be included when planning or modifying development in a bushfire prone area. It links the bushfire hazard for a site with appropriate bushfire protection measures including:
- Asset Protection Zones (fuel reduced areas).
- Building construction standards and design (using Australian Standard AS3959).
- Access arrangements for residents, fire fighters, emergency service workers and those involved in evacuation.
- Water supply and utilities.
- Emergency management arrangements.
- Suitable landscaping to limit fire spreading to a building.in
What if only part of my property is bushfire prone?
If you are constructing a dwelling, or doing alterations and additions, and the dwelling or work (including an access road, landscaping or bush fire asset protection) is located outside that part of the property designated as bush fire prone land, no special bush fire requirements will be applied to the development application.
If the application is for a residential subdivision or other type of development (such as a school or nursing home) identified under Section 100B of the Rural Fires Act, the application is considered to be "integrated development" and must be referred to the NSW Rural Fire Service.
What if my house is located outside the bushfire prone area?
The edge of the bush fire prone land on the map is an artificial boundary. The impact of a bush fire may not be limited to designated bush fire prone areas. However, it is considered that the level of bush fire risk outside of these areas is such that no special bush fire construction measures are needed. The bush fire risk can be adequately managed by normal building practices and ongoing maintenance of buildings and yards by the owners or occupiers.
How accurate is the map?
The bush fire prone land map has been produced from aerial photos and vegetation maps. Field surveys have occurred, but in some areas it is very difficult to map the edge of the vegetation.
If an applicant disagrees that a particular property is bush fire prone, they can provide more detailed information in the form of a survey showing the distance from the nearest bush fire hazard to the proposed development.
Bushfire Certificate (BAL) Application