100% Made in America American Flags near Washington CT 06793
A national icon that goes by the names “The Stars and Stripes”, “Old Glory”, and also “The Star-Spangled Banner”, the American flag is one of the very recognizable symbols in the globe today. The American Flag is the third oldest of the National Standards of the globe – older compared to the Union Jack of Britain or the Tricolor of France.
Who made the American Flag?
According to prominent tales, the first American flag was made by Betsy Ross, a Philadelphia seamstress that was acquainted with George Washington. In May 1776, so the tale goes, General Washington as well as two representatives from the Continental Congress went to Ross at her upholstery store and showed her a rough layout of the flag.
In those days, the flag was not the same as we understand it today. The act mentioned, “Resolved, that the flag of the United States be thirteen stripes, alternating red and white; that the Union be thirteen stars, white in a blue field, representing a brand-new constellation.”
Just what does the American Flag represent?
The flag initially rose over thirteen states along the Atlantic coast, with a populace of some 3 million individuals. Today it flies over fifty states, expanding throughout the continent, as well as over multiple islands of the two seas; and many owe it obligation.
The flag is composed of 13 alternating red and also white horizontal stripes standing for the first thirteen British communities that stated freedom from the Kingdom of Great Britain, and became the initial states in the US. This blue location of the flag is called the Union.
The symbolism of the Flag, as quoted from Washington: “We take the stars from Heaven, the red from our mother country, dividing it by white red stripes, therefore revealing that we have actually divided from her, as well as the white stripes will decrease to posterity representing Liberty.”
It incarnates for all humanity the spirit of liberty as well as the glorious principle of human freedom; not the freedom of unrestraint or the liberty of license, but a special principle of equal opportunity permanently, liberty as well as the pursuit of joy, secured by the demanding and lofty concepts of task, of integrity and of justice, and also possible by obedience to self-imposed legislations.
It embodies the significance of nationalism. Its spirit is the spirit of the American nation. Its history is the background of the American individuals. Emblazoned upon its folds in letters of living light are the names as well as popularity of our heroic dead, the Fathers of the Republic who dedicated after its altars their lives, their treasures and also their sacred honor. Two times told tales of national honor and glory collection heavily about it. Ever triumphant, it has emerged victorious from eight excellent national conflicts. It flew at Saratog, at Yorktown, at Palo Alto, at Gettysburg, at Manila bay, at Chateau-Thierry, at Iwo Jima. It bears witness to the immense expansion of our nationwide limits, the advancement of our natural resources, as well as the splendid framework of our people. It prophesises the victory of prominent federal government, of civic and also religious freedom as well as of nationwide integrity throughout the globe.
Why is the American Flag vital to American society?
The American flag is extremely vital due to the fact that it symbolizes the independent government as defined under the United States Constitution. The flag likewise represents the different successes of the nation as well as the pride of its individuals.
This national icon reminds people, not only in the Connecticut state, but throughout the whole USA regarding the different essential elements of the Declaration of Independence. It is a complex symbol, which represents the freedom and also rights of Americans. Floating from the soaring pinnacle of American idealism, it is a sign of sustaining hope.
It is the indicator made visible of the solid spirit that has brought liberty and prosperity to individuals of America. It is the flag of all us alike. Let us accord it recognize and loyalty.
Where can I find American Flags?
You possibly currently noticed this, however there are a lot of places where you can obtain American flags. Nonetheless, it is important to keep in mind that the flag you are going to purchase need to be “Made in USA”.
Based upon statistics, Americans spend over 5.3 million US dollars on imported flags each year – the majority of which are made in China. Maybe much more disconcerting is that throughout 2001, in the wave of patriotism that washed over America after 9/11, Americans bought $52 million USD in imported flags. The flag must represent the blood, sweat, and also tears of American men and women that brought this country right into existence, not our debt to China as well as the death of the American production industry.
The flag symbolizes nationwide independence and also popular sovereignty. It is not the flag of a ruling family or royal house, yet of the many free people welded into a country, one and indivisible, united not only by community of passion, yet by vital unity of sentiment as well as purpose; a country differentiated for the clear specific perception of its people alike of their duties and also their opportunities, their obligations and their civil liberties.
Have a little pride, cough up a few even more bucks, and get an American flag made by Americans in the United States of America.
Washington ZIP codes we serve: 06793