Critical Resistance aims to abolish society’s collective belief that caging and controlling people makes us safe.
They believe that basic human necessities such as food, water, shelter, and FREEDOM are what make our communities secure.
CR works tremendously hard to assist those have been or will be incarcerated, aiming to prevent people from being arrested and/or put in prison.
Center on Juvenile and Criminal Justice (CJCJ) are a non-profit non-partisan organization whose goal is to reduce the level of incarceration within the U.S., to thereby abolish its “reliance” within society.
CJCJ provides direct services which cater to both adults and juvenile offenders at various stages of the justice system.
These services include but are not limited to:
- Community Options for Youth (COY): provides mental health support for youth ranging from 12-24 years of age within San Francisco.
- Placement Diversion Re-entry Program (PDRP): providing intensive supervision and clinical services (ISCS) for probation-involved youth.
- Homeless Employment Collaborative (HEC): assists in finding employment for homeless individuals who were formerly incarcerated.
The Federal Bureau of Prisons (BOP) aims to provide progressive and humane care for federal inmates, professionalise the prison service, and ensure consistency in the administration of federal prisons.
They operate within the Mid-Atlantic, North Central, South Central, Northeast/Southeast, and Western Regions.
Vera aims to produce change and build an improved justice system that ensures fairness, promotes safety, and strengthen communities.
They work in collaboration with others organisations to advocate for discrepancies within the legal system. They focus on such areas like: sentencing, victimisation and safety, immigration, youth and/or family justice, as well as prosecution and racial systems.
The ACLU’s National Prison Project is dedicated to ensuring that USA’s prisons, jails, and detention centres comply with the Constitution, domestic law, and human rights principles.
In terms of prisoners’ rights, ACLU are currently focusing on issues of medical and mental health care, solitary confinement, cruel, inhuman, and degrading conditions, civil liberties in prison, and women in prison.
All of Us or None is a grassroots civil and human rights organization fighting for the rights of formerly- and currently- incarcerated people and their families. They also fight against the discrimination that people face every day because of arrest or conviction history.
Issues that AOUON have been working on include leadership-development for formerly-incarcerated people and their families, removing the question and check box, “Have you been convicted by a court?” from applications for employment, housing, insurance etc., voter education and registration, and support for Lifer families and people.