The theme of religion is an extensive subject and one that is often controversial. Level 2 students were required for the module Visual Expression to offer a response to the theme in the widest sense of the word. In this way students aimed to ambitiously challenge, probe, analyse, argue or celebrate the idea of religion. The students were also given free will to ascertain the most suitable design solution that would fittingly communicate their position on the subject.
EMMA WALLER : In this piece Emma elected to ‘retell the story of Adam and Eve told to us in the Bible. She asks how Eve was implicated in the story as the villian, thereby setting a precedent for all women, pointing out that Adam had a choice. It was not as if she had ‘pointed a gun’ towards his head, and forced him to sin. She offers in this tryptych, that the consequence of this ‘lie’ , created by man, has no doubt affected society’s view on women. Instead she offers, that we should praise Eve for her curiosity in the Garden of Eden, rather than blaming her? Maybe then, she offers, things might change.
RACHEL CROOK: In this piece Rachael reflected on the contributions made by some of the Graphic Design greats and their respective views on Graphic Design, namely: Saul Bass, and his position that ‘Design is thinking made visual'; David Carson , and his view that, one should not ‘confuse legibility with communication’ and Eric Gill’s view that ‘less is more’. These ideas were brought together as a series ‘religious’ quotes on three respective stained glass windows.
KIMBERLEY KEYS: The practice of Tarot is based on an acknowledgement that various forms of spiritual power are accessible through the arrangement cards depicting a symbol system. Tarot is often viewed as powerful way of revealing the truth about one’s life. Kimberley wanted to celebrate the tradition of the Tarot Card, while reinterpreting this system as a means of reflecting on modern ‘Wive’s Tales’ and the superstitions we still believe in today.
OLIVIA JONES: This project aimed to communicate that society has lost touch with true religion and has instead turned to worshipping brand “gods”, or in other words – brands “worshipped” or sought after within different sectors of society. Various well known brands were selected at random to offer a hypothetical example of this social phenomenon. These included: Lego; Nike; McDonalds; and Apple. Olivia proposed that “stained glass windows”, displayed together with altered texts from the Bible could, when placed in in modern day ‘churches’ such as shopping centres, serve to deliver this message.