Compare book prices
at 110 online bookstores
worldwide for the lowest price for new & used textbooks and
discount books! 1 click to get great deals on cheap books, cheap
textbooks & discount college textbooks on sale.
Within the cultural and literary context of contemporary Portugal and Western literature, 1998 was unquestionably the year that Portuguese writing gained international recognition as JosU Saramago became the first Portuguese writer ever to receive the Nobel Prize in literature. Readers who had never thought about Portuguese letters began to consume his books and, most importantly, opted for expanding their reading lists to include other important writers not only from Portugal, but from Portuguese-speaking well beyond the borders of Portugal. Global Impact of the Portuguese Language is a collection of Portuguese writing that is as rich in content and broad in scope as the diversity of its topics and writing modes of its contributors.
The book is divided into three major parts. Part 1, "Different Cultural Perspectives of Portuguese Writing," contains thirteen chapters in which the first and opening one, "Portugal: The New Frontier" ably sets the stage for the book by examining from a cultural perspective how Portugal, a peripheral country in the new world system, serves as a microcosm of the problems of cultural intercommunication in today's world. Subsequent chapters are grouped in three categories: "The Voices of the Writers," "Critical Approaches to Cames," and "Fictionalizing the Nation." Part 2, "Portuguese Language and Literature Outside Portugal," comprises one section devoted to the Portuguese language in Africa, followed by studies about Portuguese discoveries as part of the historical process of remembering and forging one's identity, and finally a comprehensive historical development of Portuguese writing, both in Portuguese and English, in the United States. Part 3, "Portuguese Literature and Criticism Available in English: Suggested Readings" details the recent literary happenings which point to a possible renaissance in Portuguese literary production. The concluding part of this volume offers a short, comprehensive listing of anthologies, general studies, and the most popular translations of the best of Portuguese writing from Portugal and Africa. This lively volume constitutes a first pioneering effort to contribute to a deepening appreciation and understanding of Portuguese writing. Anyone interested in ethnic writing will find this book an invaluable education resource with which to begin an exploration of Portuguese writing in the United States. Asela Rodriguez de Laguna is associate professor of Spanish and director of the Hispanic Civilization & Language Studies Program. She is the author of Notes on Puerto Rican Literature: Images and Identities: An Introduction, and editor of Images and Identities: The Puerto Rican in Two World Contexts.
More About Using This Site and Buying Books Online:
Be Sure to Compare Book Prices Before Buy
This site was created for shoppers to compare book prices and find cheap books
and cheap college textbooks. A lot of discount books and discount text books
are put on sale by many discounted book retailers and discount bookstores everyday.
You just need to search and find them. Our site provides many book links to
some major bookstores for book details and book coupons. But be sure not just
jump into any bookstore site to buy. Always click "Compare Price" button to
compare prices first. You would be happy that how much you could save by doing
book price comparison.
Buy Books from Foreign Country
Our goal is to find the cheapest books and college textbooks for you, both
new and used books, from a large number of bookstores worldwide. Currently our
book search engines fetch book prices from US, UK, Canada, Australia, New Zealand,
Netherlands, Ireland, Germany, France, and Japan. More bookstores from other
countries will be added soon. Before buying from a foreign book store or book
shop, be sure to check the shipping options. It's not unusual that shipping
could take 2 -3 weeks and cost could be multiple of a domestic shipping charge.
Buy Used Books and Used Textbooks
Buying used books and used textbooks is becoming more and more popular among
college students for saving. Different second hand books could have different
conditions. Be sure check used book condition from the seller's description.
Also many book marketplaces put books for sale from small bookstores and individual
sellers. Make sure to check store review for seller's reputation when available.
If you are in a hurry to get a book or textbook for your class, you would better
choose buying new books for prompt shipping.
Please See Help Page for Questions
regarding ISBN / ISBN-10 / ISBN10, ISBN-13 / ISBN13, EAN / EAN-13, and Amazon