Women and Girls are Taking Action in the Fight Against HIV/AIDS
Now it’s time for you to decide: What can you do?
National Women and Girls HIV/AIDS Awareness Day is a nationwide observance that encourages people to take action in the fight against HIV/AIDS and raise awareness of its impact on women and girls. It is coordinated by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services‘ Office on Women’s Health (OWH). It helps organizations across the country come together to offer support, encourage discussion, and teach women and girls about prevention of HIV, the importance of getting tested for HIV, and how to live with and manage HIV/AIDS.
National Women and Girls HIV/AIDS Awareness Day is observed specifically on March 10 every year, but OWH encourages organizations to hold events throughout the month of March.
Find out what you can do! Read the OWH Director’s Dear Colleague letter (PDF, 166 KB).
Learn more about National Women and Girls HIV/AIDS Awareness Day.
Sassy Shirtz is appreciative of womenshealth.gov for the wonderful and educational literature they have provided to us. We want to share with our Sassy Friends all that we can to assist in your continued health and happiness.
Here are some tools and resources provided by womenshealth.gov
Freeze Frame, One-Minute Stress Management (Institute for HeartMath). – This tool focuses on teaching a technique to control and more effectively respond to stress. Researchers have found that this technique reduces blood pressure and stabilizes heart rhythms, and users report a sense of calm and guidance in their decision-making. This tool focuses more on controlling and dealing effectively with day-to-day stressors to improve overall quality of life as opposed to avoidance of negative outcomes like depression. Visit: www.heartmath.org/index.html
Positive Psychological Interventions That Increase Happiness (Seligman, Steen, and Peterson). – The authors describe and test five potential interventions to increase happiness. Each intervention is theorized not only to cause a temporary increase in happiness but also to be able to produce long-term gains in happiness. The interventions themselves range in content. Visit: www.psych.upenn.edu/seligman/articleseligman.pdf
Be Good To Yourself!