Fort San Pedro was built by Miguel Lopez de Legaspi on May 8, 1565, 11 days after his arrival. It is the smallest an the oldest tri-baston fort in the Philippines. Today, the fort serves as a park and museum, a unique Cebuano heritage.
The Walls of Fort San Pedro
The fort served as a military camp defense so the walls are built with stone mortars. You will also see that the walls are mounted with guns or kanyon in Filipino (derived from the Spanish word cañon).
They also have a terreplein and this is one of the guns that you can find on the ground.
The Views Inside
Inside the fort, they have planted trees, flowers, and bonsai trees as well. There’s an area they call Bastion Ignacio de Loyola (herbal garden) where they have arranged the bonsai trees.
The Antiques Inside
Just a few steps from the entrance, there’s a room where they have put the antiques. First is the Spanish flag that was taken from one of the vessels of the Spanish fleet by Admiral George Dewey during the Battle of Manila Bay on August 13, 1898. It was donated to Cebu City in 1993.
They have also preserved some letters written by Andres Bonifacio and other Katipuneros (member of Katipunan, a revolutionary group that sought freedom from Spain).
There’s also the vestidor or vest of Hipolito Labra, a Katipunero and the longest who served the Cabeza de Barangay of Sapangdaku, Guadalupe. They believed that the wearing of vestidor would make them invisible.
Some weapons that were used by the Katipuneros can also be found inside.
The Pozo dela Virgen
There’s also a well inside the fort. Take not that it’s just a well and not a wishing well and there’s a note on it that clear says “No Dropping of Coins”.
The walls of the fort are wide and they have structured it in a way that people can walk on it. This is the stair that enables you to get to the top of the fort.
The Cuerpo de Guardia
The Cuerpo de Guardia is the largest among the buildings in the fort and it is where the personnel that manned the fort lived.
The Viviende del Teniente
The Viviende del Teniente served as the living quarters of the lieutenant of the fort.
A Closer look at Some of the Guns on Top of the Wall
Here are some of the guns that they put on the walls. They really protected the place since it served as the nucleus of the first Spanish settlement in the country.
There are also some chairs and trees that serve as a shade for the tired tourists.
A Philippine flag is now proudly erected in the fort that was once a Spanish camp.
- Regular – 30 pesos
- Senior Citizens – 24 pesos
- Students & Children – 20 pesos
- Car – 15 pesos
- Bus / Coaster – 30 Pesos
Fort San Pedro is open from Monday to Sunday, 8:00 AM to 8:00 PM.