VGLA/VSEP 2011-2012 Update. Augusta County Public Schools Alternative Assessments Fall Training Augusta 2011. VGLA/VSEP Process. Identification of Students Participation requirements How different from VMAST Collection of Evidence Scoring. 2010- 2011 VGLA IMPORTANT DATES. 2008
Download Policy: Content on the Website is provided to you AS IS for your information and personal use and may not be sold / licensed / shared on other websites without getting consent from its author.While downloading, if for some reason you are not able to download a presentation, the publisher may have deleted the file from their server.
Augusta County Public Schools
Please note that we will have “benchmark dates” on which collections will be checked for quality and completeness.
(1) program description
(2) roles and responsibilities of staff
(3) participation criteria
(4) implementation procedures
(5) guidelines for preparing evidence
(6) Summary of scoring, rescoring, and resubmission
Typical Characteristics of a student with a
disability recommended for the VGLA:
VGLA Implementation Manual 2010 -2011, p. 5
Why is the course content teacher needed?
What are alternative formats?
Alternative formats are methods other than multiple-choice formats used for a student to demonstrate their knowledge. Alternate formats may include, but are not limited to, interviews, projects, short answer formats, and demonstrations.
Should in the multiple-choice and alternative format demonstrate the same skill or concept?
How should student performance be described?
The description of student performance may include grading, evaluative comments, rubric scores, or other methods used by the teacher to provide feedback and to convey the accuracy of the student’s work.
Content Area – Reading
Content Area -Reading
Send the actual student work to Gordon
Virginia Grade Level Alternative Assessment
Student: Maria Student
SOL 5.13 Measure and draw right, acute, and obtuse angles and triangles using appropriate tools.
March 1, 2005: During math lesson, Maria was asked to create three types of angles using the appropriate tools. Maria picked up the protractor and created an acute angel of 35 degrees, a right angle at 90 degrees and a 125 degree obtuse angle. Each of these was correctly done.
March 8, 2005: Maria was asked to measure 5 different types of triangles. Maria identified 4 out of 5 correctly.
March 15, 2005: Maria was asked to measure 10 different types of triangles. She identified all 10 correctly.