You will need a pen and paper,Turn to your neighbout
BUT, In general, pupils are not allowed to use any of their own devices for learning in lessons with the exception of laptops, which are allowed in a minority of schools rarely or in less than half of lessons. Teachers reported that pupils are allowed to use their own laptops in 23 per cent of primary schools, 41 per cent of secondary and 39 per cent of special schoolsGraph practically the same for use of computer/internet
So students using IT for homework more than they are set
The self completion survey was completed online between September 2009 and March 2010. In total 949 primary pupils, 2074 Year 8 pupils and 1636 Year 10 pupils completed the survey.Thirty percent of young people reported that they found it difficult to find useful information online. Despite 79 per cent of Year 8 and 83 per cent of Year 10 knowing to use keywords, at least a quarter believed that they should use all the information they found, rather than being selective. Around a fifth believed that whenseeing information for a presentation they should use the first option from the search engine as it must be the most important.
The literacy practices which students tend to use in their everyday lives are on the whole:Multi-modal. On the whole students reading and writing combines the use of symbols, pictures, colour, music etcMulti-media. Students uses of literacy combine the uses of paper-based and electronic mediaShared. E.g. interactive, participatory, collaborativeNon-linear. Eg. Different reading paths are taken through a text, dipping into sections, flicking through, finding relevant bits, rather than following a linear route from the beginning to the endAgentic. Students tend to have responsibility within these practicesPurposeful to the studentHave a clear sense of audienceGenerative – involving sense making and creativitySelf-determined in terms of activity, time and place.
Start at 1:44Medical student at American University of the Caribbean
As reported in the Guardian, 8 August 2011The Future Work Skills report predicts that six trends will dominate the job market over the next 10 years. To be successful, employees will need to acquire 10 key skills.Sense-making: while computers can automate certain tasks or jobs, they can't perform reasoned analysis, which is where humans excel.Social intelligence: working effectively with large groups of people involves the ability to adapt language and behaviour.Adaptive thinking: finding solutions to unexpected situations, whether these occur in high-skill professional / technical roles or in lower-skill roles.Cross-cultural competency: being able to work not just in different linguistic or cultural settings, but in groups including different generations or people with varied skills and working styles.Virtual collaboration: adopting strategies for virtual team working, such as providing immediate feedback or staged challenges.Computational thinking: with increased data comes the need to understand it, and to make decisions based on it.New media literacy: producing content with non-text communication, such as video or audio.Cognitive load management: using filtering techniques and tools to deal with the information overload caused by huge amounts of data.Transdisciplinarity: working longer or in multiple careers means having a deep understanding in one field, as well as familiarity with a broader range of disciplines.Design mindset: as physical environments affect mood, the ability to plan work environments for different tasks or work processes will allow employees to perform better.
A caution to this ….,Learners’ expectations of innovative uses of technology are limited by a lack of prior experience and knowledge of what the institution can offer.Learners adopt a cautious, conservative, low-risk approach to study when the risks are high.
All agree? Are these statements enough?Probably not, in fact the 2012 European Commission report on expert’s view of digital competence, starts from the premise that educators require more clarity from such definitions.
Having functional access might include issues of ownership, mobility, accessibility and time.Just because learners own a lot of technology, doesn’t mean that they don’t rely on institutions. They particularly rely on institutional provision of networking and materials in electronic & accessible formatAfter having access, the next thing is to have some skills. Learners need to develop generic technical, information, communication and learning skills. There was lots of evidence that these develop over time, but need to devote time to their development. Enablers: Support from family and friends or from formal teaching (such as the European Computer Driving Licence), to develop basic IT skills e.g. word processing, touchtyping, anti-virus updates, backups, installing software updates.Guidance and training on how to access to key academic resources such as online journals, which is not confined to inductionSee DALLI example,
Abingdon & Witney. A universal induction in digital learning technologies. Induction topics includeemail, connecting to the intranet, plagiarism, the virtual learning environment, remote access andcustomising your computers. The induction mixes multimedia with in-classactivities and the online resources are available anytime, anywhereDALLI was mandatory but students received a 2G memory stick on completion
This is where it gets interesting and you start to see more differences between individual learners. At this stage learners use technology to meet a particular need (lead) and mature in these choices and uses (stroll)Learners make informed choices about how to use technologies, alone and with others. They develop personal, flexible strategies in response to situational needs.Supporting students to use personal technology in productive ways. Making the use of personal devices, such as personal laptops, smartphones, camcorders and audio devices, a central tenet of technology use across the curriculum. Staff supported to adopt innovative use of mobiles and flipcams in class (site B).Learners’ conceptions of the role of technology allow them to make use of the skills and practices they have developed to create their own learning environments
Students appreciate being allowed - encouraged – to use their own devices, and similar cheap accessible devices (flip cams) purchased by the college.
While you are doing that, I’ll tell you some more about what we are doing at Oxford Brookes….
So learners who reach the top of the triangle are those that use technology in positive ways to support their learning. Usually beyond the boundaries of the course/uni provision. Often doing creative things we haven’t thought of. It’s about learners developing an identity of a digital learner, having the attributes which allow them to create their own environments and social contexts. At Brookes we’ve been trying to make use of these learners…
The Instepp project was about how we could make use of students at the top of the pyramid to support staff and other students digital literacy development.We had lots of ideas at the start18 mths in …. The roles that are working are…
To become an epioneerAttend a short briefing session to meet faculty partnership leadCore induction training: Future consultants, Moodle training, data protectionWhat you doTake commissions from staff Act on own initiative e.g. moodle guide for studentsRewardsILM endorsement for Future Consultants1 years membership of ALT
In other words, in a multiplicity of ways some of the existing ePioneers exemplify the Oxford Brookes digital and information literacy graduate attribute, being ‘confident, agile adopter(s) of a range of technologies for personal, academic and professional use’. It is this confidence and agility, rather than specific knowledge of software or devices, that is of greatest value to the project and to developing the digital literacies of others. The ePioneers suggested that as far as possible supplementary ePioneer training on how to use various digital tools should be made available online so that ePioneers can ‘do all the training in their own time and then in their e-portfolio tick off the training when it's done’ (ePioneer 1, 14 Sep 2012).
Confidence and agility.. .. Rather than mastery of specific system. . Of course all students need baseline skills, but graduates need to have applied these skills in challenging contexts and with high-level tasks. (GRADUATE ATTRIBUTES)Digital skills should not be bolted onto existing provision. Rather, the institution needs to renew its core practices in the light of new digital challenges and opportunities. Digital literacy can be incorporated into the student experience as an aspect of professionalism, employability, citizenship, and other core values and attributes of becoming a graduate.Students' technology skills are shared very readily, including with academic staff! Students may lack experience in professional and academic practice, but their technical know-how can be harnessed through peer working, paid support roles, internships and mentoring schemes.Students needopportunities to express and develop their personal preferences for technology. Use of their own devices and services for study should be encouraged and supported. Social and personal uses of technology are important in their own right to help students fit learning into their lives and maintain their commitment to study. Institutions should find different ways to involve students in shaping their experience of learning with technology. This might be directly, for example giving choices about technology, or asking for and responding to feedback in class. Or it might be indirectly, such as working with course representatives and the Students Union to improve the learning experience.
Highbury opening presentation
DIGITAL LITERACY FOR HIGHER EDUCATIONDr. Rhona Sharpersharpe@brookes.ac.ukFor Highbury College, Portsmouth12 December 2012Oxford Centre for Staff and Learning Developmentbrookes.ac.uk/services/ocsld
How are learners making use oftechnology to support their studies?
NEW LEARNERS?Does education require a revolution to accommodate upand coming digital natives?
You will need a blank pieceof paper and a pencilNow, turn to your neighbour….
BECTA HARNESSING TECHNOLOGYSCHOOLS SURVEY 201097% of secondary school learners and 94% of primaryschool learners had internet access at home
BECTA HARNESSING TECHNOLOGYSCHOOLS SURVEY 201081% of Yr10 students know how to uploadvideos, pictures of recordings60% of Yr10 students know how to edit awiki or blog.30% find it difficult to find usefulinformation online
LITERACY PRACTICES IN EVERYDAY LIFEMulti-modal PurposefulMulti-media Clear sense ofShared audienceNon-linear GenerativeAgentic Self-determinedIvanic et al (2007) Literacies for learning in FurtherEducation. http://www.lancs.ac.uk/lflfe/index.htm
NEW DEMANDS ON EDUCATION Sense making Computational thinking Social intelligence New media literacy Adaptive thinking Cognitive load Cross-cultural management competency Transdisciplinarity Virtual collaboration Design mindsetFUTURE WORK SKILLS 2020
OVERVIEWDigital natives are not necessarily digitally literate,although they: 1. Demonstrate literacy practices informed by use of technology 2. Have high expectations of institutions to provide robust and accessible technology 3. Have a very broad view of the role of technology in learning 4. Sometimes use technology in ways that we have not predicted and that we can learn from.
DEFINITIONS: LITERACY“The use of the term literacy implies abroader form of education about mediathat is not restricted to mechanical skills ornarrow forms of functional competence. Itsuggests a more rounded, humanisticconception‟ (Buckingham, 2006)
DEFINITIONS: DIGITAL LITERACY“Digital literacy expresses the sum ofcapabilities an individual needs to live,learn and work in a digital society” (JISC,Developing Digital Literacy Workshops,2011)
TAXONOMIESFerrari, A. (2012) Digital competence in practice: ananalysis of frameworks. JRC Technical Report. EU.
DEVELOPMENTAL MODELSSharpe and Beetham 2010 attributes „I am . . .‟ personal practices „I do . . .‟ skills „I can . . .‟ functional access „I have . . .‟
BRINGING IT ALL TOGETHERAt Oxford Brookes University, digital andinformation literacy is defined as ..The functional access, skills and practicesnecessary to become a confident, agileadopter of a range of technologies forpersonal, academic and professional usehttps://wiki.brookes.ac.uk/display/slidacases/Oxford+Brookes
REFLECTION POINT 1What definition of digital literacy wouldmake sense and help people to takeaction, in your context of work? Tweet your thoughts using the tag #dlhighbury
Implications of the developmental framework 2From ISL
BIRKENHEAD SIXTH FORM COLLEGE https://wiki.brookes.ac.uk/display/slidacases/
REFLECTION POINT 2What could you do to move this agenda onat Highbury?Tweet your thoughts to #dlhighbury
OXFORD BROOKES UNIVERSITYDefining digital andinformation literacywithin the context ofthe discipline.
What does it mean to bedigitally literate in . . .? Use online databases to conduct systematic reviews. Analyse data in Excel to produce scientific reports.Health and life Maintain electronic patientsciences care records appropriately. Evaluate the role of assistive technologies in advancing health and social care practice.
What does it mean to bedigitally literate in . . .? Use relevant software to solve complex automotive engineering problems.Technology Work with models that simulate the behaviour of theand physical world.engineering Produce high quality output using the latest software tools.
CONFIDENT, AGILE ADOPTERSThe staff are asking us to do things like, "how dowe integrate Twitter with this?" and, okay, I dontknow, gimme five minutes and Ill go and find out.And thats how Ive always worked.… I will goaway and make myself an expert in that field andthen come back and pass on that knowledge,enable other people to go and use that software (InstePP ePioneer 2, JISC cluster group Sep 2012).
SUMMARYGraduates who will thrive in the digital age will need the confidence and agility to respond to complex and changing circumstance.The powerful influence of context means that teachers and their institutions should take the lead in developing their learners.Learner development can be understood as developing functional access, skills, personal practices and attributes.
CREDITSMuch of the research I have been involved with hasbeen funded by the JISC, including• The Learners Experiences of e-learning programme• The Supporting Learners in a Digital Age project• The InSTePP projectSources can be found on my rjsharpe Deliciousaccount, tagged „Highbury‟.