International Encyclopedia of Horse Breeds by Bonnie L. Hendricks
An extremely delightful horse book, this is a thorough compilation of horse breeds. It enlists detailed description about the history, appearance and background of a horse. It talks of whether the horse is rare or common breed and many other details. It provides also information about some extent species of horses.
Storey’s Illustrated Guide to 96 Horse Breeds of North America by Judith Dutson
The book is about 96 horse breeds from over the world that are famous in North America. It talks about the skill level, characteristics and abilities of these various breeds. It also provides information about how some of the imported breeds have influenced the native bloodline.
Paddock Paradise: A Guide to Natural Horse Boarding by Jaime Jackson
This is a unique model that makes equine breeds behave in the most natural way following their instincts. It is based on reducing captivity and providing a natural and emotionally free environment.
Horses Were Born to be on Grass by Joe Camp
This is a thrilling narrative of the experiences the author Joe Camp and his photographer wife Kathleen Camp encountered at “Founder Valley”. The book gives intricate and practical information about horse breading in the wild but at the same time it takes the effect of storytelling. While you read you are transported to the lush green meadows, among the horses in the Wild West.
Horse keeping on a Small Acreage by Cherry Hill
Horse breading requires organized working habits, knowledge of the subject, dedication and hard work. It is most important to keep the horses happy. This is a step by step guide to the everyday management of horses. It explains how careful planning can serve the emotional needs of the horses and keep them happy.
First Horse: The Complete Guide for the First-Time Horse Owner by Fran Smith
The books tells you all that you need to know about owning a horse, right from how to choose a horse, how to care for it and how to achieve a lifelong successful horse ownership. This is an excellent guide for the young and gives emphasis on safety.
Complete Horse Care Manual by Colin
The book covers all essential aspects of horse breading. It gives emphasis on regular professional care and medical assistance when needed. It provides accurate and reliable information on different aspects of equine breading like grazing, clipping, trimming, shoeing and nutrition needs.
The Art of Horsemanship by Xenophon translated by Morris H. Morgan
Written 2,300 years back this book provides information valid even today about practical tips on choosing, riding and caring for a horse. The equestrian arts based on a common wisdom have not changed through centuries. The author gives a thrilling narrative of the art of horsemanship
Reflections on Equestrian Art by Nuno Oliveira
The book portrays the personality and philosophy of the author who is one of the top ranking international riding masters. Skills can be acquired and processes of horse breading can be learnt. But to be the perfect horseman you need to have in the first place a deep love and respect for horses, a capacity to understand their emotions and readiness to provide them the right environment.
Training on the Trail by Clinton Anderson and Jennifer Forsberg Meyer
The author provides a detailed explanation of techniques to be used while trail riding. He explains how to channel the negative energy of the horse and control inappropriate behavior like spooking and grass snatching. But above all he teaches us to how to understand the needs of your horse and give respect.