Do you know that there is an eating disorder that can cause death? It’s called anorexia nervosa. It is primarily an eating disorder but it is also considered a mental illness. If you want to know more, read on as knowing some of the critical things about this illness may actually help you save someone else’s life.
What Is Anorexia Nervosa?
Medical experts define this as an eating disorder and a type of mental illness. A person suffering from anorexia nervosa is consumed by the fear of getting fat or gaining weight. He or she also sees his or her body differently, or in medical terms, the person has a distorted image of his or her body. Generally, people with this illness sees their body as too fat even if they are not, and because of this, they resort to extreme measures of dieting to the point of starvation and extreme exercise.
How Does This Condition Develop?
Actually, medical experts are still unsure, but according to medical researches done, results suggests that this condition normally begins during the teenage years. Generally, it is during these formative years when young people are starting to be very conscious about how they look. To deal with unwanted weight, or to “fit in”, heavy teenagers do fad diets and crash diets just to lose the unwanted weight. At this point there is really nothing wrong. However, for some teenagers, the dieting and the exercise gets out of control. Some go to as far as starving themselves just to become ‘three or four sizes smaller’.
What Are the Symptoms?
People with this eating disorder believes that they are “too fat” even if they are not. Then they exercise too much; they are obsessed with too much exercise. Another thing very observable with people afflicted with anorexia is they are possessed with dieting. They eat very little or none at all, saying they have had a meal already. Then they worry a lot about how fat they look even if they are too thin already. If these symptoms are present and observable, you can be sure the person has anorexia nervosa. Lastly, these people use laxatives and diuretics to flush out the food eaten in an effort to lose weight.
Where’s the Danger?
The problem begins when the body suffers from the lack of nourishment as a result of extreme dieting and exercise. Doctors say that as the body is starved from the nourishment it needs, major organs begin to suffer. There is muscle loss, then the bone suffers, then the heart, then the kidney, and everything else will eventually stop functioning. When all these happen, the person ultimately dies.
Can It Be Treated?
Yes of course, but only with the help of a medical professional – a doctor. Thus it is very important to consult a doctor for help.
Images courtesy of Ambro & Zircunicusso /FreeDigitalPhotos.net