|Just like phytoplankton, Joselynn Wallace (Univ. of Rhode Island)|
is taking advantage of the sun.
|L to R: Kathryn Ferguson |
Maribel Albarran (RTC-SFSU),
and Andrew Shellenbach
|Hannah Glover (UW/NOAA-PMEL), |
Rachel Vander Giessen (UW-APL)
and Keith Shadle (R/V Melville) are
deploying the "iron" fish to collect water.
|Scientists like Julia Matheson |
of Western Univ., try to work out when
there's a break in sampling.
|Joselynn Wallace (Univ. of Rhode|
Island) shows off the artistically designed
styrofoam head thatwill eventually
be sent to the depths of the Pacific,
to be shrunken by the water's pressure.
Lipids are fats that are utilized as stored energy. When phytoplankton are eaten by zooplankton (microscopic drifting animals), energy is transferred. Large zooplankton such as krill, are later eaten by larger organisms such as fish and humpback whales. Energy is required by organisms to reproduce. If phytoplankton are not able to make these lipids, then zooplankton and other organisms in a food web will be adversely affected.
One of the major questions we are testing is how will lowered seawater pH (in other words higher acidity) affect the production of Omega-3 fatty acids? If production is affected, it will alter the overall nutrition of food webs. Phytoplankton may become less (or perhaps more) nutritious to their zooplankton predators. They won't receive the quality of nutrition they once had. How will the total amount and composition of food change? How might fisheries be affected by changes in the base of the food web--the phytoplankton? How might this affect the food on your table? Important and yet to be answered questions!
|Chris Ikdea of RTC-SFSU is gearing up for his second acidification experiment.|
|Today, the ship's store was open. Only three|
cruises remain for the "Salty Ship" before
she is retired.
We are now headed toward Newport, Oregon. The sun is out, and most of us are done for the day. We have started a new multi-day deckboard experiment, and look forward collecting more data. The lab is quiet as we get ready for a new day!
The scientists aboard are glad to hear that you are following us. Please continue to check in. You can also follow me on Twitter: @SoCalCostello.