Super-Kamiokande is a 50,000 ton water Cerenkov detector located at a depth of 2700 meters water equivalent in the Kamioka Mozumi mine in Japan.
Click on image for full size
Image courtesy of the University of Maryland
The Super Kamiokande
Super-Kamiokande is a neutrino detector located in the
Kamioka Mozumi mine in Japan. Water fills this huge tank. In fact, it is the world's largest underground neutrino detector experiment (built under a joint Japan-US collaboration).
Super-Kamiokande is a big
cylindrical tank. Its dimensions are about 40 m in diameter and 40 m in
height. The walls are covered with about 13,000
photomultiplier tubes (PMT's).
These are very sensitive devices that ultimately help scientists track neutrinos.
Shop Windows to the Universe Science Store!Cool It!
is the new card game from the Union of Concerned Scientists that teaches kids about the choices we have when it comes to climate change—and how policy and technology decisions made today will matter. Cool It! is available in our online store
You might also be interested in:
All of the matter and energy in the Universe was initially confined in a very small region. An explosion occurred which caused the Universe to begin expanding. This expansion continues today. ...more
The neutrino is an extremely light particle. It has no electric charge. The neutrino interacts through the weak force. For this reason and because it is electrically neutral, neutrino interactions with...more
Theories about fusion inside the solar core predict the number of neutrinos that should reach Earth. Experiments on Earth have been set up to detect solar neutrinos in order to test these models. Current...more
When the temperature in the core of a star reaches 100 million degrees Kelvin fusion of Helium into Carbon occurs. Oxygen is also formed from fusion of Carbon and Helium together when the temperature is...more
A plot of the binding energy per nucleon vs. atomic mass shows a peak atomic number 56 (Iron). Elements with atomic mass less then 56 release energy if formed as a result of a fusion reaction. Above this...more
There are several experiments where nuclear fusion reactions have been achieved in a controlled manner (that means no bombs are involved!!). The two main approaches that are being explored are magnetic...more
In the Hydrogen bomb the explosion of a nuclear fission charge (atomic bomb) produces the temperature and density so fusion can occur. This fusion results in a sudden release of a large amount of energy...more