Yes, it’s that time of year again. In some areas kids have already gone back. In others parents wait for school to start with eager anticipation.
The beginning of the school year brings on colds, flu’s and other issues. Here are some natural ways to help.
Calendula officinalis, or Pot Marigold, is a fantastic herb for boosting the immune system. I add it to all of my herbal medicine kits. A simple tea made from calendula can help fend off colds and flu.
Calendula has been used for centuries as an antiseptic. It is used to treat wounds such as scrapes and scratches, bee stings and cuts. It was actually used during the civil war to treat wounds.
For more on immune boosting herbs see my blog here.
Most people think of lemon for lemonade, as a garnish, or as some other culinary delight. What a lot of people don’t know is that lemon has an amazing list of healing properties
• Sick headaches
It can be used around the house for cleaning and disinfecting counter tops and to freshen drains. It can be mixed with Eucalyptus oil and distilled water to clean glass surfaces and disinfect them.
Lemon is a liver detox, it is anti-inflammatory and will even make your body more alkaline if you add it to drinking water.
Echinacea is one of the most recognized of the antiseptic herbs. Many people will begin taking it at the onset of a cold. This is an excellent way to stop a cold from becoming too full blown. Caution: do not take vitamin C and echinacea thinking you will get double the power. They actually counteract each other.
Echinacea has an antiseptic use for wounds, burns fungus and boils according to the California School of Herbal Studies.
As with the other herbs mentioned here, Eucalyptus is excellent for treating wounds. It has an antiseptic and anti-bacterial effect.
Medical News Today quotes a study published in ‘Clinical Microbiology & Infection found that eucalyptus oil may have antibacterial effects on pathogenic bacteria in the upper respiratory tract.”
Eucalyptus is a favourite ingredient in many cough and cold remedies. Do not take eucalyptus oil orally.
Eucalyptus helps loosen phlegm and move it out of the system when used topically.
Coconut oil is one of my favourite, and most accessible healing agents. It can help with wound healing, fungus and head lice.
Combing coconut oil through the hair and leaving it on over night for 7 nights can help get rid of head lice. Add a rinse of lemon juice, apple cider vinegar or lavender to enhance the removal of nits.
For more info on how coconut oil works to remove lice see my blog here.
THIS BLOG IS NOT INTENDED TO REPLACE THE ADVICE OF YOUR DOCTOR.
Bartram, Thomas FNIMH, Bartram’s Encyclopedia of Herbal Medicine, Marlowe & Company, New York