Jackson was shocked at the chaos. His dad was pulling up to the parking lot at the elementary school and there was a sea of boys, siblings, parents, and leaders with packs in all stages of preparation. Before Jackson opened the car door, his dad told him to be careful but have fun. Jackson opened the door, pulled out his pack, and said, "Sure, Dad," as he kissed his dad through the open window. 

"Love you, son." 

"Love you, too, Dad". And with that Jackson's dad drove away leaving him in the middle of the sea of people. 

"There you are!" said Mr. Davis. He was the leader of Troop 27 and was the most patient man Jackson had ever encountered. "I was beginning to worry," said Mr. Davis. 

"I'm sorry," said Jackson. "I couldn't find my boots this morning." 

"Well, that wouldn't have been good for a hike," laughed Mr. Davis. "I'm glad you found them. Now let's get your pack over here and see if you've got everything." 

Jackson picked up his pack with his right hand, leaning to the left because of the weight, and shuffled over to Mr. Davis. He was pretty sure he had everything that had been on the list, but Mr. Davis was going to go through everyone's pack just to make sure. Mr. Davis carried a paper with the "each boy must have" list along with the list of items that had to be split up between all of the hikers. 

Mr. Davis said, "Just empty everything out and we'll double-check." 

Jackson started pulling out everything that he had so carefully packed last night. He hoped everything would fit when he had to pack it back up. As he was pulling out his water bottle, he heard Max, one of the older boys, say something about bears. 

Bears? thought Jackson. Weren't they hiking in Dahlonega, just a couple of hours from downtown Atlanta? Surely there couldn't possibly be any bears in North Georgia. 

Mr. Davis noticed Jackson's change in demeanor. "Don't worry, Jackson. Yes, there are black bears in North Georgia, but they don't want anything to do with us. We'll show you how to hang your food to keep the bears away." 

Jackson was suddenly not so sure about this hike.
