Heart Print: Chinese Rock Art Frescoes (Xin-yin): Crossing Boarders
In this workshop you will learn about the similarities and differences between the ancient Rock Art Frescoes of Australian Aboriginal, Chinese and Egyptian. You will explore the different specific mental processes used to create spatial depth in a selection of ancient rock art frescoes. Participants will create their own miniature sculptural petroglyph based on the findings and apply engraving and painting techniques to the frescoes. Demonstrations will be given on how to hold the Chinese brush and apply the moku ink-splash method of Chinese painting as well as how to use natural ochres in their works.
||Petroglyph, Rock Art, Australian Aboriginal, Egyptian, Comparative Study, Cross-Cultural, Moku Ink-Splash Method, Natural Rock Ochres
International Journal of the Arts in Society, Volume 4, Issue 4, pp.179-186.
Article: Print (Spiral Bound).
Article: Electronic (PDF File; 1.415MB).
PhD Candidate, Warawara- Department of Indigenous Studies, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW, Australia
Bronwen Wade Leeuwen has recently been teaching and learning in the tertiary, secondary and primary Australian educational systems. Her PhD Research in Indigenous Studies at Macquarie University focuses on cross-cultural understandings of spatial dimensions in Australian Aboriginal, Chinese and Egyptian rock art frescoes. She is Secretary of the Workshop Art Centre, (WAC), and Council Member of Australian College of Educators (ACE) and Foundation Member of the Australian Chinese Painting Association. Born in Sydney, she worked in Singapore & studied at the Nanyang Academy of Fine Arts. Completing a Bachelor of Education, (ART & DESIGN) and Graduate Diploma (Adult Education) in 1990. In 2000, completed a Masters by Research in Environmental Design-her thesis was “The Influence of Chinese Calligraphy on Australian Painting”. Awarded Artist-in–Residency in Taiwan by the Australian Chinese Council in 2002-03. In 2004, she was invited by the Taiwan’s Public Arts Projects for the Australian Indigenous NADOC week.
Write a Review
By Bronwen Wade Leeuwen
This article is a first to research the differences between these three cultural ways of depicting space. Its informative and unique in approach.