Barnabas Health Information Exchange (BHIE)
Many health care providers currently rely on slow, inconvenient methods
such as telephone, fax, mail and courier to obtain their patients’
health information. These methods are often time-consuming and can result
in health information being lost, misplaced or arriving too late. Health
Information Exchange (HIE) is the secure, rapid, electronic transfer of
your health information among the providers that treat you. Since each
provider holds a different portion of your health information, an HIE
gives your treating providers a more complete picture of your health record.
What is a HIE?
Barnabas Health’s Health Information Exchange (BHIE) allows your
Barnabas Health-affiliated hospitals, doctors and other health care providers
to electronically share your protected health information (PHI) with each
other in a secure, timely manner. For example, this health information
could include reports about your illnesses, injuries, allergies, medicines
and test results.
How will my information be used?
Protected Health Information (PHI) about you that is obtained through the
Barnabas HIE will be used for treatment only. Policies that follow federal
and state law limit how your information can be used or disclosed through
the Barnabas HIE. The privacy notices distributed by each individual provider
explains how those providers use the PHI that those providers have and
collect about you independent of the HIE.
How does the HIE work?
In order for electronic protected health information (EPHI) to be obtained
by your provider (e.g., your X-Ray results electronically sent back from
Radiology to the physician who ordered them), EPHI is stored in, and may
pass through, the Barnabas HIE secure server. When participating in the
Barnabas HIE, only authorized health care providers will have access to
the EPHI stored in that server.
Who can access my records through the Barnabas HIE?
Only health care providers who are participants in the Barnabas HIE, and
their associated staff, who are treating you, are specifically given rights
to access your PHI through the Barnabas HIE.
How secure is the Barnabas HIE?
Special security features, including data encryption and audit logs, are
used to keep your information secure and help prevent your records from
being accessed by anyone who is not supposed to have access to your information.
Even with all these security protections in place, if we discover breaches
of your information through the Barnabas HIE, you will be notified, and
the Barnabas HIE and your participating health care provider will take
steps to correct the problem.
What about my "sensitive" information?
Sensitive information in the HIE may include health information about you
that is more protected under law, such as HIV/AIDS, sexually transmitted
diseases, behavioral and mental health information, and genetic testing.
Our policies prohibit this sensitive information from being used for any
reason other than treatment of you by your health care providers.
We take your privacy very seriously. The Barnabas HIE has safeguards to
ensure as best as possible that sensitive information is accessed only
as permitted by law.
What can the HIE do for me?
Participating in an HIE- that is, consenting to share your health information
with your health care providers offers major benefits to you and your family.
- Emergency Treatment. Medical staff immediately know about your allergies,
health problems, medications, and prior visits, helping them care for
you without delay.
- More complete and accurate information. HIE gives your health care providers
greater access to the information needed to diagnose your health problems
earlier. They will know more about you and your health history before
they recommend treatment.
- Improved Care. Access to information about care you received elsewhere
gives a better, more complete picture of your health and provides information
needed to provide the best care possible. That means your care providers
can make sure the treatment they give doesn't interact badly with
other treatments you may be receiving. For example, when you can't
remember what medications you are taking, HIE can make information about
your conditions and medications available to your doctors, so they will
know the right thing to do instead of doing something that might tbe harmful.
Other "Connected” HIEs
Barnabas HIE will also be creating secure "connections" to other
community-based HIE networks. For example, if you are being treated by
two doctors - one who is in the Barnabas HIE and another who participates
in a different HIE - your two doctors could share your medical information
through a secure connection between the two HIEs to better coordinate
The Barnabas HIE will not connect to another HIE unless it meets the Barnabas
HIE’s high standards for privacy and security.
Can I access my own medical records?
With the Barnabas HIE, your records are only available to participating
health care providers, for instance, the doctor who is treating you. If
you want copies of your medical records, you should contact your health
HIE Opt-out form (pdf)
95 Old Short Hills Road
West Orange, NJ 07052
ATTN: Corp ITS, BHIE Coordinator
How do I sign up?
There is no need to do anything further. If you received treatment from
a Barnabas Health-affiliated hospital or affiliated physician office that
participates in the Barnabas HIE, then your health information is automatically
stored in the Barnabas HIE and will be made accessible to all Barnabas
HIE participants unless you decide to "Opt Out."
If you do not want your health information to be electronically accessed
through the Barnabas HIE, you must submit a completed Barnabas
HIE Opt-Out form (pdf).
Once you submit an HIE Opt-Out form, your information will not be accessible
to anyone through the Barnabas HIE,even in the case of an emergency, and your providers will need to share your information with each other
in the same way that they have in the past, such as by telephone, fax, or mail.
If you previously submitted a Barnabas HIE Opt-Out form but now have changed
your mind, you must complete, sign, and submit the
CANCELLATION OF PRIOR BARNABAS
HIE OPT-OUT form (pdf), which will cancel your previous decision to opt out.
I still have questions. Whom do I contact?
If you have additional questions about the Barnabas HIE that are not covered
in this brochure, please contact the Barnabas HIE at 732-557-2060 or email us
DISCLAIMER: THIS PAMPHLET IS BEING PROVIDED FOR INFORMATIONAL PURPOSES
ONLY. THE STATEMENTS WE MAKE IN THIS BROCHURE DO NOT PROVIDE A WARRANTY
OF ANY KIND, EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED. NONE OF BARNABAS HEALTH, INC., OR ANY
OF ITS AFFILIATED HOSPITALS OR OTHER HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS OR ANY OTHER
THIRD PARTY CAN GUARANTEE A SPECIFIC OUTCOME AS A RESULT OF ANY PERSON'S
USE OR PARTICIPATION IN THE BARNABAS HIE, OR ANY OTHER HIE.