Proudly Made in the USA American Flags in Ossian IN 46777
A national symbol that has the labels “The Stars and Stripes”, “Old Glory”, and also “The Star-Spangled Banner”, the American flag is among the extremely well-known icons worldwide today. This is mostly because of the status of the United States as one of one of the most influential countries in history. The American Flag is the third oldest of the National Standards of the globe – older than the Union Jack of Britain or the Tricolor of France. It is distinct in the deep and also noble importance of its message to the whole world. It stands for a message of national independence, of individual freedom, of idealism, and of patriotism.
Who designed the American Flag?
According to popular tales, the first American flag was made by Betsy Ross, a Philadelphia seamstress who was acquainted with George Washington. In May 1776, so the story goes, General Washington and also 2 people from the Continental Congress visited Ross at her upholstery shop and also showed her a rough layout of the flag.
In 1777, the Continental Congress passed an act that provided our nation an official flag. In those days, the flag was not the same as we see it today. Rather than the 50 white stars in the field of blue, there was a circle of 13 white stars to represent the 13 colonies. The act mentioned, “Resolved, that the flag of the United States be thirteen stripes, alternate red and white; that the Union be thirteen stars, white in a blue area, representing a new constellation.”
Exactly what does the American Flag represent?
The flag initially rose over thirteen states along the Atlantic seaboard, with a population of some 3 million people. Today it flies over fifty states, extending throughout the continent, and over great islands of the 2 seas; as well as hundreds owe it allegiance.
The flag consists of 13 alternating red as well as white horizontal stripes standing for the very first thirteen British colonies that proclaimed independence from the Kingdom of Great Britain, and also came to be the initial states in the United States. This blue location of the flag is called the Union.
The symbolism of the Flag, as quoted from Washington: “We take the stars from Heaven, the red from our mother country, separating it by white stripes, therefore revealing that we have actually divided from her, and the white red stripes shall decrease to posterity representing Liberty.”
It incarnates for all humanity the spirit of freedom and the glorious ideal of human liberty; not the liberty of unrestraint or the liberty of license, but a special principle of equal opportunity permanently, freedom as well as the quest of happiness, protected by the stern as well as soaring concepts of responsibility, of morality and of justice, and also attainable by obedience to self-imposed legislations.
Twice informed stories of nationwide honor and glory cluster heavily concerning it. It bears witness to the immense growth of our nationwide borders, the development of our natural sources, as well as the magnificent framework of our world. It forecasts the accomplishment of popular federal government, of civic and spiritual freedom as well as of nationwide integrity throughout the globe.
Why is the American Flag vital to American community?
The American flag is essential because it signifies the independent federal government as explained under the United States Constitution. Add to that, it additionally represents the background, ideas and also values of its people. As a democratic nation, its individuals adhere to necessary values such as freedom, justice and equal rights. Moreover, the flag also represents the various accomplishments of the nation as well as the pride of its individuals.
This nationwide symbol reminds individuals, not only in the Indiana state, but throughout the whole USA regarding the different important elements of the Declaration of Independence. It is a complex symbol, which represents the freedom and also rights of Americans. Floating from the lofty pinnacle of American idealism, it is a beacon of withstanding hope.
It is the indication made visible of the strong spirit that has brought liberty and prosperity to the people of America. It is the flag of all us alike. Let us accord it recognize and commitment.
Where can I purchase American Flags?
You most likely already observed this, however there are a great deal of areas where you could get American flags. It is essential to keep in mind that the flag you’re going to acquire should be “Made in United States of America”. There are several vendors whose flags are labeled as made in China, and flying a China-made American flag simply does not make any sense, does it?
Based upon stats, Americans invest over 5.3 million USD on imported flags annually – most of which are made in China. Probably much more upsetting is that throughout 2001, in the wave of nationalism that spread over America after 9/11, Americans acquired $52 million dollars in imported flags. The flag should signify the blood, sweat, as well as tears of American people that brought this country right into existence, not our indebtedness to China as well as the fatality of the American manufacturing market.
The flag symbolizes national self-reliance as well as popular sovereignty. It is not the flag of a reigning household or imperial house, however of the thousands free individuals welded into a country, one and indivisible, joined not only by community of passion, yet by crucial unity of sentiment and function; a country differentiated for the clear specific perception of its citizens alike of their responsibilities as well as their opportunities, their commitments and also their civil liberties.
Have a little pride, cough up a few even more money, as well as purchase an American flag made by Americans in the USA
Ossian ZIP codes we serve: 46777