The noises you hear can be soft or loud and can sound like hissing, roaring, buzzing, wheezing, or whining whisper. One may even think you are hearing air escaping, water running, the inside of a seashell, or musical notes.
Tinnitus is common. Almost everyone experiences a mild form of tinnitus once in a while it lasts only a few minutes. However, constant or recurring tinnitus is stressful and can make it hard to concentrate or sleep.
It is not known for sure what causes a person to "hear" sounds with no outside sound source. However, tinnitus can be a symptom of almost any ear problem, such as:
Foreign bodies or wax in the ear
Hearing loss from loud noises
Meniere's disease, a disorder of the inner ear that involves hearing loss and dizziness
Alcohol, caffeine, antibiotics, aspirin (aspirin) and other drugs can also cause ear noises.
Tinnitus may occur with hearing loss. Sometimes it is a sign of high blood pressure, an allergy, or anemia. Rarely, tinnitus is a sign of a serious problem like a tumor or aneurysm.
Tinnitus can be masked by competing sounds:
The low-level music, ticking clocks, or other noises may help you not notice the tinnitus.
Tinnitus is often more noticeable when you go to bed at night, because the surroundings are quieter. Any noise in the room, like a humidifier, a machine that produces uniform noise, or dishwasher, can help mask tinnitus and make it less irritating.
Learn ways to relax. Stress does not cause tinnitus, but feeling stressed or anxious can worsen it.
Avoid caffeine, alcohol and snuff.
Get enough rest. Try sleeping with your head up in an elevated position. This lessens head congestion and noises may become less noticeable.
Protect your ears and hearing from further damage. Avoid loud places and sounds. Use earplugs if you need them.
Call your health care provider
Call your doctor or nurse if:
Noises in the ears start after a head injury.
The sounds are presented with other unexplained symptoms like dizziness, loss of balance, nausea or vomiting.
Unexplained ear noises that bother you even after applying the self-help measures are presented.
The tinnitus noise occurs only in one ear and continues for several weeks or longer.