Plug in your hybrid and release its full potential
All of the hybrid vehicles on sale today are single fuel systems. This means that they supply all of their energy from one source, petrol. Once the vehicle is fuelled at the fuel pump the vehicle runs on either its electric motors, internal combustion engine or a combination of both. The battery system used to drive the electric motors is charged by either the internal combustion engine or by regenerative breaking.
This results in a vehicle that improves fuel economy to around 50/60mpg, around the same level a good diesel will return.
Existing hybrid technologies make for vehicles that have much improved fuel economy over standard petrol vehicle types but is the hybrid concept reaching its full potential?
If you enlarge the capacity of the battery pack by using a state of the art safe lightweight Lithium-Phosphate battery cells from Valence Technology and add a facility to charge the batteries from a domestic electricity supply you have the potential to extend the electric mode range from around the standard vehicles 1 to 2 miles to up to 35 miles (below 33 mph), more than enough for most city commutes.
Also at A road speeds the hybrid will rely less on the internal combustion engine for power resulting in more than 100mpg. In the Tour de Sol event in New York the EDrive Systems Prius Plug-in achieved 102mpg over a 150mile course, US gallons are smaller than the UK imperial gallon.
In conjunction with our partners in the US, EnergyCS and E-drive Systems, and battery modules from Valence Technology we have turned the Hybrid concept on its head.
It can be looked at it two ways:
Our Toyota Prius conversion is the first step to achieving a more fuel efficient means of transport, reducing the amount of fuel used, reducing emissions and providing a useful electric only mode at urban speeds, helping to create pollution free cities and towns.
The highlights of the system are shown below:
The Prius conversion is the first step in a programme to offer plug in solutions for other Hybrid vehicles as they come on to the market.
We are also interested in talking to automotive OEM's about how our system can help you achieve your emissions targets, with particular focus on the 4x4 (SUV) market that are experiencing public resistance on environmental grounds.
If you are interested in finding out more or how you can have your car or fleet of cars converted or partner with us on developing your next vehicle please click on the link below: