Many of us grew up with apple juice in our lunch boxes, handed to us after a hard day of playing in the backyard, and a frequent feature at elementary school gatherings. While apple juice is a hit with kids because of it’s mild, sweet flavor, the health benefits are great for adults too!
Apples are loaded with crucial nutrients and antioxidants. Antioxidants stabilize free radicals, a process that is important in preventing cancer. Antioxidants also have a great impact on heart health because they protect blood vessels. Did you know apples have the second maximum level of antioxidant activity in comparison with other commonly eaten fruits? Pretty impressive!
In addition to packing a serious antioxidant punch, apples are rich in flavonoids. Flavonoids are naturally occurring chemicals that help plants resist disease and bacteria and provide their colorful appearance. When you eat plant foods like apples, you take in these powerful nutrients. Flavonoids have been linked to preventing viruses, cancer, inflammation, and allergic reactions in the human body.
According to epidemiological studies, apples can play a large role in reducing the risk of variety of chronic diseases. Apples are the food most consistently associated with reduced risk of cancer, heart disease, asthma, and type II diabetes when compared to other fruits and vegetables!
What other health benefits can you look forward to with a daily drink of apple juice? Improved digestion, reduced risk of Alzheimer’s disease, and boosted liver health! Apples have proven themselves to be tasty and beneficial for kids as well as adults.
There are many types of apple juice on the grocery store shelves today. A quick peek at the nutritional labels will reveal that a serving of apple juice can contain 24 grams of sugar. Some brands even contain added sugar!
Edit Fruit Juice gives you the benefits of apple juice, without the harmful sugar. Drinking de-sugared apple juice is a great way to cure your sweet tooth, aiding you in your weight loss goals. We use an assortment of the best apple varieties, picked fresh from the trees of Michigan orchards. This helps us make the most flavorful juice, without the unnecessary sugar.
“An apple a day keeps the doctor away” is still a great saying - but if you’re watching your sugar intake, make sure your apple juice comes from de-sugared Edit Fruit Juice.