Food is the basic unit of life; which is required by everyone to stay alive. Guess, what will happen if the prices of food commodities will rise unbelievingly. Poors will starve and die of hunger, due to the lack of fresh items; we will have to survive upon canned and packaged food stuffs. Presently, the portrait of our society is marching to this only. Food stuffs are so costly, that poor and low-class persons are not able to afford. So, what health tips will you provide those who don’t possess capital to buy food? We will be talking about 10 food items which are healthy and quite inexpensive too.
Why some edibles are costlier whereas some remains normal?
- Few decades back, food commodities were not so costlier and were accessible to all. It was with very minimal price that everyone used to afford it and stay healthy.
- Slowly, when world population raised then there was lack of food stuffs; and as we know when there is lack of some particular thing and the demand is increasing; then automatically price gets higher as you can see the price of Onion.
- Not only just high-priced, to increase the production and texture; some artificial colours, chemicals etc are added so that consumer get attracted to it and sale becomes high.
So, are we consuming slow poison in form of good-looking and lustrous edibles? When talking about costlier stuffs such as Apples, Pomegranates, Cheese, Milk, Cereals, Coconut water, Chicken, Sea-foods, Mushrooms, Corns etc; these are not affordable by everyone. Riches are getting these and maintaining their health; but what about those who lives below; BPL or Below Poverty Line. Will they starve of hunger and die? These must be something for them.
Now, we will be giving 10 food stuffs which are not only healthier but also quite inexpensive and can be afforded by all. Have a look on these and self-conclude; are these really expensive and can’t be afforded-
10 Inexpensive and Healthy edibles:-
Tomatoes are red-orange coloured vegetables which are rich in Vitamins, Minerals, beta-carotene, lycopene and several other trace metals. It is highly beneficial for health and tastes good. It is used in many types like cooked with curries, as chutney, soups, salads, baked, roasted, sauces etc. It is not so expensive and can be afforded by all. One should consume at least one tomato per day to stay fit and healthy.
It comes under the non-vegetarian diet. Being rich in protein and fats, it is advisable to have 2 eggs per day. It is good for bones, heart health and reinitialize your whole body. It is also a good saying in Hindi- ‘Sunday ho ya Monday, roz khao ande’. Hen egg is much suitable and the brown one which is considered as ‘desi egg’ is much better than the white one. One can have eggs in the form of omelette, boiled eggs, egg curry, egg with milk etc like that.
Poha is a famous Maharashtrian breakfast which is prepared using flattened rice. It is a salty recipe which is cooked with different veggie and condiments in it. It is easy to digest and highly nutritious. The major ingredient in it is ‘flattened rice’ which is quite cheaper and affordable. A small bowl of Poha with jalebi will fill your stomach completely and is ideal for any-time snack.
4. Green leafy vegetables-
Since from childhood we have been listening that leafy green vegetables are better than anything else. They are rich in health promoting ingredient especially those of Iron. Leafy vegetables are prescribed for all case; in pregnancy, for nursing mother, for kids, for adults and also in different kinds of ailments. As a fact, leafy greens are not so expensive and are affordable. One should include these greens like spinach, lettuce, parsley, mint, cilantro, asparagus etc in their daily diet.
Proteins are regarded as the bulldozing blocks of our body. To gain weight, to loose weight and in every cases proteins are regarded as the best diet. Lentils, egg whites, chickpeas, red grams, kidney beans etc all are rich in protein content. In the lack of protein,our body turns fatigued and malnutrition. One must include these in their daily diet for a fit body.
Everyone can’t afford an apple; for them guava is the best choice. Guava is also regarded as the “Apple of poor”. Being rich in Vitamins, minerals, fibres, choline, beta-carotene and other ingredients it is very helpful to keep away maladies. It has a very nice taste with an infusion of sour and sweet. Guava is found in many varieties and re used to prepare a number of dishes and salad dressings. It has a very least price and affordable by everyone. Have a ripe guava everyday and keep away diseases from yourself.
7. Roots and Tubers-
Roots and Tubers comes under the category of vegetables and are rich in proteins, beta-carotene, carbohydrates, fibres, minerals and many other nutrients. Potato, sweet potato, yam, beetroot, carrots, radish etc comes under these. All these are helpful to keep you fit and healthy always. In addition, it is also quite cheaper and inexpensive. One can have thee in their daily diet.
Here comes the Saturday specialist! In many parts of India, Khichdi is often cooked on Saturday due to several reasons. Khichdi is the mixture of rice, pulses, vegetables and condiments. It is very tasty and rich in Health benefits. As you can see its ingredients, all are healthy and free from fats. It is often served with pickles, papad, salads and chips. All the ingredients comes in a very affordable price, thus can be tasted by all. You can have it as your lunch.
Maize; commonly known as ‘bhutta‘ or ‘makka‘ is a crop which is very unique. It is completely enclosed as modified leaf sheaths or husks. It is rich in Protein, fat, minerals, iron, calcium, phosphorus and many other nutritive elements. Currently, winter season is about to arrive and with this season the harvest of maize will also be coming. This time you will get fresh maize in a very affordable prices. It is a very healthy thing and meant to cure many ailments too.
10. Vegetable soup-
Many kids hesitates to have veggies; for them vegetable soup will be a good option. Cook vegetable like carrots, corns, spring onions, broccoli etc with cream and corn flour with some spices in it. It gives a very brilliant taste and looks even well. You can also go for Tomato soup which is very healthy and tasty. Soups are always good and healthy for the body. During summers, soups are liked by all and is highly nutritive one.
In markets, all the vegetables and fruits are very costlier which makes us hesitated. During weekends, everyone are free; many small markets and other markets are set-up on Sundays or once a week. They sell vegetables, fruits and other edibles in a very affordable price. Actually, they are the rural farmers who sells their own crop at a least price; as like “Rythu Bazar” at Hyderabad. Get benefited from all these. Eat well and Live well!
Get more stuff like this
Subscribe to our mailing list and get interesting stuff and updates to your email inbox.
Thank you for subscribing.
Something went wrong.