Snowshoe cats are a relatively new breed of cat. And because it is very difficult to reproduce the coat markings accepted by the breed standards, Snowshoes are rare.
Why is it so hard to produce a snowshoe cat? The markings and patterns of these lovely cats are a result of recessive genes – which are difficult to control – making it hard to obtain the desired result on a regular basis.
Origin of the Snowshoe Cat Breed
This unique-looking cat dates back to the 1960s.
The breed was developed in the United States, and it was the result of crossing a bicolor American Shorthair with a Siamese.
As you may have noticed, the look of the Snowshoe is similar to that of the Himalayan and the Siamese.
This breed does have the added characteristic of the white patterns that can occur in the chest, stomach, face, and most noticeable in the feet and paws.
Appearance of Snowshoes
Snow shoe cats are known for their beautiful coloration. Indeed, the recognized coat color for this breed is what is called "point coloration". Snowshoes sport a pattern of light body color with dark-colored ears, legs, and tail. Cats of this breed are also known for having "boots" and "gloves".
Snowshoes come in several colors, including black, blue, lilac, lynx, fawn, chocolate, and seal points. The accepted point coloration varies per registry and/or cat association.
For example, the American Cat Fanciers Association recognizes seal point and blue point coloration. The Fédération Internationale Féline recognizes black, blue, chocolate, cinnamon, cream, fawn, red, and seal point coloration. The International Cat Association recognizes all pointed colors.
Interestingly, Snowshoe kittens are born with an all-white coat. The points appear within 1 to 3 weeks.
The coat of the Snowshoe cat should be short to medium size, glossy, smooth and with no obvious undercoat. Snowshoes with double or plush coats are not acceptable under the breed standards. Luckily, the coat of Snowshoes is easy to groom.
Cats of this breed are medium-large sized with males weighing over 12 lbs. Snowshoe cats have medium to medium-large ears with tips that are slightly rounded. The head of the Snowshoe is triangular but not as pronounced as that of the modern Siamese cat. You will also find Snowshoes with an "applehead", which is more rounded. The tail is medium sized.
Snowshoes have gorgeous blue eyes.
Snow shoe cats are affectionate, docile, and very social animals. They enjoy human company and get along with children and other pets. Just like Siamese cats, Snow shoe cats can be very vocal.
Snowshoes are also very intelligent and can learn tricks, including how to open doors and fetch.
Needless to say, Snowshoes make wonderful family pets. So if you’re looking for a pet with a sweet disposition, consider a Snow shoe cat.
Gifts for Cat Lovers
If you love Snowshoes or know someone who does, check out the following gift ideas:
Snowshoe art - from Art.com
Snowshoe-inspired postcard - from Zazzle.com
Angel t-shirt – from Zazzle.com
Snowshoe print – Zazzle.com
Tote – from Zazzle.com
Snow Bengal Cats
Leave Snowshoe Cats and return to Cat Breeds
Return to the Home Page of Cat Lovers Gifts Guide