confidently aggressive or self-assured; positive: aggressive; dogmatic:
He is too assertive as a salesman.
having a distinctive or pronounced taste or aroma.
It tells me we need more women, and men, to raise their girls the way my parents raised me: to be assertive, confident and proud.
Sheryl Sandberg’s Got a Bigger Problem Than Bossy-Gate Keli Goff March 16, 2014
He would recognize the angry, assertive tone of comments on web articles as the exact same tendency he identified in 1929.
The Smartest Book About Our Digital Age Was Published in 1929 Ted Gioia January 4, 2014
Its vague claims and assertive behavior are unnerving its Asian neighbors.
Meanwhile, in the Pacific… Noah Kristula-Green August 9, 2012
And, in all fairness to Lady Gaga, any singer who matches up with Tony Bennett needs to get loud and assertive.
Can Lady Gaga Do Jazz? Ted Gioia September 21, 2014
Instead they were becoming an assertive voice on the streets, and also online, for their rights.
Principal Murdered in Pakistan: Latest Assault on Girls’ Schooling Gordon Brown March 29, 2013
Night was assertive in its heaviness, but communicative of its mysteries in its wild scents—the silent music of its hour.
The Rustler of Wind River G. W. Ogden
This assertive Briton has no desire to lose identity in “Brahm.”
Oswald Langdon Carson Jay Lee
There was in them something else, or more, than the assertive grossness of life.
The House of Pride Jack London
He was a slender fellow with close-clipped, assertive red hair.
The Arena Various
He represents the assertive, Jacksonian period of our national existence.
The American Spirit in Literature, Bliss Perry
confident and direct in claiming one’s rights or putting forward one’s views
given to making assertions or bold demands; dogmatic or aggressive
1560s, “declaratory, positive, full of assertion,” from assert + -ive. Meaning “insisting on one’s rights” is short for self-assertive (1865).
confidently aggressive or self-assured; positive: aggressive; dogmatic: He is too assertive as a salesman. having a distinctive or pronounced taste or aroma. Contemporary Examples Lukonge chimes in assertively: “When people discourage us we feel more encouraged to go on.” Victims No More: Congo’s Badass Women Mechanics Nina Strochlic June 5, 2014 Historical Examples Well have […]
- Assertiveness training
a type of behavior therapy in which people are taught appropriate methods of asserting themselves in various situations through honest and direct expression of both positive and negative feelings. Historical Examples Anxiety is offset by means of desensitization, assertiveness training, and sex therapy. When You Don’t Know Where to Turn Steven J. Bartlett Dr. Cantwell […]
confidently aggressive or self-assured; positive: aggressive; dogmatic: He is too assertive as a salesman. having a distinctive or pronounced taste or aroma. Contemporary Examples The assertiveness China already shows in Asia and Africa is just the beginning. Why the West Rules—For Now Ian Morris December 24, 2010 When she tries to join a conversation between […]
adjective (logic) (of a statement) stating a fact, as opposed to expressing an evaluative judgment (obsolete) judging what is rather than what may or must be Historical Examples The expression of actuality in the assertoric judgment involves no adverbial modification of the predicate. A Commentary to Kant’s ‘Critique of Pure Reason’ Norman Kemp Smith