There is a great deal of fascinating information about the ancient Indo-European and Germanic peoples contained in what Professor L.A. Waddell termed the British Chronicles. Examples of the writers who would fall under this catergory are Bede, Gildas, Nennius, William of Malmesbury, Gerald of Wales, Geoffrey of Monmouth etc. It is my intention to make a thorough study of these writings when I retire in 3 months time.
The following is an extract from Nennius' Historia Brittonum (Giles translation):
"17. I have learned another account of this Brutus from the ancient books of our ancestors. After the deluge, the three sons of Noah severally occupied three different part of the earth: Shem extended his borders into Asia, Ham into Africa, and Japheth into Europe.
The first man that dwelt in Europe was Alanus, with his three sons, Hisicion, Armenon, and Neugio. Hisicion had four sons, Froncus, Romanus, Alamanus, and Brutus. Armenon had five sons, Gothus, Valaothus, Cibidus, Burgundus, and Longobardus. Neugio had three sons, Valdalus, Saxo, and Boganus. From Hisicion arose four nations--the Franks, the Latins, the Germans, and Britons: from Armenon, the Gothi, Valagothi, Cibidi, Burgundi, and Longobardi: from Neugio, the Bagari, Vandali, Saxones, and Tarinegi. The whole of Europe was subdivided into these tribes.
Alanus is said to have been the son of Fethuir; Fethuir the son of Ogomuin, who was the son of Thoi; Thoi was the son of Boibus, Boibus of Semion, Semion of Mair, Mair of Ecthactur, Ecthactur of Aurthack, Aurthack of Ethec, Ethec of Ooth, Ooth of Aber, Aber of Ra, Ra of Esraa, Esraa of Hisrau, Hisrau of Bath, Bath of Jobath, Jobath of Joham, Joham of Japheth, Japheth of Noah, Noah of Lamech, Lamech of Mathusalem, Mathusalem of Enoch, Enoch of Jared, Jared of Malalehel, Malalehel of Cainan, Cainan o Enos, Enos of Seth, Seth of Adam, and Adam was formed by the living God. We have obtained this information respecting the original inhabitants of Britain from ancient tradition.
18. The Britons were thus called from Brutus: Brutus was the son of Hisicion, Hisicion was the son of Alanus, Alanus was the son of Rhea Silvia, Rhea Silvia was the daughter of Numa Pompilius, Numa was the son of Ascanius, Ascanius of Eneas, Eneas of Anchises, Anchises of Troius, Troius of Dardanus, Dardanus of Flisa, Flisa of Juuin, Juuin of Japheth; but Japheth had seven sons; from the first, named Gomer, descended the Galli; from the second, Magog, the Scythi and Gothi; from the third, Madian, the Medi; from the fourth, Juuan, the Greeks; from the fifth, Tubal, arose the Hebrei, Hispani, and Itali; from the sixth, Mosoch, sprung the Cappadoces; and from the seventh, named Tiras, descended the Thraces: these are the sons of Japheth, the son of Noah, the son of Lamech."
As was typical of the era in which Nennius wrote biblical personages were mixed in with historical and mythological characters, not only in the ancestry of kings but in the origins of entire peoples. If one disregards the biblical corruption evident in these chronicles then there is a great deal of information which is of both interest and of use to us. In this article I wish to focus specifically on the paragraph which I have underlined. My readers will note the reference to a person called Armenon who is credited with being the father of the Goths, the Burgundians and Langobards. I am unsure as to the identity of the tribe known as the Cibidi. As with Tacitus' Germania we have a founding father of the Germanic peoples Alanus who equates to Mannus, the son of the earthborn God Tuisto. Let us read again the relevant passage from Tacitus:
"In ancient lays, their only type of historical tradition, they celebrate Tuisto, a god brought forth from the earth. They attribute to him a son, Mannus, the source and founder of their people, and to Mannus three sons, from whose names those nearest the Ocean are called Ingvaeones, those in the middle Herminones, and the rest Istvaeones. Some people, inasmuch as antiquity gives free reign to speculation, maintain that there were more sons born from the god and hence more tribal designations- Marsi, Gambrivii, Suebi, and Vandilii- and that those names are genuine and ancient."(Germania 2.2, Tacitus, J.B. Rives translation)
"In the traditional songs which form their only record of the past the Germans celebrate an earth-born god called Tuisto. His son Mannus is supposed to be the fountain-head of their race and himself to have begotten three sons who gave their names to three groups of tribes- the Ingaevones, nearest the sea; the Herminones, in the interior; and the Istaevones, who comprise all the rest. Some authorities, with the freedom of conjecture permitted by remote antiquity, assert that Tuisto had numerous descendants and mention more tribal groups such as Marsi, Gambrivii, Suebi, and Vandilii-names which affirm to be both genuine and ancient." (H. Mattingley translation, revised by S.A. Handford.)
I suggest that the formula that we have in Nennius: Alanus > Hiscion + Armenon + Negio = Mannus > Istio + Irmin + Ing. Armenon and Hiscio very clearly are derived from Irmin and Istio respectively. Negio contains within it the name Ing. Clearly Armenon is not just an earthly ancestor but the divine ancestor of the Germanic and other Aryan peoples. Thus Armenon = Irmin = Aryaman = Airyaman = Eremon = Ariomanus.