Mark Antony, Roman politician and general, was an ally of Julius Caesar and the main rival of his successor Octavian (later Augustus). The passing of power between the three men led to Rome’s transition from a republic to an empire. Antony’s romantic and political alliance with Egyptian queen Cleopatra became his downfall.
Mark Antony was born Marcus Antonius in Rome in 83 B.C. to a well-respected Roman family.
Promised an excellent education, his reckless behavior squandered much of that opportunity. Deep in gambling debt and pursued by creditors, Antony fled to Greece in 58 B.C. and took part in military campaigns in Judea, where he performed well.
With Julius Caesar
Between 52 and 50 B.C., Mark Antony was assigned as a staff officer to Julius Caesar in Gaul and was instrumental in helping bring the province under Rome’s control. Upon returning from Gaul, Antony was appointed tribune, representing the interests of the people. His success and popularity helped him gain support for his benefactor, Caesar, who was being challenged by members of the Roman Senate.
As pressure increased against Caesar, Mark Antony joined his mentor in Gaul and engaged in a series of battles between Caesar and Pompey. Antony again helped Caesar defeat his enemies and he returned to Rome as Caesar’s second in command. Having amassed a great deal of power, in 45 B.C., Caesar was designated dictator for one year.
Caesar’s actions led many to believe he was positioning himself to become king. A plot to assassinate him emerged, and on March 15, 44 B.C., he was killed in the Roman Senate. Antony was next in line to Caesar but was challenged by Octavian, Caesar’s nephew and adopted son, who claimed he was heir to Caesar’s rule.
The Second Triumvirate
Caesar’s death brought a chaotic grab for power among several factions. As Mark Antony pursued Caesar’s killers in Gaul, Octavian’s armies scored a series of victories against Antony, forcing him to retreat to southern Gaul. Caesar’s assassins, Brutus and Cassis, were preparing to descend on Rome when Octavian, Antony and Lepidus formed the Second Triumvirate and defeated the traitors in the battle of Philippi in October 42 B.C.
I just wanted to say some stuff in response to that huge string about Percy and Nico’s relationship. Firstly I completely agree that throughout the whole thing Percy never looked at Nico like he was on his team. He always thought that Nico would at some point betray them all, because of the way he looked and who is father is. (which if Percy knew anything about Greek mythology he’d realize Hades is actually the most chill god of all) He was like every other demigod at camp, judging Nico on things he had no control over. More than once Percy used Nico to his advantage and the crush Nico had on Percy also helped benefit Percy even though he didn’t know about it. So honestly from the beginning Percy did not see Nico as his friend, he viewed him as another demigod caught up in all this godly war business. He was very self-centered, but honestly I can’t blame him too much for that, he’s one of the only children of the Big Three and everyone’s been telling how special he is since he was 12 years old. So his hero complex isn’t hard to understand, Jason himself exhibited signs of a hero complex more than once, but he was different from Percy. He literally grew up not wanting to be his father’s legacy so it is understandable how he avoided such a big hero complex as Percy has.
But back to Nico, Percy was very problematic for Nico. He viewed Percy as the cause for his sister’s death and Percy honestly didn’t see himself as the cause, (the way it was presented he really wasn’t), but he never really put himself into Nico’s shoes and tried to understand why Nico saw him as the cause. He partially understood, but he really just thought Nico was a vengeful evil little shit. He thought since Nico’s father was king of the Underworld all he’d want to do is make Percy pay. He couldn’t get off himself long enough to realize that Nico probably has a lot more problems in his life than worrying about the kid who got his sister killed. Percy should’ve realized that Nico was demigod and demigods have lots more problems than each other.
Even years later when they’re all on Argo II Percy only thinks Nico is out to get him and that he can’t be trusted, because he pretended he didn’t know Percy at New Rome. Which Percy should have realized was because Percy couldn’t know of his past, not then at least. Yet once again Percy was caught up in his own mind thinking that Nico did it on purpose to make his life worse, not realizing there were bigger powers at play there. Annabeth herself was a little caught up in her own mind about Nico as well, she thought he was creepy and she agreed with Percy that he was vengeful also she had thought at the time he’d had a crush on her, which always makes someone seem more creepy to you. The others aboard the Argo II were prejudiced against Nico even before he got there, because of Percy and Annabeth’s stories, the only one who knew Nico was not the vengeful little shit they described him as was Hazel. She knew what Nico was like because he acted like himself around her, like he would around Bianca. Then with Jason, Cupid revealed his entire life to Jason which made that boy understand exactly what kind of turmoil Nico went through for four years. Jason understands better than anyone else because he literally saw and felt exactly what Nico had which is why he’d take on the role of older brother. He’d be most protective of Nico, latching onto him and asking him to join in activities when Percy would still be uncomfortable around him from the confession of a crush. I personally don’t think Jason would threaten Will, I think he’d sit Will down and tell him everything he’d seen and felt with that encounter with Cupid, he’d tell Will that Nico doesn’t need to be “fixed” but he will need someone to be there for him and Will thinks he can do it, Jason knows he can. Out of everyone at camp Will is probably most capable to be there for Nico, being a healer he’s not prone to the defensive and the attack like Percy is, plus I’m convinced the Apollo cabin reads up about every mental disorder and illness and acts as counselors for everyone else, since they’re not just physical healers they’re mental ones too. Because demigods gotta have some levels of PTSD.
Then with Reyna she felt Nico’s pain, the physical and emotional, she’s the one he can open up to most, she’s the one who’ll listen without saying anything afterwards. She would walk up to Will, shake his hand in the hard leader type handshake she spent years perfecting, stand in her straight praetor form and promptly inform him she controls an army, her mother is a war goddess and she took down the giant Orion with only herself and Ageus. then she’d tell him that she thinks he’s a good person and is a nice fit for Nico, but that he should be careful, because she will kick his ass the second he hurts Nico. I fully believe Will would tell her that she should definitely kick his ass if he hurts Nico. Then Reyna would relax and be herself around Will knowing that this boy would never purposefully hurt Nico.
In all honesty I do not believe Percy would threaten Will, I think he’d be almost oblivious of the couple. I believe he and Nico would develop some kind of friendship over the years, but Percy would still feel a bit prejudiced against Nico. he’d still think Nico hated him in some way for either killing his sister or being oblivious to his crush or for being so biased against him. But I do believe at some point Percy would love Nico like a friend, and Nico would feel the same, but I do not either one will feel any of the brotherly love for each other that Jason and Reyna have for Nico and Nico has for them.
That was just my rant about the subject, sorry. I have a lot of feelings about this subject and I honestly don’t understand why people think Percy loves Nico, because from the evidence we have that his feelings for the boy, he feels guilt and he’s creeped out by the boy. However over time I’m sure he develops friend love for Nico, but in the books he does not show any signs of it, like Jason, Reyna and Hazel do, even Frank showed more love for Nico than Percy did and they had like three interactions. I’m sorry if I repeated myself a lot or offended you in anyway that was not intent.
Sent in by the amazing bisexualdragon-girl. Thank you, everyone needs to read this. ESPECIALLY Percico shippers.
*most of my knowledge comes from School and a deep love of German culture which led to many trips to the library and the internet.*
Alright Hetalia fandom. I know you get this a lot, but Germany is Holy Roman Empire. Now before you start attacking me and getting angry saying, “Well, you only want that to be true for GerIta.” NO. That is not true whatsoever. I honestly don’t care if they ever do find out. But Germany is Holy Roman Empire.
No, lets begin why.
1) The Holy Roman Empire was composed mostly of what is today Germany, Austria, Northern Italy, Belgium, the Netherlands, Switzerland, and what was then Prussia. Now, let’s eliminate Austria and Northern Italy because we already know that they’re separate people. Let’s also eliminate Belgium, seeing as she’s a girl. And we can also get rid of the idea of Switzerland being part of this seeing as he’s far older and looks nothing like Holy Rome.
But for the most part, the HRE was made up of German States.
2) (On more of a history stand point). Like previously state, the Holy Roman Empire was made up of German states each individually ruled by German princes. Otto Von Bismark was a Prussian leader who basically organized Germany and unified it as a country. He tried to get Prussia in on the deal, but the King was too stuck up to unify with the German states.
So, Germany is made up of German states previously controlled by HRE. Interesting.
4) I know a lot of people will say that Holy Rome technically died when he was defeated by France during the Napoleonic Wars. That’s a fair-ish point to make and can see how that would make sense. However, the Napoleonic wars technically didn’t destroy much of the HRE, just as a title. The Emperor was taken down and the country was no longer unified.
So, the HRE wasn’t technically killed, just seriously injured. The name is gone, but the culture of the HRE is still alive.
5) The Holy Roman Emperor(s) were mostly Frankish, aka, German.
6) Now I’m going to go into some more obscure things that prove that Germany could be (cough-is-cough) HRE.
“So…” Jason approached Nico cautiously, “Necromancy…”
“You say that word like it’s a curse, Lord Grace.” Nico didn’t turn to face him, his shoulders tense, hand grasping and letting go of his sword apprehensively. Jason made sure to keep his guard up.
“Not Lord, not anymore. I’m sorry, I didn’t mean to offend-” “Because you’re scared?” Nico’s voice was chilly. Jason couldn’t help but flinch.
“Because…I considered you my friend. Why did you lie to me?” Although, Jason was scared of the boy now. Not that he hadn’t been menacing before, with his cold sword and dangerous reputation. Still though, magic…dark magic, no less, was the stuff of Roman nightmares.
“Why do you think? The Romans paid well, I didn’t want to lose an empire worth of jobs.” “I wouldn’t have-” “What?” Nico snapped, finally turning on his heel and jabbing his finger into Jason’s chest. He could feel Jason’s heart rush under his hand, his fear under his tan, calloused skin, “What, Grace? Sold me out? Turned me in? Killed my yourself? Or maybe have me locked away in iron shackles to die in the dark? I can feel your fear, Jason Grace, I have seen your eyes grow anxious at the mention of chaos and magic. I heard your breath stop when Percy mentioned necromancy.” “Nico-”
“But what shall you do with me here, my lord, out in the old waters where there is no Pact of Jupiter? Will you face me? Will you try to repress me, or deny me? Here I stand, son of Rome, I dare you.”
ROMULUS AND REMUS, twin brothers and founders of Rome.
Their mother was Rhea Silvia, daughter of Numitor, king of Alba Longa. Once the twins were born, Amulius had them abandoned to die in the Tiber river. They survived - the river carried them to safety, a she-wolf (in Latin, lupa) found and suckled them, and a woodpecker fed them. The twins became leaders of a band of adventurous youths, eventually killing Amulius. They subsequently founded a town on the site where they had been saved. When Romulus built a city wall, Remus jumped over it and was killed by his brother. Romulus consolidated his power, and the city was named for him.
url graphic as a simple birthday present for dearest cathy. (join my birthday page for a special present on your birthday x)
Mithridates VI of Pontus (134 BC - 63 BC), Nemesis of Rome, styled as Hercules
There was a king reigned in the East: There, when kings will sit to feast, They get their fill before they think With poisoned meat and poisoned drink. He gathered all that springs to birth From the many-venomed earth; First a little, thence to more, He sampled all her killing store; And easy, smiling, seasoned sound, Sate the king when healths went round. They put arsenic in his meat And stared aghast to watch him eat; They poured strychnine in his cup And shook to see him drink it up: They shook, they stared as white’s their shirt: Them it was their poison hurt. –I tell the tale that I heard told. Mithridates, he died old.
-A.E. Houseman, from Terrence, This is Stupid Stuff