Word of the Day
|Definition:||(adjective) Extremely loud.|
|Usage:||He was woken by the stentorian voice of his teacher, demanding to know why he wasn't paying attention.|
|Early American settlers in the western territories depended on the Mississippi River's port of New Orleans for commerce. When Spain retroceded New Orleans to France in 1800, Americans feared their access to the river would be blocked, so President Thomas Jefferson sent negotiators to broker a deal for the port city.|
|Mudd was the physician who set the broken leg of John Wilkes Booth, Abraham Lincoln's assassin, just hours after Booth fled the crime scene. A Confederate sympathizer, Mudd was accused of aiding Booth's escape and tried along with Booth's other accomplices. Throughout, Mudd maintained that he had not recognized the disguised Booth, an acquaintance of his, and had been unaware of the assassination, but he was nonetheless convicted and sentenced to life imprisonment.|
1606 - The "Susan Constant," "Godspeed" and "Discovery" set sail from London. Their landing at Jamestown, VA, was the start of the first permanent English settlement in America.
1699 - Peter the Great ordered that the Russian New Year be changed from September 1 to January 1.
1946 - The Frank Capra film "It's A Wonderful Life" had a preview showing for charity at New York City's Globe Theatre, a day before its "official" world premiere. James Stewart and Donna Reed star in the film.
1968 - Author John Steinbeck died at the age of 66.
1998 - In Houston, TX, a 27-year-old woman gave birth to the only known living set of octuplets.
1999 - The Vermont Supreme Court ruled that homosexual couples were entitled to the same benefits and protections as wedded couples of the opposite sex.
Shown above are two photos taken from the same spot in Draper, Utah on the dates of the winter solstice and the summer solstice. They were blended, using Photoshop, to show how dramatically the Sun moves across the horizon in the course of half a year. Note that this year's winter solstice occurs on December 20 at 4:03 p.m., Mountain Standard Time or 23:03 Universal Time. This is the day having the shortest period of daylight in the Northern Hemisphere.
crochet, 18 mths
A beautiful blonde teenager, wanting to earn some extra money for the summer, decided to hire herself out as a ‘handy-woman’ and started canvassing a nearby well-to-do neighborhood.
She went to the front door of the first house, and asked the owner if he had any odd jobs for her to do. ‘Well, I guess I could use somebody to paint my porch,’ he said, ‘How much will you charge me?’
Delighted, the girl quickly responded, ‘How about $50?’
The man agreed and told her that the paint brushes and everything she would need was in the garage.
The man’s wife, hearing the conversation said to her husband, ‘Does she realize that our porch goes ALL the way around the house?’
He responded, ‘That’s a bit cynical, isn’t it?’
The wife replied, ‘You’re right. I guess I’m starting to believe all those dumb blonde jokes we’ve been getting by e-mail lately.’
Later that day, the blonde came to the door to collect her money. ‘You’re finished already?’ the startled husband asked.
‘Yes’, the blonde replied, ‘and I even had paint left over, so I gave it two coats.’
Impressed, the man reached into his pocket for the $50.00 and handed it to her along with a ten dollar tip. ‘And by the way,’ the blonde added, ‘it’s not a Porch, it’s a Lexus.’
What do you call a sheep crossed with a kangaroo??
A woolly jumper
For all you bird watchers out there:Click on all the birds and they will sing. Leave your mouse on the bird until it stops singing. There is sometimes a few seconds pause before or during the performance.