AProginator Forefather of the People known as Redbone
y-DNA Haplo Group
E3a which has been updated to E1b1a haplo verified through 4 direct male contributions of y-DNA, West African, Bantu Tribe.
Ethnic & Cultural Associations
Burrell Nash applied for recognition as Cherokee Indian in 1896 along with his siblings. Burrell removed to Oklahoma and raised his family. However, the others choose to decline tribal rights and remained in Texas.
REDBONES COME TO LOUISIANA
The earliest known progenitor of Louisiana Redbones to have come to the area was Thomas Nash, who was in the Mississippi Territory by at least 1781 when his son William was born on June 6 of that year.26 He was in a area of the Mississippi Territory, known today as the West Florida Parishes of Louisiana.
Jane Parker McManus, a descendent, states that “When Thomas Nash left North Carolina, he probably traveled down the famous Natchez Trace into the Mississippi Territory. It has been said that he came down the Trace with Tapley Dial, another early Louisiana progenitor.”27 Nash was mentioned in the Natchez court records in 1788, but by 1815 he was in Natchitoches Parish.28
Cherokee-Son, Benjamin Ash/Nash signs & is compensated for Old Cherokee Settlers Treaty.
Grandchildren made application,1896 Cherokee Rolls.
Creek-Family Oral Tradition
Coushatta’s-Son, Benjamin Ashes gives approval for settler on Red River, Coushatta Village. See Also Burgess-Sweat-Nash Entry.
Alabama-Coushatta settlement (see transcriptions below)
Documented classification designation
Mulatto-Free Person of Color
1810 Thomas Ash, Opelousas Parish Census, Free Person of Color.
1820 Thomas Ash, Natchitoches Parish Census, Free Person of Color.
1826 Atascositia District of Texas, no race classification, 62 b. NC
1830 Natchitoches Parish Census, Free White
1840 Rapides Parish Census, Free Colored, conflicting birth year of 1762
1850 Natchitoches Parish Census schedule, Mulatto
North Carolina Birth abt 1753 (census record 1850 at 97yrs of age)
Natchez District arrival by 1788 Spanish Held
Some children of said Thomas Nash claim a Georgia birth however most later documented birth places suggest Mississippi.
Possible Land Grant, Orangeburg South Carolina on the Savanah River, 1792.
Mississippi Territory- possible death of father Thomas Nash (1) abt 1800 see Thomas Nash-Slave Boat-Mutiany-Murder-Congressional Papers-Further Review-Amistade Act.
Mississippi Territory 1808 Jefferson County
Nuetral Zone or No Mans Land 1807, Rio Hondo Lands
Joseph Grubb of Thomas Nash on Bayou Kisatchi
1826 Atascosita District of Austins Colony, Mexico 1826 militia against insergents at Nacagdoches.
2 Jan 1815 Legitimize Children; Phillip Goin mark and Thomas Nash mark appear on the marriage bond between Kiziah Nash and Philip Goin.
In Question; the initials below are TA not TN, as he is named in the document “Thomas Nash” aka Thomas Ash. And, very clearly, it is not even an “N” it is and “A” I can hardly believe it would be a cryptic backwards N?
Joseph Grubb from Gibson Johnson 640 acres West side of Bayou Kisatchie gave witness Ethelred Smith and Major Smith that said tract was occupied cultivated and inhabited since prior to 1819. Claim was granted. Kisatchie Bayou land claim and many other related claims listed at link below
Book “B” natchez court district and claims page 384
Page 209. Claims number 370. February 06, 1804.William Curtis to Thomas Nash for $100.00 , my claim in Jefferson county now in the actual possession of Thomas Nash, adjacent lands of John Hamberland, Robert Dunbar, and the donation right of Hugh Slater, all my right of donation and said tract. Signed William Curtis. Witnessed: John HamberlinWilliam McDuggle. Acknowledged before David Phelps, justice of the peace Jefferson county.//page 210. February 07, 1804 Thomas Nash for $600.00 paid to Joseph Bowlen, land as above, settled the last of the semper 1797 by William Curtis. Thomas (X) gnash. Witnessed Armstrong Alice, William Ferguson, acknowledged before Thomas Rodney, justice of the supreme court thirteenth at the weary 1804//file. Claimant, Joseph Bullen, February 28, 1804. Witnessed: Abraham Mayes and John Griffin, March 10, 1806. Certificate be-88 issued February 03, 1807. Bullen claims a donation of 640 acres as above.
Polk & Trinity Counties, Texas
1810 Claimed Baton Rouge W of Pearle RiverCyrus assignee Elizabeth Nash
1806 claimed 240acres St Helena (cultivated 1810-1820)Ira and Elizabeth Nash
1804 claimed 1600 acres 131 niles north of mouth of Missouri (granted)Webb Nash
1810 (Feb) claimed or purchased W. of Pearle RiverJoseph Nash
1781 claimed as fifer and private 6th Maryland Regt unknown location (granted)ASH William Ash
1815 claimed 640 acres Natchitoches in what was once Neutral Territory and lieing on the east bank of Sabine River about two miles below the Coushatta Village. Vincent Jackson and Morris Mc Laughlin gave testimony of inhabitants and cultivation of potatoes, peach trees etc. Claim was denied for non continuation of inhabitants.John Ash
claimed 400 acres Kaskaskias in virtue of improvements, grant denied for reason of perjury.
Nos. 1,031 and 1,032.
Supreme Court of the United States
April 3, 1893.
Appeals from the court of claims.
Petition by Bryan, Wilson, and Hendricks, under Act. Feb. 25, 1889, (25 St. at Large, p. 694,) for themselves, and as commissioners of the ‘Old Settlers,’ or ‘Western Cherokee,’ Indians, to recover moneys alleged to be due from the United States. A decree was given for petitioners. Both parties appeal. Modified and affirmed.
Statement by Mr. Chief Justice FULLER:
The original petition was filed March 8, 1889, and the substituted petition, January 23, 1890, and thereby the petitioners, Bryan, Wilson, and Hendricks, purporting to act for themselves, and as the commissioners of the ‘Old Settlers,’ or*428 ‘Western Cherokee,’ Indians, represented that the latter are that part of the Cherokee race of Indians which formerly composed the Western Cherokee nation, and which subsequently became known as the ‘Old Settlers,’ and that for the purpose of prosecuting their claims against the United States government they had appointed Bryan, Wilson, and Hendricks as their commissioners to represent and in their names and for their benefit to do and perform any and all acts and things necessary and proper to be done by them in the premises. That the suit was brought under the provisions of the act of congress approved February 25, 1889, entitled ‘An act to authorize the court of claims to hear, determine, and render final judgment upon the claim of the Old Settlers, or Western Cherokee Indians,’ (25 St. p. 694,) and which is as follows:
‘Section 1. That the claim of that part of the Cherokee Indians known as the ‘Old Settlers,’ or ‘Western Cherokees,’ against the United States, which claim was set forth in the report of the secretary of the interior to congress of February third, eighteen hundred and eighty-three, (said report being made under act of congress of August seventh, eighteen hundred and eighty-two,) and contained in executive document number sixty of the second session of the forty-seventh congress, be, and the same hereby is, referred to the court of claims for adjudication; and jurisdiction is hereby conferred on said court to try said cause, and to determine what sum or sums of money, if any, are justly due from the United States to said Indians, arising from or growing out of treaty stipulations and acts of congress relating thereto, after deducting all payments heretofore actually made to said Indians by the United States, either in money or property; and, after deducting all offsets, counterclaims, and deductions of any and every kind and character which should be allowed to the United States under any valid provision or provisions in said treaties and laws contained, or to which the United States may be otherwise entitled, and after fully considering and determining whether or not the said Indians have heretofore adjusted and settled their said claim with the United States, it being the intention of *429 this act to allow the said court of claims unrestricted latitude in adjusting and determining the said claim, so that the rights, legal and equitable, both of the United States and of said Indians, may be fully considered and determined; and to try and determine all questions that may arise in such cause on behalf of either party thereto, and render final judgment thereon; and the attorney general is hereby directed to appear in behalf of the government; and, if said court shall decide against the United States, the attorney general shall, within sixty days from the rendition of judgment, appeal the cause to the supreme court of the United States; and from any judgment that may be rendered the said Indians may also appeal to said supreme court: provided, that the appeal of said Indians shall be taken within sixty days after the rendition of said judgment, and said court shall give such cause precedence: provided, further, that nothing in this act shall be accepted or construed as a confession that the government of the United States is indebted to said Indians.
‘Sec. 2. That said action shall be commenced by a petition stating the facts on which said Indians claim to recover, and the amount of their claim; and said petition may be verified by the authorized agent or attorney of said Indians as to the existence of such facts, and no other statement need be contained in said petition or verification.’
And it was thereupon averred that under the provisions of certain treaties, made and entered into in 1817 and 1819, the Western Cherokees, or Old Settlers, sold, ceded, and relinquished, and there was conveyed to the United States, all their right, title, and interest in and to all the lands belonging to them situated in the states east of the Mississippi, and in consideration thereof the United States sold them certain lands, situated in what is now the state of Arkansas. That, in consideration of the subsequent sale and cession of the lands in Arkansas to the United States, and in further consideration of the removal of the Western nation of Cherokees from the state of Arkansas, under the provisions of the treaties of May 6, 1828, and February 14, 1833, between the Western Cherokee nation and the United States, the latter bargained, sold, ceded, relinquished *430 and conveyed, solely and exclusively to the Western Cherokee nation, subsequently known as the ‘Old Settlers,’ all the lands situated in the now Indian Territory, and described in the treaties of 1828 and 1833, and solemnly guarantied the lands to them forever. That while in the peaceable and undisputed possession and enjoyment of the tract of land, in the now Indian Territory, the United States, under the color of a pretended treaty with the Eastern Cherokee nation in 1835, made and entered into without the knowledge or consent of the Western Cherokee nation, and to which it was not a party, and from the provisions of which it was prevented from protecting itself by force and fraud on the part of the United States, granted to the Eastern Cherokees the same lands that were sold and conveyed to the Western Cherokee nation, without the consent and against the wishes and in fraud and violation of the rights of the latter, and removed the Eastern Cherokees, against their will and by force of arms, from their homes east of the Mississippi, and located them upon the lands belonging to the Western Cherokees, thus depriving them of the sole use, right to, and interest in the lands as guarantied by treaty, and reserving to them only an interest in proportion to their numbers, they being but one third of the whole Cherokee people. That from that time, and continually thereafter, the Western Cherokees protested against and resisted this invasion of their rights, until in 1846, when, acting under duress of life, liberty, and property, advantage being also taken by the United States of the fiduciary relations existing towards the Western Cherokees, and also of the condition of extreme impoverishment, destitution, and want to which the Western Cherokees had been reduced by the United States, they were forced to make and enter into an agreement with the United States, fraudulent in character, by the terms of which the consideration they were to receive was grossly inadequate to compensate them for their right to and interest in the lands, of which they had been unjustly deprived by the United States, and for the property destroyed and lost to them through the wrongful acts of the United States, and its default to comply with its treaty obligations It was further alleged that the land so *431 bargained, sold, relinquished, and conveyed to the Western Cherokees by the treaties of 1828 and 1833 contained in all 13,610,795.34 acres, and that the Western nation of Cherokees formed but one third of the whole Cherokee race, the Eastern nation forming the other two thirds; and that the amount of land owned by the Western nation, which was appropriated by the United States and granted to the Eastern nation of Cherokees, under the provisions of the treaty of 1835, was the same part of the whole body of land as was the Eastern nation of the whole body of the Cherokee people; and that, therefore, the United States took from the Western Cherokees, and deprived them of the sole use, right, title, and interest in and to two thirds of 13,610,795.34 acres, amounting to the sum of 9,073,863.56 acres, and converted the same to the public use and benefit; the land being worth at the time it was so taken and converted the sum of $5,671,164.72 1/2.
Petitioners further alleged that after the Eastern Cherokees had been forcibly removed into the country of the Western Cherokees through the wrongful acts of the United States, and because of its failure to protect the Western Cherokees according to treaty stipulations, property of great value was lost to them to wit, of the value of $30,000; and, further, that the only payments made to the Western Cherokees since the appropriation of their lands and the destruction of their property were the sum of $532,896.90, appropriated by act of congress of September 30, 1850, (9 St. 556;) a one-third interest in the sum of $500,000, given by the United States to the whole Cherokee people in common, by the treaty of 1835; and a one-third interest in 800,000 acres of land sold in common to the Cherokee people by the United States in the treaty of 1835, which was made exclusively with the Eastern Cherokee nation, for the sum of $500,000, at which valuation the Western Cherokees have been and still are held charged by the government for their one-third share.
It was further alleged that under the provisions of the treaty of 1846 the sum of $5,600,000, which had been provided by the treaty of 1835, and a supplementary treaty thereto of 1836, was adopted and taken by the United States *432 as a basis of settlement of the claims of the Western Cherokees against the United States, from which amount certain sums were to be first deducted, and of the residuum thus obtained the Western Cherokees were to be paid one third, according to their numerical proportion to the whole people, and that the charges to be made against the said ‘treaty fund’ were to be limited to ‘proper’ and legitimate charges, ‘excluding all extravagant and improper expenditures.’ That the only legitimate charges against the treaty fund are among those enumerated in the fifteenth article of the treaty of 1835, as provided in the treaty of 1846, which proper charges were as follows, to wit: The amount invested as a general national fund, $500,000; the amount expended for 800,000 acres of land $500,000; the amount expended for improvements, $1,540,572.27; the amount expended for ferries, $159,572.12; the amount expended for spoliations, $264,894.09; and that the $600,000 forming a part of the treaty fund was provided by article 3 of the supplemental treaty of 1836, for, among other things, the removal of the Eastern Cherokees. That out of this fund there were removed in number 2,495. That of this number 295 were chattels, to wit, slaves. That for the removal of personal property there was no provision made by the treaty; and that, therefore, the only proper expenditure for removal was for 2,200 Eastern Cherokees, at $20 each, according to the terms of article 4 of the treaty of 1846, amounting to $44,000.
It was also charged that by the fourth article of the treaty of 1828 there were 3,343.41 acres reserved by the United States, which the latter agreed to dispose of and to apply the proceeds thereof to the sole interest and benefit of the Western Cherokees, together with the value of certain agency improvements on the lands, and that the United States have failed and neglected to do so, and are therefore liable for the full value of the lands and agency improvements; in all, the sum of $9,179.16 1/4.
MF number 574, special files of the office of Indian Affairs 1807-1904, National Archives
“A treaty which was signed on August 6, 1846, in Washington, decreed that the lands in the Cherokee Nation were for the use and occupancy of all the Cherokees; provided for the adjudication of all……….and promised to reimburse the Nation for sums unfairly deducted by the United States government from the $5,000,000 owed to the Cherokees in payment for Eastern lands, and, to smooth the ruffled feathers of members of the Treaty party, the Treaty of 1846 stipulated that members of the latter party were to receive $115,000 for all their losses, including the $5,000 to be paid to each of the heirs of the Ridges and Boudinot.”
Then a list of 252 names (with one crossed out, Beet N Spring) and a few empty spaces with sums of money after their names ranging from a couple of thousand to a few dollars.
I am entering names but not the sums: Rachel Adair, Sabrina Arther, Andrew and Alsy Adair, Calvin S Adair, Johnson Alberty, Moses Alberty, G W Adair, David Borlan, Heirs of Rosa Baldridge, George Bearmeat, James Berry, Samuel Ballard Wiley Butler, Jack Ballard, Ellis Benge, Buzzard, David Bell, John A Bell, Sabra Buffington, Aggy Butler, Arch Ballard, Widow William Borlan, Wilson Cordery, A B Cunningham, Joseph Clark, Harry Colston, John Countryman, Tin cup, William Crittendon, D H Creason, Cah he na he, or Spring Frog, Ca u ka, Aggy Childers, Stephen Carroll, James Chambers, Jno Caldwell, William Childers, Joseph Crittendon, George Candy, Cule ska wie, William Conner, Andrew Cordery, J A Cox, Arch Downing, Mary Downing, William Dennils, Duck, John Duncan Sr, Doct Davis, Mary Duncan, widow of Jack, Moses Fields, Black Fox, Moses Black Fox, Frank Faulkner, Jno Fish, Estate of Exekiel Field, John Forlen, Estate of John Field John Mc Field, W Foy, Charles Griffin, James Gunter, Ann Garrett, George Gann, Walter A Goss, William Griffin, Tiana Guess, Heirs of Huckleberry, George Hughes, John Hammer, wife of Jno Hammer, John Hogg, John and William Harnage, Horse Fly, Nelson R Harlin, Handle, Heirs of Jack Hawkins, Thomas Horn, Sally Huss, Sally Hughs, Jane Huss, John Huss, James A Humphrey, E S Harlin, Philip Inlo, Isaac, Jailor, Benjamin Johnson, John Justice, July, Kil la ne ka, Woman Killer, Knight Killer, David Night Killer, Adam Long Knife, Ca u ka to hee, Moses Ca u ka to hee, George D Kinny, James Landrum Junr, Charles Landrum, James Landrum Sr, James Langley, John Love, David Landrum, Hiram T Landrum, B F Landrum William Lasley J M Lynch, N B McNair, Danl M” Coy, Avery Miller, Heirs of Ground Mole, Polly Miller, John Martin, Warren Miller, Alfred Miller, Jesse Mayfield Lewis Miller J W Mayfield and BENJAMIN NASH. (receiving $30) He is number 129. If interested I will type the other names in.
And following is “Abstract of claims for damages allowed by the Committee of The Treaty party of Cherokees under the 6th article of the Treaty of 6th August 1846, in addition to others allowed in report of 19th February, 1847.”
Names and amout awarded and amout to be paid pro-rata.
Benjamin is number 24 on this list receiving $85.41.
Subjects: Thomas Nash/AshBook “B” page 54page 112Will Richard Carpenter, of Natchez, merchant, weak and body: the 800 acres lately granted to me by this government, about eight miles from the fort, to my son, James, and my will is that a house, 30ft. long by that 16ft wide, be built thereon for the reception of my wife and family as soon as it can be conveniently done. To beloved wife Mary Carpenter, Negro man Boston”, Negro woman “ Anny”, and all the furniture of my house. To son James, girl “kitty”; to my daughter Mary Flowers, Negro girl “ Rose”; two daughter Elizabeth Boardman, Negro named “Jack”. To wife, Mary carpenter, twelve cows and calves and my white horse. My wearing apparel to be sold and proceeds to fight it equally between my wife, son, my daughters and my son in law. My house and a lot at natchez lending to be sold, also tracked of 300 acres which I bought from John Lusk. And whereas there is remaining in my hands some articles of merchandise, the property of Mr. Brown, of a Rhode Island, and myself, my executors to get an exact knowledge there of the Mr. William Ferguson, who is acquainted there a and they be disposed of two best advantage to get my other estate for payment of all dates and funeral charges, (2) $500.00 to build house above described; and the residue to be divided equally between my wife, son James and three daughters, Elizabeth, Mary and Sarah. Exrs; wife, Mary, daughter Mary flowers, sun and law Samuel flowers and son in law, Charles Boardman, with my friends, Mr. David Williams and Bernard Lintot. The above request that twelve cows and calves go to my wife, to be charged; for cows and calves two Y. and the remaining eight cows and calves to my youngest children, James and Sarah. Signed July 14, 1788 with witnessed: George Fitzgerald, Alexander Henderson, George Profit, William Voustan, Peter Walker, PierreBessandon, J. Henderson. July 24, 1788, notice of death of Richard carpenter at plantation of Samuel flowers to which he had been removedon night of July 22; Commandant, with Antonio Soler and Don Estevon Minor, repaired to the dwilling house of the deceased in the town of Natchez and caused the the most important keys to be delivered to Commandant, five in number, (1) key to writing desk, (2) key to trunk (3) key to the stor, (4) key to another trunk (5) key to cellar; seal of commandant’s arms of fixed two said places and things for security, leaving said property in charge of Bernard Lintot,Antonio Soler, Alexander MOORE, Mary carpenter, David Williams, Carlos De Grande-Pre.// page 114. 28 July 1788 Samuel Flower appointed, ad in a room, and~wheel is read, your raider and Guardian of the miners of Richard carpenter, deceased, namely James and Sarah, just aged eight and the last eleven months lawfully issue of his marriage with Mary Fairchild is surviving wife, having also issued by his first marriage two daughters namely, Elizabeth, wife of Charles Boardman, dwelling in the Parish of Iberville, and Mary, wife of Samuel Flower, of this District, here present. August 07, 1788 estate of Richard Carpenter debts outstanding:Samuel GibsonJacob Cobin (Coburn)Ephraim BatesThomas NashCharles CasonJohn HollandThomas GriffinStephen MayesJoseph Mills Richard GoodingDavid TannerRichard LordJames WhiteWilliam OwensWilliam WicksJesse HamiltonClement DysonJohn JonesJames SimmonsDavid MulkeyJohn AlexanderJohn LumRobert KiddGabriel SwayzeWilliam ThomasJoseph FosterIsaac FifeHenry RichardsonJohn AllenJames RichardsonJames BakerHenry Lovick
David Smith ( for note)
In completed list, please email firstname.lastname@example.org for details of full listing
Book “C” Natchez Court Records page 112
page 257. note: the following record does not mention Thomas.
Inventories of Asahel Lewis. Natchez, seventeen March, 1795. And presence of Don Estevan Minor and Ebenezer Rees, Don Manuel Gayoso de Lemos opened a cypress box which had a good lock and key, and found the following: Reciept from James Willwy for a negro belonging to Hugh McGary; note drawn by William Collins for an ox and a hog; receipt from Garret Rapalye senior to his son Garret Rapalye for $12; a sale of a negro from Jacob Nash; a receipt from Mary Carpenter; sale of a horse by William Collins; a draft by Archibald Robertson on Edward McCabe; account against James Rose, deceased, for $18; a bond drawn by Charles Profitt; a draft of Mrs Sybil Nash on the deceased; a memo of payment to “Emma” and her son Henry, not witnessed. Inventory also included some wearing apparel and the whole was delivered to Joseph Bernard, agent for the estate. //
Book “D” Natchez Court Records Page 143
page 66. 14 May 1789 Thomas Nash indebted to Don Juan Girault for $10.00, Robert Miller Security. Thom. (X) Nash, Robert Miller
Book “E” Natchez District Court Records Page 196
page 315. His creditors versus William Henderson. Peter Walker, an agent for the creditors of this district, and John O’Conner, as the greatest creditor of the late William Henderson, planter, represent that, having had certain infromation of the deceased of the above-mentioned William Henderson, we think it our duty to have an inventory of the estate made immediately, In order it may not be embezzled, of which we are very apprehensive. We ask to be authorized to take the above mentioned inventoried as agent and the greatest creditor. April 18, 1793. Signed: Peter Walker, John O.-Conner.// granted. Same date. The documents to be returned and attested by two witnesses to be present at the proceedings. Signed: Manuel Gayoso De Lemos.//in for two of the foregoing decree, the E., Peter walker and John oh-Conner at the applet welling house of the late in Henderson, a company to buy Mr. Joseph Bernardinand Mr. George Fitzgerald, as witnesses, and having applied to Dorothy, the widow, for a statement of the property left in her hands by her late husband when he left the country, she gave it in the following account: one tract of land situated on the bluff, about two leagues north of fort Panmure, containing 800 acres, with house and improvements, on which she and her family now dwell, the above tract mortgaged to Mr. James Carrick, merchant in N.O.; one tract of land on the Homochitto, 500 acres, on which there is a ferry; three tracks situated at the Big Black, one, on which there is a ferry, 250 acres; another 258 errors, and another 200 acres; for Negroes, horses, cattle, and hearts, and the following notes number as in the margin: Mordecai a Richards, William Robinson, Solomon Wheatley, William Acheson, Abraham Mayes, William Kelsey, Edmund Quirk, Samuel Head, William Owens, Samuel Murphy, Steven Minor, Steven Minors order: Nathaniel Tomlinson, a pair papers, etc., tools, household furniture, kitchen furniture and milk house utensils. Further, Mr. Burrel Stroud said that when William Henderson died in Kentucky, he had in his possession several obligations and other effects, and that they remained in the hands of captain James Morrison, who is expected down very shortly. Above inventories certified by Peter walker, John O.-Conner, Joseph Bernard and George Fitzgerald. April 22, 1793// obligations in the hands of John O.-Conner where they were lodget by the late William Henderson before his departure from this country where they still remain. These were by Moses Armstrong, William Bassett, Christy Bolling, Samuel Heady, William Barnett, Daniel Bernet, Gibson Clark, George Cochran, Jacob Cobun, Lewis Charboneau, William Cheney, Thomas Evans, John Farquhar, John Ferguson, Benjamin Grubb, John Burnett, John Booth, George Beattie, Thomas Beans, Charles Carter, Waterman Crane, Silas Chambers, William Curtis, John Chambers, Isaac Fife, John Ford and Robert Miller, Samuel Gibson, James glasscock capitalize, Ezekiel Hoskinson, Margaret Harmon, Thomas Hubbard, Ralph Humphries, Nathaniel Ivey, Joseph Dove, Thomas Jordan, Joseph King, Justus King, William Kelsey, Thomas Kelly, James Lobtal, James Leyton, Richard Miller, John Montgomery, Roswell Mygatt, Thomas Nash, Frances Nailor, John Nailor, John Newton, John Ormsby, William Oglesby, William O. NS, Ebenezer Potter, Ruben Proctor, Jon Peters,
Full list of detailed names avaialble from Parrotsgrl@aol.com
Book “F” Page 276 Natchez Court Records
Page 300. William Lee versus Daniel Harrigal. Sandy Creek District, William Cooper, justice of the peace before whom appeared Ms. Susana Lee who made oath that Daniel Harrigill told her that he helped Thomas Nash to kill two hogs the property of Alexander Farrar and one Moore, and that he helped Silas McBee catch a horse the property of David Williams, deceased, and the said horse ran about the pond where David butOdam now lives and that he piloted the said McBee out of the settlement to the other side of William Calvit’s with the said horse and negro man that stayed at said Hargill’s and that the said negro had hired himself from his master to trade for himself and the said negro had come from below and the said Williams had wrote a free pass for the negro.Susanna S. Lee July 21, 1794//personally appeared before William Cooper, Daniel Herrigill that Gave about four years ago William Lee came to his house and asked him to go bear hunting with him and they went to the plantation where Thomas Belleu ran away from. As they were going to the place, William Lee proposed to said Harrigill to steal a bar for a plow from said plantation but said Hargrill did not and they been returned back by the house where stood a spinning wheel, etc.. August 27, 1794.// Beesley Pruitt made of that William Lee offered to sell him a spinning wheel which he thought to be the property of Thomas Belleu: August 27, 1794 periods//August 29, appeared Mary Radcliffe and made oath that on Friday last Daniel Harrigill came to the house of John Radcliffe and carried off a rifle of the said Radcliffe.//John Radcliffe and Joseph Slater, who do, being sworn, said that Daniel Harrigill hollowed to the deponents as they were working in said Radcliffe as field where they were working and Harrigill had the rifle which he had just taken out of Ratcliff’s house and was his property.