Levels of hazardous pollutants generated by planes at LAX are much more prolific and dangerous than previously believed, according to a study to be released today that asserts the airport generates as much toxic chemicals as hundreds of miles of freeway traffic.
Ultrafine toxic particulates permeate the area 10 miles downwind of the Westchester facility, contrary to previous studies that have found air pollution dissipates quickly after airplane takeoffs, according to the study that will be published in the American Chemical Society’s Environmental Science and Technology journal.
Researchers from USC’s Keck School of Medicine conducted the analysis over 29 days, usually during times of onshore westerly winds in the late morning and afternoon. But measurements also were taken in early mornings and late nights when air traffic and onshore winds are lower. They found chemical concentrations to be up to five times higher than background pollution levels within nine square miles of the airport. Within two miles east of the airport, levels of dangerous particulates were 10 times higher than in areas not affected by the airport’s emissions.
Los Angeles International Airport “should be considered one of the most important sources of (particulate matter concentration) in Los Angeles,” the report states.
As a result, residents living downwind and to the east of the airport in Hawthorne, Inglewood, El Segundo, Lennox, South Los Angeles and Westmont could be inhaling hazardous levels of nitrogen oxides and fine particulates that could contribute to inflammation, blocked arteries, asthma, heart conditions and other health issues, according to the American Chemical Society. Cities south of the airport are affected to a lesser degree.
“Our research shows that airport impacts extend more than five times farther than previously assumed,” said co-author and lead researcher Scott Fruin, a USC professor. “Effects from planes that are landing appear to play a major role in this large area of impact.”
Concentrations of particulate matter, black carbon and nitrogen oxides are elevated fourfold within six miles downwind of the airport and twofold within 10 miles from airport emissions.
“Based on these concentration-weighted impact areas, 280-790 kilometers of freeway are needed to produce the equivalent” to the hazardous particulates generated at the airport, the report states.
“The emissions from LAX are likely not unique. The large area of impact from LAX suggests that air pollution studies ... should carefully consider wind conditions and whether measurements are influenced by airport emissions.”