Get your students interacting with the vocabulary from chapter 8B of the Realidades 1 Spanish textbook with this fun game of ¡Pesca!. Students will test their knowledge of the vocabulary as they play this classic card game in small groups. Not only will they learn, they will be engaged and having fun! Great speaking and listening experience, too!
Included: Teacher prep instructions, student instructions and vocabulary list to display on game day, 82 game cards, 2 blank cards, and a piece of decorative paper to copy onto the back of game cards.
Vocabulario incluido: la bolsa, la botella, la caja, el cartón, el centro de reciclaje, la lata, llevar, el periódico, el plástico, reciclar, recoger, separar, usado(a), el vidrio, el barrio, la calle, la comunidad, el jardín, el río, los ancianos, el anciano, la anciana, el campamento, los demás, la escuela primaria, la gente, el juguete, los niños, el niño, la niña, pobre, el problema, el proyecto de construcción, el trabajo voluntario, el voluntario/la voluntaria, a menudo, decidir, increíble, inolvidable, la vez, otra vez*
*If you didn’t cover a particular vocabulary word included in the game, simply pull that match out of the deck. In anticipation of this, I made more than enough cards to play the game in small groups without running out. I also included blank cards should you want to include your own vocabulary words with the game.
This set is included in my Realidades 1 Vocabulary ¡Pesca! Game BUNDLE #2 (Capítulos 5A-9B) which includes TEN of my Realidades 1 ¡Pesca! games. Save 25% off the list price when you buy the money-saving bundle! Click the link to see it!
These versatile cards work great for other activities and games, too! Want to use them for a game of Memory? Just pick out the 12-15 pairs you want them to practice matching up and place the rest aside. Pictionary is always a hit, too, and these cards are perfect! Number the English cards and hang up around the classroom and have students go around and write the matching vocab. word. Four activities for the price of one!
Check out my other ¡Pesca! games for vocabulary and verb tenses HERE!
Here are some things buyers have said about games of ¡Pesca!:
Buyer- "I loved having extra blank cards to write some extra words on! Here's how the game went down:
Me: We're going to play Go Fish.
High Schoolers: What? Aww...
towards the end of class...
Me: OK, let's go ahead and clean up.
Kids: AHH! No! 5 more minutes!
next day...(and every day since)
Kids: Can we play Pesca again?"
Elizabeth C.- "Will use tomorrow with task cards! I love these games!"
Hannah B- "A fun idea with clear student directions!"
Tess M. "A fun way to practice grammar."
Need another Realidades 1 activity? Check out my other Realidades 1 resources by clicking HERE. This game pairs really well with my 48 Realidades 1: Capítulos 8A & 8B Task Cards
Did you know you can follow my store and receive notifications when new products are posted or upcoming sales? I have lots of engaging resources in the works and new products (except bundles) are 50% off for the first 24 hours! Click the green star by my store name to follow me!
Thanks for checking out my game!
La Profe Plotts