Audio – Jan 22 2013 Lesson 80
“I have a Red Indian friend…When we were once speaking confidentially about the white man, he said to me: “We don’t understand the whites; they are always wanting something – always restless – always looking for something…We can’t understand them. They have such sharp noses, such thin, cruel lips, such lines in their faces. We think they are all crazy.” Carl Jung, Modern Man in Search of a Soul, 277-78.
[Such things are] “hard only to the hard, incredible only to the incredulous.”
(Augustine, in Frederick Farrar, The Life of Christ, 318.
“There are few persons who see that light or even believe in the fuller life, and often after glimpsing it, they turn away to the grosser and more sordid things.”
David O. McKay, 1961.
“One can see much in the face of a man [or woman] as the years pass by. Something happens to the features of the relativist: a slackness, a weakness, a futility seems to stamp itself on them. But the man who has stood unflinchingly for great principles shows an increasing firmness, a nobility and a majesty in his face as time goes by.”
“And fellow sojourners on earth. It is your privilege to purify yourselves and come up to the same glory, and see for yourselves and know for yourselves. Ask…seek…knock.”
Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 13.
“Every …person who lives in this world wields an influence whether for good or for evil. It is not what he says alone; it is not alone what he does. It is what he is…Every man has an atmosphere which is affecting every other man. He cannot escape for one moment from this radiation of his character…”
David O. McKay, in M. Catherine Thomas, Light in the Wilderness, 186-187.
A monk feared to leave praying in case he missed a divine manifestation, but could not ignore the hungry souls he usually feeds at that hour. So he leaves his praying, and feeds the hungry and return to his cell, to find Christ waiting and saying: “Hadst thou stayed I might have fled.”
Henry Wordsworth Longfellow, “The Theologian’s Tale,” in Tales of a Wayside Inn.