Tech knowledge isn’t just a nice diversion anymore. Our modern lives are shaped by technology, and understanding how it works and what role it will play in the future is vital for 21st Century learners, especially girls.
Young boys seem to be attracted to computer games from the get-go and often give the appearance of being “tech savvy” while girls often use it in different ways and may not seem as interested in the possibilities. As a result parents enrol their boys in tech-related courses and camps and fail to do the same with their girls.
But empowering and teaching girls from a young age to understand (and not just consume) computing so they can be coders, creators and innovators is crucial for society and for their ability to be a part of shape the future.
Six reasons girls need to get tech savvy
Computer-related jobs are growing: To be career ready, one thing is certain: the tech sector is only going to grow. It’s imperative that girls play a part in this economy.
Computing is a creative and fun outlet: The creative possibilities inherent in technology and computing are boundless. Girls need to start early so they can play, experiment, fail, and succeed, and so they can see the potential that lies within them and this exciting field of learning.
We need to close the tech gender gap: The IT sector is notoriously male-dominated, and let’s face, this leads to a disturbing imbalance in the force.
Girls need role models in the industry: Girls need to see that women and other girls are part of the IT industry, so they’ll consider being a part of it.
Girls and women need to be a part of shaping the future: Empowering and teaching girls from a young age to understand computing so they can be coders, creators and innovators is crucial for society and for their ability to help shape the future.
Early interaction with technology is crucial: Early exposure to technology, information about job opportunities and support from parents and role models encourages girls to consider tech as a career option, according to CompTIA, the nonprofit association for the technology industry.
This post is sponsored by Claren Academy
For a new choice in education in Vancouver, check out Claren Academy! Opening in September in downtown Vancouver, Claren Academy is taking applications for kindergarten to grade two. This new elementary school was founded by parents looking for an education for the future, pairing strong academic foundations with creativity and problem solving. Small classes, individualized learning, passionate staff, and new technology bring that vision to life. Visit clarenacademy.org today to apply!