Beth Kitchin PhD RDN blogs on health and nutrition. Her blogs are fact-based and offer a common sense approach to a healthier life. She's a food lover so don't expect her to tell you what not to eat! Beth is a an Assistant Professor in the University of Alabama at Birmingham's Nutrition Sciences Department and the patient educator at UAB's Osteoporosis Prevention and Treatment Clinic. She also appears weekly as a guest contributor on WBRC's morning show "Good Day Alabama".
Thursday, February 23, 2017
Your Risk of Breast Cancer with these 3 Science Supported Habits
cancer is the most common cancer in women. One in eight women will get breast
cancer in her lifetime. Medical treatment can cure it in many women. However, experts
estimate that 40,700 women will die of breast cancer this year. Like all women,
I want to know how to reduce my risk. I don’t have a family history of breast
cancer – but many women who get it don’t have one either. So, I went looking for
the best evidence on what we can do to lower our risk. One of best websites for solid, science based
cancer prevention recommendations is the American Institute of Cancer Research
(AICR). They estimate that 33% of all breast cancer cases in the U.S. are
preventable. That means 81,400 women who could avoid breast cancer. But how?
can’t avoid all of the risk factors for breast cancer. Age and genetics
increase your risk and you can’t do much about them. But there are some things
you do have control over. Research shows that these three steps may actually
lower your risk:
Lower Your Breast Cancer Risk:
– and Stay – at a Healthy Weight
Extra body fat correlates with post-menopausal
breast cancer risk. About 1 in 5 cases of breast cancer is in women with extra
body fat. Fat tissue increases inflammation and hormones that promote cancer
cell growth. Overweight and obesity correlate with 10 other cancers as well.
Physically Active Every Day
Exercise helps lower the risk of both pre- and
post-menopausal breast cancer risk. It can help you stay at a healthy weigh and
boost the immune system. Thirty minutes a day may be all you need! It can be
any activity – walking, gardening, dancing, swimming, hiking and the list goes
Alcohol can act as a carcinogen in the breast
tissue. It can damage DNA and increase hormones that promote cancer. Women
should limit alcohol to no more than one drink a day or seven per week on
average. Less is best when it comes to alcohol and cancer risk.
those three are the most evidence-based recommendations. There’s a lot of
interest in Mediterranean diets and the risk of cancers. One recent study showed
that a Mediterranean eating style – particularly nuts and olive oil – reduces
breast cancer risk. The study was a randomized controlled trial. That’s the kind
of study that can actually show cause and effect. It's a really strong study design. But it’s just one study – so we
can’t really make recommendations on it just yet. Also, the women in the study
were eating around four tablespoons of olive oil a day! That’s a lot to work
into your diet (although I’m pretty sure I’m getting at least two to three a
day!). Some new research is also linking smoking with breast cancer.
at least for now, you can take these three steps and rest assured that you’re
doing all you can to lower your risk!
Kitchin, PhD, RDN
Assistant Professor, Nutrition Sciences
University of Alabama at Birmingham