Termites are some of the most vicious pests you could encounter. While they might not necessarily be dangerous for your health, they can and will eat through wood and other similar plant matter that can be found lying around your home. If left to breed and proliferate, termites can potentially destroy a home with their ravenous appetite for wood.
While all termites feed on wood, there are actually two types of the insect: subterranean and drywood termites. Subterranean termites live underground, but need moisture to survive, thus they venture out occasionally to feed on damp and old wood. Drywood termites, on the other hand, can attack wood that is not even wet, and can create colonies without even connecting to the ground.
Unfortunately, Florida is host to both types of termites, particularly the drywood species. They can be a nuisance to homeowners, causing thousands of dollars’ worth of damage. You will have to act quickly should you suspect a termite infestation in your home. To get to the bottom of the infestation quickly and stop it, you can always count on Bug Maniacs for pest control and management services.
How to Find Out if You Have a Termite Infestation
There are several signs to look out for should you suspect a termite infestation:
- If you see any small winged insects emerge from a structure, there is a good chance that it means a subterranean termite infestation has taken root. Subterranean termites also build mud tubes that link their food sources to their underground colonies, which are sure signs of a serious infestation.
- If you find any strange pellets near wooden structures or objects, then it could be a telegraph for drywood termite activity. These wood-colored pellets are actually the insects’ droppings, and are usually found near furniture or the ceiling.
Some infestations are not even visually obvious, and termites can hide their activities by tunneling through the wood without causing too many holes. The best way to confirm a termite infestation is to call in Bug Maniacs. Our team from Jacksonville, FL is capable of handling any and all termite-related issues, regardless of the severity of the attack.
Why Deal with Termites?
Termites have to be dealt with as soon as possible before the damage they can cause becomes too costly. A report by the National Pest Management Association states that termites cause $5 billion worth of damage every single year, in both residential and commercial properties. If you value your home and the investment it stands for, you will have to clear out the termites completely to ensure that future invasions are not possible.
How Bug Maniacs Helps You
It is not enough to spot termites on your own; you need to put them down fast before they cause even more damage to your furniture and your wooden structures. This means eliminating the bugs attacking your belongings, all the way down to their queen responsible for their growth and expansion. For a thorough solution against termites, you will need professional help. Bug Maniacs has the solutions to contain your termite issues before they get out of hand. We use a proprietary green and non-toxic solution that not only stops termites from burrowing and feeding on your wooden items, but also deals with their queen and her offspring.
To ensure the bugs never return, we can arrange periodic maintenance services with you. After performing initial pest control services, we can continue to monitor the state of your home, preempting future termite attacks.
Schedule an Appointment Today
Bug Maniacs is based in Jacksonville and serves nearby communities, such as Atlantic Beach, Fernandina Beach, Orange Park, Avondale, and Saint Augustine. If you need our help dealing with termites, or if you have questions for us, call us at (904) 425-7341. If you call us about a termite infestation, we can schedule an on-site evaluation to find the critters.