CES is investigating the deployment of new advanced carbon negative power plants into the California energy market. These plants use CES’ proven oxy-fuel combustion technology to burn a gasified biomass fuel to produce clean steam to power turbines. The plant then captures and permanently sequesters more than 99% of the produced carbon, effectively pulling carbon dioxide from the air and cleaning the atmosphere. CES plans to first deploy a small-scale commercial “BioCCS” plant at its Kimberlina Facility located in the southern central valley before deploying a fleet of these new advanced carbon negative plants across the state. To learn more about CES’ BioCCS development efforts see this link.
An informational brochure is now available outlining CES' available technology options for Heavy Oil Applications. CES produces high quality Gas Generators and Reheaters, while HEXCES, a division of CES, produces Compact Platelet Heat Exchangers (CPHXs). These technologies can be combined in a variety of configurations depending on customer need. Check out the brochure here.
Clean Energy Systems, Inc. has just opened a new division named HEXCES to focus on the design, development, manufacture, and service of compact platelet heat exchangers (CPHXs). Also known as printed circuit heat exchangers (PCHEs), these devices provide efficient thermal management solutions across a variety of market applications. Check out the new website www.hexces.com for details.
Through the support of the US Department of Energy, Clean Energy Systems, Inc. and its development partners have designed, manufactured, and tested and industrial-scale oxy-fuel turbine, suitable for applications in oxy-combustion power cycles that capture greater than 99% of produced carbon dioxide. To save on development cost and schedule, a used industrial gas turbine, an SGT-900 811/12 engine, was purchase, disassembled and inspected, then retro-fitted to act as an intermediate-pressure, hot gas expander. Also, the engine's air-breathing combustors were converted into oxy-fuel reheaters to boost turbine inlet temperatures and therefore, cycle efficiencies. A dedicated test rig was designed, fabricated, instrumented, and installed at an existing test facility to demonstrate reheater performance prior to install and operations within the oxy-fuel turbine. Component test results prove the feasibility of gas turbine conversion to oxy-fuel turbine, however further testing is recommended to further verify performance at higher power levels, and longer durations.
Click on this link for access to the entire paper.
John Lippert of Bloomberg Markets Magazine covers Clean Energy Systems' aerospace origins and future in European markets
Clean Energy was featured in a December 2012 Sacramento Business Journal article titled "Rocket Scientists Aim to Offer Clean-Air Power Plants by 2015"
Future fossil-fueled power generation systems will require emission control technologies such as carbon capture and sequestration (CCS) to comply with government greenhouse gas regulations. The three prime candidate technologies which permit carbon dioxide (CO2) to be captured and safely stored include pre-combustion, post-combustion capture and oxy-fuel (O-F) combustion. For more than a decade Clean Energy Systems, Inc. (CES) has been designing and demonstrating enabling technologies for oxy-fuel power generation; specifically steam generators, hot gas expanders and reheat combustors.
Recently CES has partnered with Florida Turbine Technologies, Inc. (FTT) and Siemens Energy, Inc. to develop and demonstrate turbomachinery systems compatible with the unique characteristics of oxy-fuel working fluids. The team has adopted an aggressive, but economically viable development approach to advance turbine technology towards early product realization. Goals include short-term, incremental advances in power plant efficiency and output while minimizing capital costs and cost of electricity.
Phase 2 of this development work has been greatly enhanced by a cooperative agreement with the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE). Under this program the team will design, manufacture and test a commercial-scale intermediate-pressure turbine (IPT) to be used in industrial O-F power plants. These plants will use diverse fuels and be capable of capturing 99% of the produced CO2 at competitive cycle efficiencies and cost of electricity. Initial plants will burn natural gas and generate more than 200MWe with near-zero emissions.
To reduce development cost and schedule an existing gas turbine engine will be adapted for use as a high-temperature O-F IPT. The necessary modifications include the replacement of the engine’s air compressor with a thrust balance system and altering the engine’s air-breathing combustion system into a steam reheating system using direct fuel and oxygen injection.
Excellent progress has been made to date. FTT has completed the detailed design and issued manufacturing drawings to convert a Siemens SGT-900 to an oxy-fuel turbine (OFT). Siemens has received, disassembled and inspected an SGT-900 B12 and ordered all necessary new components for engine changeover. Meanwhile CES has been working to upgrade an existing test facility to support demonstration of a “simple” oxy-fuel power cycle. Low-power demonstration testing of the newly assembled OFT-900 is expected to commence in late 2012.
Copyright © 2012 by ASME and Siemens Energy, Inc.
Future fossil-fueled power generation systems will require carbon capture and sequestration to comply with government green house gas regulations. The three prime candidate technologies that capture carbon dioxide (CO2 ) are pre-combustion, post-combustion and oxy-fuel combustion techniques. Clean Energy Systems, Inc. (CES) has recently demonstrated oxy-fuel technology applicable to gas turbines, gas generators, and reheat combustors at their 50MWth research test facility located near Bakersfield, California. CES, in conjunction with Siemens Energy, Inc. and Florida Turbine Technologies, Inc. (FTT) have been working to develop and demonstrate turbomachinery systems that accommodate the inherent characteristics of oxy-fuel (O-F) working fluids. The team adopted an aggressive, but economical development approach to advance turbine technology towards early product realization; goals include incremental advances in power plant output and efficiency while minimizing capital costs and cost of electricity . Proof-of-concept testing was completed via a 20MWth oxy-fuel combustor at CES’s Kimberlina prototype power plant. Operability and performance limits were explored by burning a variety of fuels, including natural gas and (simulated) synthesis gas, over a wide range of conditions to generate a steam/CO2 working fluid that was used to drive a turbo-generator. Successful demonstration led to the development of first generation zero-emission power plants (ZEPP). Fabrication and preliminary testing of 1st generation ZEPP equipment has been completed at Kimberlina power plant (KPP) including two main system components, a large combustor (170MWth ) and a modified aeroderivative turbine (GE J79 turbine). Also, a reheat combustion system is being designed to improve plant efficiency. This will incorporate the combustion cans from the J79 engine, modified to accept the system’s steam/CO2 working fluid. A single-can reheat combustor has been designed and tested to verify the viability and performance of an O-F reheater can. After several successful tests of the 1st generation equipment, development started on 2nd generation power plant systems. In this program, a Siemens SGT-900 gas turbine engine will be modified and utilized in a 200MWe power plant. Like the 1st generation system, the expander section of the engine will be used as an advanced intermediate pressure turbine and the can-annular combustor will be modified into a O-F reheat combustor. Design studies are being performed to define the modifications necessary to adapt the hardware to the thermal and structural demands of a steam/CO2 drive gas including testing to characterize the materials behavior when exposed to the deleterious working environment. The results and challenges of 1st and 2nd generation oxy-fuel power plant system development are presented.
Copyright © 2010 by ASME and Siemens Energy Inc.