Nutritionally, teriyaki chicken hits highs and lows. It's a good source of protein and other nutrients, however it can be high in fat and calories depending on how it is cooked. Teriyaki sauce can also be high in sodium. The key is to eat teriyaki chicken in moderation, prepare it using healthy cooking techniques and pair it with other nutrient-dense foods.
Chicken is a source of protein, which the body needs to grow, repair and maintain tissue and strengthen immunity. Chicken is also a good source of phosphorus, selenium, iron, magnesium and B vitamins. Federal guidelines recommend eating lean proteins to reduce intake of calories and saturated fat. Eating too many calories can lead to weight gain and obesity, while saturated fat contributes to high cholesterol, high triglycerides and heart disease. Choose chicken breasts over chicken legs, drumsticks or thighs because they are naturally lower in fat and calorie. Remove all visible fat and skin before cooking to make chicken even leaner. One serving of chicken is 3 ounces. A 3-ounce cooked chicken breast with the skin contains 166 calories, 25 grams of protein, 7 grams of total fat and 2 grams of saturated fat. The same chicken breast without the skin has 138 calories, 26 grams of protein, 3 grams of total fat and 1 gram of saturated fat. A 3-ounce cooked chicken leg with the skin contains 196 calories, 11 grams of total fat and 3 grams of saturated fat. Without the skin it has 159 calories, 7 grams of total fat and 2 grams of saturated fat.
Teriyaki sauce is flavorful, but high in sodium. Federal guidelines recommend consuming less than 2,300 milligrams per day. Sodium helps regulate blood pressure and muscle and nerve function, however too much sodium can lead to high blood pressure in certain individuals. It can also harm people with heart problems, cirrhosis or kidney disease. Marinating chicken in teriyaki sauce is acceptable, but limit its use at the table as a sauce or condiment. Choose low-sodium teriyaki sauce whenever possible, and prepare homemade teriyaki sauce with low-sodium soy sauce. One tablespoon of low-sodium teriyaki sauce only has 284 milligrams of sodium compared to 611 milligrams in the regular version.
Remove all visible fat and skin from the chicken before cooking. Even if you purchase leg meat instead of breast meat, by removing the fat and skin you will save yourself a lot of calories and fat. Cook teriyaki chicken without the use of oil by grilling or baking it. If you sauté or stir-fry, use a non-stick pan to minimize the amount of oil needed to prevent the chicken from sticking to the pan.
Pair teriyaki chicken with other nutrient-dense foods. Choosemyplate.gov says a balanced and healthy plate is 25 percent meat or protein, 25 percent grains and 50 percent fruits and vegetables. Choose whole grains whenever possible like brown rice and whole-wheat pasta. If you order a teriyaki chicken sandwich or burger ask for whole-grain or whole-wheat bread.
- chicken teriyaki with noodles image by Aqeel Ahmed from Fotolia.com