Just like the individuals the countries of today’s world do not have a uniform economy. The main basis for determining the country’s wealth is the GDP per capita. GDP is the rate value of all final goods and services produced within the geographical boundaries of the country within a year. A country with GDP capita of $765 or less is defined as a poor country. All of these countries do not have surplus resources to feed their majority of the population. People also face difficulty in meeting their necessities of life.The United Nations program for development has taken three aspects that are: Knowledge ,longevity and access to resources as the indicators to determine the poorest of all. On the basis of these figures, the following list has been prepared.Unemployment, inflation, overpopulation, political instability, illiteracy are some factors that don’t let the countries prosper, and they tend to remain poor.
Countries with Most Poverty- Top 10 Poorest Countries in the World
Here is the complete list of world’s top ten countries with most poverty according to GDP per Capita.
Angola officially called by the Republic of Angola is the tenth poorest country in the world.The standard of living in the country is extremely low, and life expectancy is one of the worst in the world.The infant mortality rate also shows miserable figures for Angola.Despite having an abundance of natural resources 70% of population lives below the poverty line.With the high poverty rate, the crime rate in the country is also very high which has led to the establishment of a large law enforcing agency in the entire region. The literacy rate and GDP rates are also extremely low.
Suriname is on the 9th position in the list of top 10 poorest countries of the world. It is not a very famous country, and many of us haven’t even heard of it before. Just like Angola Suriname’s 70% of the population is facing poverty and are unable to fulfill the necessities of life.The country is mostly agricultural which hardly fulfills the domestic requirements of the population, and the rest is imported through grants and aids by the UN. A recently emerging industry in Suriname is mining that has led to the excavation of many small-scale mines in the country.The main extracted output is the aluminium, which helps to earn a good revenue for this State. But the mining activities have led to the contamination of fresh drinking water of the country.
Guatemala, the central American country has a population of about 15,806,675 and covers an area of 108,890 cm square.The majority of the population is also rural based and has 75% of the population living below the poverty line.Further, 8,50,000 people are expected to fall into the poverty, and the 700 thousand are expected to reach extreme poverty that is near to “starve to death” position.Despite receiving some aids and grants, Guatemala’s condition is worsening every passing day. This land also experiences one of the worst literacy figures in the world.
Liberia is an African based English speaking country that is the home of the recent disease that has caught the world by fear, Ebola virus. Numerous citizens of the country have fell prey to the virus and have died a sudden death.Until 1990, Liberian economy was only dependent upon the export of iron and rubber, which was offset by the destruction of the civil war. Liberia has a better literacy rate than the other countries on the list, as its 60% of the population is educated but, the poverty figures are worse as they cross 80% making it the seventh poorest country in the world.
Haiti is the sixth poorest country in the world. It faces almost same poverty rates like Liberia but has even a lower per capita income.Haiti is also an agricultural country, and it is known to receive a lot of grants and aids from developed countries.The earthquake of 2010 not only shattered the country but of its economy.The country also has the honor to be one of the first independent nation of the Latin America but has the worst economic position than the other Caribbean countries.
Moldova is rated at 5th position in the list of top ten most poorest countries of the world. It has a population of almost 4 million, and it is famous for its wine making business in the world.Still, the poverty figures of this region are alarming. Agriculture is the main occupation of its residents, and the GDP figure of the country has improved recently but still it remains as the poorest country in Europe.
Chad is rated at the 4th position in the list of world’s poorest countries. This semi-desert has suffered a lot of damage through internal conflicts and tribal wars.The inadequacy of infrastructure and the deplorable health and social conditions has led to the country facing almost 80% of poverty.A lot of revenues is earned through the export of oil, gold and uranium, but the earnings are used to buy weapons and ammunition that are why it is the fourth poorest country in the world.
Zimbabwe is the 3rd most poorest in the list of top ten. It is based on the southern half of the Africa and surprisingly had been able to attract a list of the tourist earlier. This decade but after 2000, the economy started to decline in the higher percentages due to mismanagement and corruption of government official. Another main dispute in the country is the unfair distribution of land by more than 400 white farmers.During 2008, Zimbabwe faced alarming figures if inflation that further deteriorated its position.Now it’s mostly dependent on the help of its neighboring countries.
2. Gaza strip:
Gaza has been headline news several times for some years because of the ongoing war in the country. The war had dangerously affected in the already poverty-stricken country. The war has further pushed up the poverty figures in the country. The majority of the population of Gaza is concerned with agriculture, construction and manufacturing. The economy is suffering from unemployment and inflation as well.
To everyone’s’ surprise, Zambia is the leading producer of copper and also involved in industries like mineral processing, cement production and other agriculture-related industries but still it is the most poorest country on the planet. The poverty figures touch almost 90%, and average life expectancy is 51 years.The majority of the population lives on the less than $2 a day.
See More As: