Jesus Is the Apostle and High Priest of Our Profession (Hebrews 3:1-6)
1. Hebrews identifies itself as a "word of exhortation [encouragement]" (13:22). 2. Its purpose is to encourage Christians to remain faithful to the Lord. 3. To accomplish this purpose, Christ is highly exalted throughout the book. a. (3:1-6) Christ is shown to be far greater than Moses. b. When we see how Christ is so highly exalted, we should be encouraged to know Him and appreciate Him more fully. c. The better we know and appreciate the Lord, the more committed we will be to Him, and the more faithfully we will serve Him. d. Vs.6 stresses the importance of remaining faithful to the Lord. 4. In our lesson we are emphasizing the fact that we are to consider Jesus as "the Apostle and High Priest of our profession."
I. JESUS IS THE APOSTLE OF OUR PROFESSION
A. Apostle: one who is sent forth with authority to fulfill a mission 1. The limited commission illustrates the meaning of apostle (Luke 6:13; 9:1-2). 2. Later, the Great Commission was given to the apostles (Matthew 28:16-20). B. Jesus is the Apostle of our profession in that: 1. He was sent forth by the Father (Galatians 4:4 - "But when the fullness of the time was come, God sent forth His Son") 2. He was given authority (John 17:2 - Jesus said that the Father had given Him "power [authority] over all flesh") 3. He was given a mission (1 John 4:14 - "the Father sent the Son to be the Savior of the world"). a. In fulfilling His mission, Jesus tasted "death for every man" (Hebrews 2:9). b. As a result of fulfilling His mission, Jesus made it possible for us to be delivered from bondage (Hebrews 2:14-15). C. We are to consider Jesus as the Apostle of our profession. 1. What does this mean? a. Consider: to observe carefully, to fix the eyes upon b. In Hebrews 12:1b-2a we are taught to keep our eyes focused on Jesus. 2. We learn from Hebrews 12:3 why we must do this. 3. Considering Jesus as the Apostle of our profession will help us to remain faithful to Him.
II. JESUS IS ALSO THE HIGH PRIEST OF OUR PROFESSION
A. The high priest served as the main religious leader of the Jews. 1. He taught the law to the Jews. 2. He offered a special sacrifice for the Jews on the Day of Atonement. B. As the High Priest of Christians, Jesus serves as our leader. 1. As God's spokesman today, He teaches us God's Word (Hebrews 1:1-2). 2. He offered Himself once as a perfect sacrifice for sin (Hebrews 7:26-27). C. In Hebrews, Jesus is shown to be: 1. a merciful and faithful High Priest (2:17-18) 2. a sympathetic High Priest (4:15). D. We are to consider Jesus as the High Priest of our profession. 1. We are shown in Hebrews 4:16 how to do this. 2. We are shown in Hebrews 4:14 why we must do this.
1. As an Apostle, Jesus was sent to save us from our sins, and He is able to accomplish this mission (Hebrews 7:25a). 2. As a High Priest, Jesus helps those who have been saved (Hebrews 7:25b). 3. Is Jesus your Apostle and High Priest?