It’s almost time for the kids to head back to school, so we made these cute DIY first day of school signs, a great school craft for kids entering preschool all the way up to the 12th grade!
Free printable first day of school signs!
Time is really flying by, I can’t believe that our summer shenanigans are almost over and school is getting ready to start! I have one child entering 4th grade, and my youngest is starting kindergarten – cue the tears because I am SO NOT READY (we’ve been prepping and made this paper plate school bus craft, but, still). They’re growing up so quickly, and I want to remember each moment. I created these DIY first day of school printable signs and put together this fun ruler frame to display them in – get the first day of kindergarten sign free download here!
Free printable signs for the first day of school
If you have kids headed back to school, print out one of these signs to take the first day of school photos with! These DIY back to school signs were made for kids starting preschool, and all of the elementary, middle school, and high school years. Here’s how to make it…
- 1 – 8×10 photo frame (the dollar store is perfect for this)
- 4 wooden rulers
- glue gun
- DIY first day of school printable signs (see gallery below)
Ok, so making these DIY first day of school free printable signs is pretty easy. You’ll need to make sure your 8×10 frame has a little bit of space around the edges to glue the ruler. First, measure your rulers around each side of the frame, cut if necessary. The outer frame is size always different, I had to cut my rulers on the 8 inch side down to
Glue rulers to each side of the outer frame, Start with the longer side, then glue on the shorter 8-inch side. They’ll overlap at each corner.
Give the rulers a little bit of time to dry, print out your desired grade from the DIY first day of school signs gallery below and write or type in the year.
Print out the chalkboard sign with your child’s grade
To print your child’s grade sign – to access the DIY first day of school sign of your choice, see the gallery below. Click the photos you want to print and save them to your computer. When you set them up to print, make sure you’re using the 8×10 setting, landscape, and full color. Slide it into the frame and you’re all set!
I love how this project turned out, and I will definitely be using this ruler sign every single year until my kids are in college! These are so much fun, and they will make great memories when your kids are all grown and old. My daughter was excited to be holding my first day of school chalkboard signs, she was super cute, too. I hope you love these and can use them each year!
DIY signs for the first day od school gallery
Click this image of the first day of school chalkboard signs to open in a new window and print as many as desired.