Soccer can be a grueling sport when played at highly competitive levels, but it provides a wide variety of health benefits for both recreational or scholastic athletes. The sport has cardio, endurance, flexibility and weight-loss benefits. Depending on your goals, you’ll need to get in shape to play soccer, or you can just play soccer to get in shape.
Improves Cardiorespiratory Function
Soccer, like basketball, tennis, football and volleyball, is a highly anaerobic activity, which means much of the activity takes place beyond your ideal target heart rate range. The action takes place in spurts of high-intensity running, kicking, sliding and jumping, followed by lulls of light jogging or walking as the action shifts to other parts of the field and players. This constant elevation and recovery of the heart and respiration rates helps build stamina and improves your ability to recover between points. The long games feature many moderately intense periods of activity, requiring aerobic conditioning, and the sport helps maintain your aerobic base.
Promotes Weight Loss
The intense action of soccer helps you burn more calories than aerobic workouts, depending on how hard you play the game. Anaerobic exercise burns more calories from glycogen than fat when compared to aerobic exercise, but burns more calories overall.
Soccer is a high-impact sport, which means both feet leave the ground during activity. High-impact exercise puts stress on your lower back, hips, knees and ankles. Playing on grass is less punishing, while indoor rinks, even if they have turf or carpet, provide a much harder pounding. Because it is a weight-bearing exercise, soccer helps improve bone density.
Improves Footwork and Speed
Soccer is an excellent cross-training activity for athletes because it requires frequent changes of direction, starts-and-stops and quick increases in acceleration. Playing soccer helps you improve your footwork, balance and speed.
Builds Muscular Endurance
Even though soccer features short bursts of high-intensity activity, you are often on the field, moving your body, for long periods. This helps improve muscular endurance, which is your ability to perform movements over time. While soccer builds some muscle because your legs face the resistance of your body’s weight as you run and jump, muscular endurance is a bigger byproduct of the sport than strength.
Although soccer is a noncontact sport, players do run and bump into each other, resulting in concussions, sprains, tears, breaks, bumps and bruises. If you play on turf or carpet, you’ll get skin burns from sliding. A good dynamic stretching routine before you play, and thorough static stretching after each practice or game, will help you improve your flexibility and possibly decrease injuries.
- Jupiterimages/Creatas/Getty Images