December 21, 2012 is NOT the end of the world.
Check the video and find out why.
As at 02.12.12, this video has had over 100,000 views in just three months! We believe it's making a difference. Please pass it on. In fact, pass this page on.
People were speaking about a 2012 Doomsday long before the 2012 End of the World doomsday movie, simply called: 2012. Some were prophets of doom with their own band of followers (a band that still followed even though the dates kept changing), some have been merchants of doom making money off people’s fears, some were survivalists or “preppers” stocking up food and weapons for the fallout after a doomsday.
And then you have a heap of others who could be described as freaked, confused, curious, or entertained by the whole idea of a 2012 doomsday. So how do you feel about a 2012 Doomsday?
As 2012 arrived, many people turned their attention to the Mayan long count calendar which ends its 5,125 year cycle on December 21, 2012.
Some believe it prophecies the end of the world on that date. And there’s been a flood of predictions about how this 2012 doomsday might happen.
There have been predictions about giant asteroids, solar flares, an alien invasion, galactic alignment and a rogue planet entering our solar system.
People have been asking about when the end of the world will be since ancient times. There is something in our human consciousness that seems to say, it can’t go on forever. So let’s have a quick look now at some of these 2012 doomsday predictions and see whether they are worth taking seriously.
One of those predictions is that a rogue planet called Nibiru (sometimes planet X) will enter our solar system on an elliptical orbit. It’s predicted to either collide with earth or come close enough to cause catastrophic disasters through its gravitational forces.
It is not possible to take this prediction seriously. If this planet actually existed, and if it was to come anywhere near earth on December 21, 2012, it would need to have travelled well into our solar system by now; AND be visible to amateur astronomers all over the world.
Nibiru is supposed to be about 5 times bigger than Pluto. Why is it then that we can see Pluto which is at the end of our solar system, but we cannot see a planet 5 times bigger than which should be just about upon us by now!!
The reason why astronomers cannot see Nibiru and why newspapers are not full of sightings about this mysterious planet, is that Nibiru simply does not exist. There will be no 2012 doomsday brought about by a rogue planet called Nibiru.
Planet X is a myth. Besides all this, in ancient Babylon astronomy, when observed in the month of Tišritum, Nibiru is actually the name for Jupiter!
A second prediction for a 2012 doomsday is that Giant Solar flares or, more correctly, the coronal mass ejections which often accompany them could wipe us off the grid. Coronal mass ejections can spew up to 10 billion tons of ionised gases into our solar system and can travel as fast as 2 million mph.
Coronal mass ejections can cause magnetic storms when they interact with the earth’s magnetic field. You can see the effects in the northern lights and this has resulted at times in damage to satellites and localised blackouts.
While blackouts have serious consequences and it could take months to get a citywide electrical grid working again, the next solar maximum cycle that produces these flares and ejections, is not going to happen till around May 2013. At this time, it is predicted to have the lowest number of sunspots (which cause solar flares) since 1928.
So that’s a second 2012 doomsday prediction burnt up.SEE OUR PAGE "SOLAR FLARES 2012"
There are predictions about giant asteroids. There is an asteroid belt between mars and Jupiter. Asteroids at times have broken free from this belt and some have developed an orbit that passes the earth.
An asteroid the size of two football fields called Apophis will pass near earth around December 28, 2012 but it will be between 1-9 million kilometres away. And while it will come closer still in 2029 and 2036, it is not rated by NASA as a threat. As a precaution, Russia is planning to place a tracking device on Apophis to give more detail of its future orbit.
There is a much larger asteroid called Tautatis is due to come near earth on December 12, 2012. Toutatis is 4.6 by 2.4 kilometers and if it hit, it would cause worldwide destruction. What you need to know is that Tautatis is only going to come as close as 6,900,000km, which is about 18 times further away from the earth than the moon.
If it weren’t for these factors, a giant asteroid could have been a winner for a end of the world 2012 doomsday prediction.SEE OUR PAGE "ASTEROID COLLISION 2012"
One of the 2012 doomsday predictions is that the earth will be pulled apart by gravitational forces caused by a “galactic alignment”.
There are actually two types of galactic alignment. One is observable, the other is not.
The observable kind of galactic alignment happens every year at the time of the winter solstice (when the sun – from earth’s perspective only – lines up with the centre of the Milky Way galaxy).
The other alignment has already passed and won’t happen again for a long long time (when the solar system crosses the galactic plane).
These facts don’t seem to have thrown any cosmic water on those preaching about this doomsday prediction. It’s easy to confuse people with science; even easier with bad science.VISIT OUR PAGE ON GALACTIC ALIGNMENT 2012
Some people have been talking about an alien invasion in 2012. There are beliefs that aliens have long since entered our solar system, have a base on the moon and have been scanning our planet for some time now, observing life on earth and looking for the right opportunity to invade. It has even been suggested that an invasion may come in 2012.
But really, honestly, where’s the hard evidence. Carl Sagan said that "extraordinary claims require extraordinary evidence"!
But while there’s no evidence for a 2012 alien invasion, people do continue to have strange experiences where they claim to have seen UFOs or been abducted by aliens.
So, do aliens exist? And if so, are they from another planet or another dimension? Check out the rest of our website for answers on this and about related topics such as the nephilim and the annunaki.VISIT OUR PAGE ON ALIENS AND 2012
Finally, there is the so-called Mayan 2012 prophecy. Some have said that when the Mayan 5,125 year long count calendar ends on December 21, 2012, that the world will also end. All the predictions we have just looked at, and more, have been associated with this date on the Mayan calendar.
The theory is that because the Mayan’s understanding of the cosmos was light years ahead of other civilisations at the time, that they new something modern mankind did not. Did they believe in a 2012 Doomsday? Many people think they do. The belief is that the Mayan calendar ended on December 21, 2012 because the Mayans knew that’s when time would ran out for the earth.
But for the Mayan’s December 21, 2012 is simply the end of an age, the end of an era and a time for new beginnings. What the Mayans believe however, seems to have been overlooked by some…. Well, maybe they are not so much overlooking it but ignoring it because it would spoil a great commercial opportunity to make a fast dollar through movies, books and survival kits.
So, when the Mayan calendar runs out, it’s time to get a new one! And as most of us don’t use a Mayan calendar, we’ll put up a new 365 day calendar, one that begins on January 1, 2013.VISIT OUR MAYAN CALENDAR 2012 PAGE
Clearly, the 2012 Doomsday is a complete fake and we can say even before the day arrives that it will get an epic: FAIL. The reason is that all so callled prophecies and predictions are based on lies, myths and bad science. Does this mean there will not be an ultimate doomsday for the earth? NO! It simply means that when you examine the facts, there is nothing to support a 2012 doomsday caused by a giant asteroid, solar flares, aliens, galactic alignment or anything else.
For answers on more 2012 topics like, Armageddon, the I-Ching, Time Wave Zero, Satan’s Rapture, Apocalypse, Judgement day, planetary alignment, pole shift and Nostradamus, please visit end of the world 2012.net Over 2.5million people from over 200 nations have visited this site. So please, take some time to check out the rest of our site.
Many people find the FAQ page helpful. If you’re the community type, you sign up and join our forum (then you can make and reply to posts). And, and even if you’re not a member, you can still leave a comment on our blog. Let us know what you think.nbsp;Here are a few other pages you may be interested in... NOSTRADAMUS I-CHING 2012 SATAN'S RAPTURE APOCALYPSE 2012 JUDGEMENT DAY 2012 BIBLE PROPHECY
We found that as the Harold Camping prophecy came near to its epic: FAIL, that some people got quite freaked. Even people who had previously not believed in Camping’s doomsday theories and predictions started to get worried... perhaps they were wrong... should they now be concerned?
This is bound to happen again as December 21, 2012 draws near. You can help us help these people. Don't try and work out who they are, just use the buttons above to spread this web page as far and wide as you can.
Please Note: This website does not make any money from visitors since we are a non-profit organisation. So please, help people to find the truth about a 2012 doomsday. You can like, comment and share in Facebook and on YouTube. We would be very thankful for any help and support you would give.