A Helpful Guide for Writers
Understanding the Assignment
To fully understand your writing project, there are questions you should ask yourself when receiving it from the teacher. First, you should know when the assignment is due? What form is it due in? What the type of assignment it is? What are the goals and purpose in undertaking this assignment? Finally, how will your assignment be evaluated?
Overview of Academic Essay- Thesis, Argument, and Counterargument
The goal of an academic essay is to persuade the readers of an idea based on evidence. Make the best possible case for an original idea after doing extensive research. The thesis is the main point of the writing. The next step is the argument. This should give tension and persuasion. To convince any person of your case is the goal when writing your thesis. When you have facts of evidence that goes against your thesis, it is called a counterargument. The counterargument tests the persuasiveness of the idea for what you are writing.
To serve the purpose of an essay it must be written in the correct format. The introduction should start your essay. It will introduce your topic giving the framework that supports your topic. Next, is the body of the writing. The body is where you discuss the important facts supporting the thesis. Supply examples and different aspects of the topic. Finally, we have the conclusion of the writing. The essay closes with the conclusion. The conclusion points out the most important facts about your essay. With a strong conclusion, you should leave your readers with an impact and even more interested in your topic.
Developing A Thesis
In developing a thesis, you must first choose the subject and specific topic. A statement of one or two sentences providing framework of the paper with a cause, motive, or analysis is a thesis. A good way to pick your thesis is writing your best idea down. You should feel confident that you can write your essay around your thesis.
Outlining the Essay
A way to organize your thoughts for your essay, is called outlining. Developing a well-structured outline will help introduce points in your essay. A good outline will help your essay be more organized, in addition to helping plan the length of the essay. An essay outline will help the essay to have a natural flow of information. It should consist of the ideas for the Introduction, the Body, the Conclusion, and Citations.
Beginning the Academic Essay
When beginning the Academic Essay, you should focus on the topic of the essay. This is a very vital part of the essay. You want to capture your reader's attention and set up authority. Ask a question and decide what your focus is going to be in the essay. Your idea should be clearly indicated in the beginning of the essay. The beginning is the buildup that brings you to the argument.