This program focuses on safety in movement for persons with low bone mass (osteopenia) and skeletal fragility (osteoporosis).
Wade Anderson, PT studied the Meeks Method which specializes in the unique management implications of persons with osteopenia and osteoporosis, and utilizes an easy, effective, comprehensive, site-specific, 12-part program for the conservative management of persons with osteopenia, osteoporosis, postural problems and back pain.
What You Need To Know About Osteoporosis
Osteoporosis literally means "porous bones" - bones that were once strong have become fragile. It is considered a childhood disease which manifests in adulthood. This insidious disease is sometimes called "the silent thief" because there are no symptoms. Yet it works little by little over a period of decades to rob your bones of calcium-a mineral that keeps them strong. Older women are the main victims of osteoporosis, as they suffer nearly 1.5 million fractures to the hips, forearms, and vertebrae each year. Because bones become thin and brittle, recovering from these fractures can be a long and complex process, with possible life-threatening complications.Osteoporosis and low bone mass affects an estimated 28 million women and men age 50 and over. Eighty percent of the osteoporosis cases are women, yet a significant number of men also suffer from the disease. In addition to the toll it exacts in human suffering, osteoporosis costs our economy $13.8 billion each year in health care expenses and lost productivity. The good news is that you can often prevent osteoporosis if you begin weight-bearing exercise, such as walking, running, gardening, or aerobics, and eat a calcium-rich diet from an early age. And if you already have osteoporosis-or you're at high risk for developing it-physical therapy can help make the difference in keeping you active and mobile.
What are the risk factors
Who does osteoporosis affect?
Everyone may be affected by osteoporosis. It is most common in postmenopausal women (Caucasian or Asian) who are thin boned. Disease, diet and exercise can all play a role in osteoporosis.
What are the early warning signs of osteoporosis?
What does the treatment consist of?
You will receive a comprehensive assessment and a SAFE program designed
to strengthen your spine, restore posture and prevent compression fractures