Many students both in high school and college complain about their poor grades. Often, these students blame themselves because they think they are too dumb and cannot understand anything. However, what most of these students do not know about is that their problem is not about being dumb, but rather, it is about not knowing the right study techniques. Poor study techniques are common constraints in learning. Students need to believe in themselves and work hard in developing study techniques that have been proven to work.
Many people wonder, why there is a need for students to put importance in using the proper study techniques. It is important for students to do so because how they study affects how they learn. It is important for students to not only follow these techniques but to do it at the proper place, too. The right place for studying is peaceful, clean and has adequate lighting. Nevertheless, there are those students who prefer to study while listening to music because it helps them concentrate. The study environment is also a great factor in a student’s study. Choosing the right study environment is actually the first step in developing study techniques if you want to learn how to get better grades now.
Here are a few tips in developing effective study techniques:
- Take down notes
This study technique requires students to own a notebook and a pen and perhaps a highlighter too. This study technique is for students to develop a good habit of note taking. Notes are important especially to college students. Unlike high school, there are some subjects in college that do not have textbooks or materials that can be read. In certain subjects, students can only rely on the lecture of their professor and research.
This does not mean that high school students no longer have to write down notes. They still have to especially if their books have other explanations than their teacher. Also, it is very helpful if they develop this habit as soon as high school. With this technique, students can save more study time because they no longer have to read their whole book. Their goal is to have an organized outline as much as possible so that they can avoid confusion. They need to make sure that they understand every single word they write.
- Study every day
Studying daily helps students remember their lessons longer and this prevents them from cramming before the tests. They do not really need to study for hours like they always do on tests. They only need to develop the habit of opening their notes and glancing over the keywords. As long as they know the definition of the keywords, it is going to be easy recalling the details of their lessons. A daily study can only take up 20 to 30 minutes of their time.
- They need to take a reak once in a while.
To avoid mental blocks in tests and oral quizzes, they need to make sure that they really absorb what they hear and read. In order for the brain to function well, students need to know their limits. If they can no longer take it, they need to pause for a few minutes break.
To pass school, students do not really need to be like Einstein. All they need to be is to be hard working students who spend time in developing study techniques that are proven effective.