What Is Biosecurity?
Biosecurity refers to measures taken to prevent or stop misuse or exposure of harmful biological agents.
Formed as an industry industry-led organization, the objectives of IGSC are to: safeguard biosecurity, apply a common protocol for screening DNA sequences and customers while promoting the beneficial use of gene synthesis.
With the ability to improve many different industries, the IGSC supports the responsible synthesis of DNA for new medicine, diagnostic tests, agricultural biotechnology products, industrial chemicals and other beneficial applications.
The International Gene Synthesis Consortium (IGSC) is an industry-led group of gene synthesis companies and organizations formed to design and apply a common protocol to screen both the sequences of synthetic gene orders and the customers who place them. In addition, the consortium works with national and international government organizations and other interested parties to promote the beneficial application of gene synthesis technology while safeguarding biosecurity.
Formed in 2009, IGSC members screen synthetic gene orders to identify regulated pathogen sequences and other potentially dangerous sequences. By screening the sequences of ordered genes and vetting customers, IGSC members help to ensure that researchers and the synthetic biology community realize the many benefits of gene synthesis technology while minimizing risk.
Specifically, IGSC members screen the complete DNA and translated amino acid sequences of every double-stranded gene order against the IGSC’s comprehensive curated Regulated Pathogen Database derived from international pathogen and toxin sequence databases.
Currently, the IGSC members together represent approximately 80% of commercial gene synthesis capacity world-wide.
Ginkgo Bioworks uses the most advanced technology on the planet–biology–to grow products instead of manufacture them. The company’s technology platform is bringing biotechnology into consumer goods markets enabling companies to make better products. In early 2017 Ginkgo acquired Gen9 and has since integrated the company’s DNA synthesis expertise into its foundries to accelerate organism engineering.
With a goal of making state-of-the-art genomics highly accessible to the global research community and clinical markets, BGI has integrated the industry’s broadest array of leading technologies, including high-throughput, cost-effective sequencing and synthesis platform, large sample collection and storage, and expert bioinformatics resources, to offer a wide service portfolio around the world.
Blue Heron Bio will synthesize any gene and any sequence, through the proprietary technology of GeneMaker® multi-technology platform.
ATUM (formerly DNA2.0) offers an integrated pipeline of solutions including gene design, optimization and synthesis, technology platforms for protein and strain engineering and protein expression.
IDT specializes in DNA synthesis, gene construction, antisense oligos, molecular beacons and a variety of molecular biology products.
Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc. is the world leader in serving science. Our mission is to enable our customers to make the world healthier, cleaner and safer.
SGI-DNA, a subsidiary of Synthetic Genomics, Inc., provides a variety of synthetic DNA services to select business customers with demands for large or complex DNA constructs, including combinatorial libraries.
GenScript USA, Inc., is a leading multinational biotech company specialized in biology research and drug discovery/development services.
At Twist Bioscience, we work in service of people who are changing the world for the better. In fields such as medicine, agriculture, industrial chemicals and data storage, our unique silicon-based DNA Synthesis Platform provides precision at a scale that is otherwise unavailable to our customers.
Bioneer Corp., an innovative genomics platform company, pioneers the next generation high performance and rapid automation in delivering cost-efficient total genomics solution.
The Edinburgh Genome Foundry specialises in the computer-aided-design and automated assembly of large DNA constructs up to chromosome size.
Battelle is the world’s largest independent, non-profit research and development organization, founded to translate scientific and technological advancements into societal benefits. The company’s business spans areas that encompass risk-reduction, security solutions, and technology enablement. Recognizing the emerging complexity and scale of gene synthesis, Battelle developed ThreatSEQ™ services, a web-based, continuously-curated DNA screening platform for the detection, characterization, and threat assessment of sequences of concern.
- International Gene Synthesis Consortium Updates Screening Protocols for Synthetic DNA Products and Services
Want to Join Us?
Interested in becoming a member of the International Gene Synthesis Consortium? Please refer to the IGSC application for prospective members here.