plans and participating in drills are essential emergency preparedness
activities. Taking steps to be financially prepared for an emergency
is a critical activity in any planning effort.
Emergency Financial First Aid Kit (EFFAK), a joint publication
Hope, and the Federal Emergency Management Agency,
contains information for you to prepare now for a financial emergency.
The guide includes information on obtaining insurance, planning tips and
resources to help you manage your finances, and accessing important
records to help you recover more quickly should you be affected by a
alerts and warning apps can make it easier than ever for families,
businesses, and individuals to effectively prepare for and recover from
disasters. Visit the Ready Campaign’s Get Tech
Ready page for tips, such as:
to receive preparedness tips from the Federal Emergency Management
Agency’s (FEMA) text
message program: text PREPARE to 43362 (4FEMA).
the FEMA App to
access disaster preparedness tips, obtain weather alerts for up to five
locations, and look for open Disaster Recovery Centers along with open shelters.
your important documents such as personal and financial records on a
secure flash or jump drive that you can keep readily available.
happen quickly; it is important to recognize whether or not you live in
an area prone to flash flooding and how you can prepare in advance.
Weather Service, the causes of flash flooding include heavy
rain, ice or debris jams, and levee or dam failure. These floods exhibit
a rapid rise of water over low-lying areas. In some cases, flooding may
even occur away from where heavy rain initially fell.
tips from Ready.gov
to make sure you, your family, and your home are prepared for a flash
reader recognizes that the federal government provides links and
informational data on various disaster preparedness resources and events
and does not endorse any non-federal events, entities, organizations,
services, or products. Please let us know about other events and services
for individual and community preparedness that could be included in future
newslettersby contacting firstname.lastname@example.org.