Summary of W. Tarpley’s Table: “The 46 Drills, War Games and Activities of 9/11” (http://tarpley.net/docs/drills_of_911.pdf)
Compiled by Dr. Eric T. Karlstrom, Emeritus Professor of Geography, CSUS, June 8, 2016
The following information validates the hypothesis that Operation 9/11 was primarily an “inside job” (See my 2002 article: “Reflections on the Origins of 9/11,” this website). Indeed, the drills prove that much, if not most, of American military/intelligence played some role in carrying out this “false-flag, state-sponsored, synthetic terrorist attack.” Startling revelations from the following information include: 1) the U.S. military secretly threatened to unleash its nuclear weapons against Russia and Chine in order to intimidate these nations so they would not retaliate for invading Afghanistan and Pakistan, and 2) Since some of the drills on September 11th involved actual implementation of continuity of government (COG) protocols and procedures (the first and only time in history), it is reasonable to speculate that 9/11 itself functioned as a drill for ushering in COG and military dictatorship in response to an even larger, future (contrived) “false-flag, state-sponsored, synthetic terrorist attack” against the U.S.
Agencies Involved in the 9/11 Coup of 2001:
1) NORAD = North American Aerospace Defense Command- (Wikipedia: combined organization of the United States and Canada that provides aerospace warning, air sovereignty, and defense for North America)
2) NEADS = Northeastern Air Defense Sector
3) SEADS= Southeastern Air Defense Sector
4) STRATCOM = U.S. Strategic Command (Wikipedia: United States Strategic Command (USSTRATCOM) is one of nine Unified Combatant Commands of the United States Department of Defense (DoD). It is charged with space operations (such as military satellites), information operations (such as information warfare), missile defense, global command and control, intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (C4ISR), global strike and strategic deterrence (the United States nuclear arsenal), and combating weapons of mass destruction.)
5) AWACS = Air Warning and Control System
Pentagon MASCAL- Pentagon “mass casualty project” (contingency exercise held by Secretary of Defense between Oct. 24 and 26, 2000. The exercise required emergency response teams, members of the defense protective services, and U.S. government officials to conduct emergency simulations in preparation for a possible plane crash into the Pentagon.)
6) NRO: National Reconnaissance Office
7) Air Combat Command
8) US Space Command
9) U.S. SOCOM: U.S. Special Operations Command
10) U.S. CENTCOM: U.S. Central Command
11) USJFCOM: U.S. Joint Forces Command
12) FEMA: Federal Emergency Management Agency
13) DIA: Defense Intelligence Agency
16) NY OEM: Office of Emergency Management
17) NY Police and Fire Departments
18) FAA: Federal Aviation Administration
19) Coast Guard
23) P2OG: Proactive Pre-emptive Operations Group
24) U.S. Dept. of Transportation
25) US Air Force Bases: Andrews AFB, Nellis AFB, Nevada; Offutt AFB, Nebraska; Barksdale AFB, Louisiana; Minot AFB, North Dakota; Whiteman AFB, Missouri, Wright-Patterson AFB, Dayton, OH; Keflavik AFB, Iceland, Dobbins AFB, Georgia;
26) New York City
27) Forts: Fort Belvoir, Fort Monmouth, NJ,
28) Miami Dade County Police Dept.
29) Westmorland Co., Pennsylvania (Shanksville)
30) Cheyenne Mountain, CO (NORAD)
31) Fiduciary Trust Co. of WTC, 97th floor South Tower
Plus about 52 more unnamed agencies
A. WTC attack (12 drills):
1) NORAD (1991-2001)
2) White House (Richard Clarke) 1998
3) NORAD (1999-2001)- hijacked aircraft hit many targets including WTC, MACAL
4) NORAD (NEADS)Oct. 16, 2000, Federal express plane crashed by terrorist into UN HQ NYC
5) NORAD (NEEDS) terrorist crashes fed ex plane into UN HQ NYC
7) FAA drill (Dec. 2000) a chartered flight out of Ohio turns its transponders off
*8) Red Ex (Recognition, Evaluation, and Decision Making Exercise) NYC OEM; FDNY; NYPF; FEMA; FBI, May 11, 2001, Plane crashed and building collapses in NYC (WTC attack, demolition)
9) NORAD, NEADS, US-Canada,9/11, live-fly hijacking and air defense; hijack multiplication, diversion, and confusion
10) NORAD/JCS Vigilant Warrior, through 9/11, reported by Richard Clarke
11) National Reconnaissance Office drill, Chantilly, VA, 9/11, Simulated plane crash into high-rise government building; satellite imaging (WTC attack)
12) Amalgam Virgo 02, Scheduled for June 2002, Air defense, interception, surveillance and pursuit drill; Delta 757 with real Delta pilots, actors as passengers, FBI as hijackers- deviated from Salt Lake City to Hawaii; Canadian police to hijack DC-9 near Vancouver
B. Divert Fighter planes out of Washington, Boston, New York (NEADS) air space (6 drills)
1) Operation Southern Watch, through 9/11, Diverts 174th Fighter Wing, New York Air National Guard, to Sultan Air Base, Saudi Arabia, to impose no-fly zone over southern Iraq
2) Operation Northern Watch, through 9/11, Diverts 6 jet fighters from Langley AFB sent to Incirlik AFB, Turkey to impose no-fly zone over northern Iraq
3) Operation Northern Vigilance, through 9/11, diverts fighters and 350 personnel to Alaska and northern Canada to counter a Russian bomber drill
4) Operation Northern Guardian, Kevlavik AFB, Iceland, through 9/11, Divers fighters from Langley Air Force Base (VA) deplayed to Keflavik AFB, Icleand to counter a Russian bomber drill
5) Red Flag, Nellis AFB, Nevada, 100 pilots: 9/11, Diverts most F-15s of 71st Figher Squadron, Langley AFB, VA, DC ANG’s 121st Fighter Squadron of Andres Air Force Base also depleted.
6) Andrews AFB local drill, 9/11, Diverts 3 F-16s to North Carolina
C. Pentagon attack (6 drills):
1) Pentagon MASCAL Oct. 24-27, 2000 commercial aircraft hits Pentagon, MASCAL
2) NORAD (1999-2001)- hijacked aircraft hit many targets including WTC, MACAL
3) Amalgam Virgo ’01; US-Canada, multi-agency drill, NORAD, SEADS, Coast Guard, Army, Navy, June 1-2, 2001, UAV drone launched from rogue freighter in Gulf of Mexico or cruise missile from barge in Atlantic Ocean; Joint-based Expeditionary Connectivity Center (JBECC) mobile radar command center tested. (Pentagon attack)
4) Ft. Belvoir, Davison Army Airfield helicopter base MASCAL: June 29, 2001. Scenario: based on plane hitting Pentagon (indoctrination of first responders).
5) Positive Force 01: USJFCOM; US CENTCOM; USCOCOM; 40 agencies, April 17-26, 2001; Continuity of government, attacks on transportation; one scenario: terrorist goup hijacking commercial airliner and flying it into Pentagon (Pentagon attack)
6) NORAD (1999-2001)- hijacked aircraft hit many targets including WTC, MASCAL
D. Plane hijacking and simulated telephone calls (6 drills):
1) FAA drill; VBU Miami field office, Miami-Dade County Police Dept., June 16, Toxic chemical agent and the simulated release of radiation and radiological contamination (indoctrination of first responders)
2) U.S. Dept. of transportation, August 31, 2001, U.S. Dept of Transportation Crisis Management Center drilled hijacks; simulated telephone calls.
3) Vigilant Guardian: NORAD, NEADS, Sept. 6, Seoul to Anchorage flight hijacked by “Lin Po” to Seattle
4) Vigilant Guardian: NORAD, NEADS, Sept. 9, UK to NYC flight hijacked, blown up
5) Vigilant Guardian: NORAD, SEADS, NEADS, Sept. 10, 2001, Ilyushin IL-62 from Cuba hijacked by asylum seekers, lands at Dobbins Air Force Base in Georgia
6. FAA Drill: FBI Miami field office, Miami-Dade County Police Department, Summer 2001; Varig airlines Boeing 767 hijacked over Florida
E. Controlling patsies (4 drills)
1. Able Danger: DIA, US-SOCOM, LIWA, Dec. 1999-2001, Manipulate Al Qaeda; data mining (patsy control)
2. Stratus Ivy, DIA, 1999-2001(?), Operate on patsies “out of the box” (patsy control)
3. Door Hop Galley: DIA (?), Dec. 1999-2001, Still Secret (patsy control?)
4. Proactive Pre-emptive Operations Group (P2OG); unknown, “Stimulating reactions” of terrorists (patsy control)
E. Intimidation of Russia and China with the nuclear option (3 drills)
1) Global Guardian, STRATCOM: Offutt AFB, Nebraska, Barksdale AFB, Louisiana; Minot AFB, North Dakota; Whiteman AFB, Missouri, 9/11, Nuclear warfighting; Armageddon. (deterrence of Russia and China during invasion of Afghanistan and Pakistan)
2) Amalgam Warrior, 9/11, Large live-fly air defense and air intercept, tracking, and surveillance drill; air defense against foreign retaliation.
3) Global Guardian Computer Networking Attack, 9/11, Enemy forces “war dialed” STRATCOM’s telephone and fax systems; “bad insider” has access to key C-3 system (missile launch option)
F. Continuity of Government: Install new leaders (dictators) of successful coup (3 drills)
1) STRATCOM Strategic Advisory Committee, Offutt AFB, Nebraska, Andres AFB, MD, Wright-Patterson AFB, Dayton, Ohio, 9/11, Three E-4B National Airborne Operations Center planes (Doomsday or Looking Glass) airborne; passengers include Brent Scowcroft; Warren Buffet at Offutt, (Committee of Public Safety option).
2) Positive Force 01: USJFCOM; US CENTCOM; USCOCOM; 40 agencies, April 17-26, 2001; Continuity of government, attacks on transportation; one scenario: terrorist group hijacking commercial airliner and flying it into Pentagon (Pentagon attack)
Move FBI/CIA Anti-Terrorist Task Force to California (1 drill)
3) Positive Force 01: NORAD plus a dozen agencies, worldwide, April 17-26, 2001, Continuity of government; attacks on transportation; one scenario: terrorist group hijacking commercial airliner and flying it into Pentagon (Pentagon attack).
G. Invasion of Afghanistan and Pakistan (1) drill
1. Unified Vision ’01: NORAD plus a dozen agencies worldwide, April 17-26, Invasion of Afghanistan and Pakistan (prepared Operation Enduring Freedom, October 2001)
H. FBI/CIA Anti-terrorist Task Force moved to California (1 drill)
1) FBI training exercise in Monterey, CA- for FBI/CIA Anti-terrorist task force, through 9/11, Diverts top FBI, CIA anti-Terrorist and special operations agents and heavy equipment away from Boston, NYC, Washington, DCl
I. Test Readiness of NORAD at Cheyenne Mountain (1 drill)
1) Vigilant Guardian: NORAD annual readiness drill at Cheyenne Mt. 9/11,
Able Danger, Full “battle staff” levels to test entire organizations
J. Indoctrination of First Responders (2 drills)
1) Timely Alert II, Fort Monmouth, New Jersey, 9/11, Indoctrination of WTC first responders
2) Mall Strike 2001, Westmoreland County, Pennsylvania (near Shanksville); 600 local first responders and emergency managers, June 16, 2001, Toxic chemical agent and simulation of release of radiation and radiological contamination (indoctrination of first responders)
K. Assemble and silence unreliable outside contractors at WTC (1 drill)
1) World Trade Center Emergency Drill, Fiduciary Trust Co., 97th floor of South Tower, 9/11, Meeting called to assemble and silence unreliable outside contractors
L. Aerial surveillance of President during coup
1) AWACS (Air Warning and Control System) drill, ordered by NORAD commander Larry Arnold, 9/11, Two AWACS aircraft from Tinker AFB, Oklahoma sent over Washington, DC and Florida, surveillance of capital and president during coup
M. Response to biochemical attack (2 drills)
1) Tripod II, New York City, 9/11, Response to biochemical attack; run from backup command center at Pier 92, Hudson River, assembled and indoctrinated Pentagon first responders.
2) Mall Strike 2001, Westmoreland County, Pennsylvania (near Shanksville); 600 local first responders and emergency managers, June 16, 2001, Toxic chemical agent and simulation of release of radiation and radiological contamination (indoctrination of first responders).
N. NO details known. (2 drills)
1) Crown Vigilance, Air Combat Command, 9/11, no details known
2) Apollo Guardian, US Space Command, 9/11, no details known.
Agencies most involved:
NORAD: 11 drills
STRATCOM: 3 drills
Certainly, the 46+ drills that were operating before and during September 11, 2001 abundantly prove that “9/11 was an inside job.” No other conclusion is possible. The most obvious questions, then, are:
1) How is it possible that the various military and intelligence structures that were originally put in place to protect America have now turned against the American people?
2) If Operation 9/11 was an inside job, as proven by the above information, how can it be possible that Israel and Zionist Jews/Masons did 9/11, as is also proven on this website?
In my 2002 article, “Reflections on the Origins of 9/11: Three Scenarios,” I quoted Brigadier General Smedley Butler, who spoke these words to the American Legion in 1933:
The trouble with America is that when the dollar only earns 6% over here, it gets restless and goes overseas to get 100%. Then the flag follows the dollar and the soldiers follow the flag. There are only two things we should fight for. One is the defense of our homes and the other is the Bill of Rights. War for any other reason is simply a racket. There isn’t a trick in the racketeering bag that the military gang is blind to. It has its “finger men” to point out enemies, its “muscle men” to destroy enemies, its “brain men” to plan war preparations, and a “Big Boss”, Super-Nationalistic-Capitalism. It may seem odd for me, a military man, to adopt such a comparison. Truthfulness compels me to. I spent 33 years…. being a high-class muscle man for Big Business, for Wall Street and the bankers. In short, I was a racketeer for capitalism. I helped purify Nicaragua for the international banking house of Brown Brothers in 1909-1912. I helped make Mexico… safe for American oil interests in 1916. I helped make Haiti and Cuba a decent place for the National City (Bank) boys to collect revenue in. I helped in the rape of half a dozen Central American republics for the benefit of Wall Street. In China in 1927, I helped see to it that Standard Oil went its way unmolested. I had… a swell racket. I might have given Al Capone a few hints. The best he could do was operate a racket in three cities. I operated on three continents.
In his 1961 farewell address, President Eisenhower descried the fact that the military-industrial-(Congressional) complex, even then, was by then even farther out of control:
Our military organization today bears little relation to that known by any of my predecessors in peacetime, or indeed by the fighting men of World War II or Korea. Until the latest of our world conflicts, the United States had no armaments industry. American makers of plowshares could, with time and as required, make swords as well. But now we can no longer risk emergency improvisation of national defense; we have been compelled to create a permanent armaments industry of vast proportions. Added to this, three and a half million men and women are directly engaged in the defense establishment. We annually spend on military security more than the net income of all United States corporations.
This conjunction of an immense military establishment and a large arms industry is new in the American experience. The total influence – economic, political, even spiritual – is felt in every city, every Statehouse, every office of the Federal government. We recognize the imperative need for this development. Yet we must not fail to comprehend its grave implications. Our toil, resources and livelihood are all involved; so is the very structure of our society.
In the councils of government, we must guard against the acquisition of unwarranted influence, whether sought or unsought, by the military-industrial complex. The potential for the disastrous rise of misplaced power exists and will persist. We must never let the weight of this combination endanger our liberties or democratic processes. We should take nothing for granted. Only an alert and knowledgeable citizenry can compel the proper meshing of the huge industrial and military machinery of defense with our peaceful methods and goals, so that security and liberty may prosper together.
Akin to, and largely responsible for the sweeping changes in our industrial-military posture, has been the technological revolution during recent decades. In this revolution, research has become central, it also becomes more formalized, complex, and costly. A steadily increasing share is conducted for, by, or at the direction of, the Federal government.
Today, the solitary inventor, tinkering in his shop, has been overshadowed by task forces of scientists in laboratories and testing fields. In the same fashion, the free university, historically the fountainhead of free ideas and scientific discovery, has experienced a revolution in the conduct of research. Partly because of the huge costs involved, a government contract becomes virtually a substitute for intellectual curiosity. For every old blackboard there are now hundreds of new electronic computers.
The prospect of domination of the nation’s scholars by Federal employment, project allocations, and the power of money is ever present – and is gravely to be regarded. Yet, in holding scientific research and discovery in respect, as we should, we must also be alert to the equal and opposite danger that public policy could itself become the captive of a scientific-technological elite.
It was almost as if Eisenhower could foresee that government itself, emboldened by its enormous scientific and technological advantages over the citizenry would sooner or later turn against the American Republic and try to destroy the U.S. Constitution. I submit, however, that Ike had no crystal ball. Rather, he was intimately familiar with the very individuals who then led the “secret” or “shadow government” of America. Here I refer to the Rockefeller-Harriman-Dulles-Bush-Wall Street faction that is intimately connected to the Rothschild family and the City of London/British Empire. Indeed, Eisenhower himself was golf partner to Prescott Bush of Yale’s Skull and Bones (“Order of Death”) secret society, one of the most important American branches of the German (Jewish) Illuminati (aka “Order of Death”). As demonstrated in my article, “The Bush Dynasty of Death; Four Generations of Wall Street War-Making and War-Profiteering” (http://911nwo.com/?p=2079), the Bush family is perhaps more intimately connected to America’s “military-industrial-intelligence” establishment than any other single family.
The infamous “shadow government” is known by various names, including the “New World Order.” Tarpley refers to it as the “rogue network.” Others call it the “cryptocracy” (rule by secrecy), “plutocracy” (rule by the rich), “pathocracy” (rule by psychopaths), and “pedophocracy” (rule by pedophiles). Some researchers trace its origin to Cecil Rhodes’ Round Table groups in Britain. Others trace its origins back further to 16th-century British Rosicrucians, John Dee and Francis Bacon. Others trace the origins of this cabal to founding of the Bavarian Illuminati in 1776. Others trace it to the Masons, the Theosophists, the New Age religions, etc. Still others consider that the modern core of this sociopathic cabal includes the Nazi International. Christian researcher and author Texe Marrs conclude that the core of this nefarious and destructive group is Jewish.
In “Holy Serpent of the Jews,” Marrs summarizes the geo-political reality behind Operation 9/11:
“The Jewish neocons who control America and are now implementing the New World Order realize that their historic mission is to invent wars and to destroy culture. By way of this “creative destruction,” the neocons expect that Satan will be encouraged to establish his long sought for Kingdom on earth. Michael Ledeen, a necon who is well-known U.S. intelligence and foreign policy operative, explains this historic mission of the kabbalistic Jews:
“Creative destruction is our middle name, within our society and abroad. We tear down the Old Order every day, from business to science, literature, art, architecture, and cinema to politics and the law. Our enemies have always hated this whirlwind of energy and creativity which menaces their traditions (whatever they may be) and shames them for their inability to keep pace…. We must destroy them to advance our historic mission.”
The neocon Jews drew the first American blood of the 21st century in the 9/11 airstrike. They banded together, forming the “Project for a New American Century.” In a special report that soon became the basis for the foreign policy of the Bush-Cheney Administration, the necons said that there needed to an attack on America similar to Pearl Harbor. After such a shocking surprise attack, Americans could be easily marshaled to fight terrorists and governments around the globe. Thus would the military supremacy of America, chief ally of Zionist Israel, be established.
The 9/11 assaults took place shortly after this report was released, and the world situation has never been the same. The U.S. is continually seeking “Ordo Ab Chao” in the world. Michael Ledeen must be very proud. As we read in the “Protocols of the Learned Elders of Zion,” Protocol 13: “Who will ever suspect then that all these people were stage-managed by us according to a political plan which no one has so much as guessed at in the course of many generations.” The mission of the Jews is building of a New World. “Tikkun Olam,” the “mending or repairing of the world,” means that the Jews will use “creative destruction” to destroy the structures and cultures of this world, a process in which they are currently heavily engaged.”
Is it possible that in some manner, all of the groups mentioned above are involved; American military-intelligence, the British and American Round Table Groups, the Nazi International, the secret societies, the Jews? Yes, it is, as demonstrated in the research posted on this website. The following statement by German physicist, Harald Kautz Vella, may provide an important spiritual overview of our current situation:
“…. when you look at the entire thing, and you try to find solutions to it, you realize that everybody who is involved on the different levels is making the same mistake. It is of the Luciferic game. “Let me participate in your power, and I will serve you. I don’t know want to know what you are doing. I don’t want to stand in my own responsibility. Just let me participate from your power and I will serve.” This is the Luciferic deal everybody’s doing. And we are doing this by going to vote, the government, that is taking care of all the pipes we’re connected to. But we let go of our responsibility and we let them do. They are giving control to the military domain; the military domain is giving control to the intelligence community; the intelligence community is giving control to the Black Magicians, the Black Magicians are giving control to the demons, and the demons lost control to their AI. (ETK- referring to “artificial intelligence” or to Satan himself?)”
Please note that Vella’s summary is completely verified by former military “psychic warrior,” (now Christian), William Dean Ross in his articles:
“The Hidden Evil Agenda” (www.theforbiddenknowledge.com/staticwritings/evilagenda.htm)
“Riders on the Storm” (www.theforbiddenknowledge.com/staticwritings/riderstorm.htm)
“Catch A Falling Star” (www.hiddenmysteries.org/themagazine/vol13/articles/…)
Referring again to Vella’s statement about Black Magicians and demons (above), it has been abundantly demonstrated on this website that the basis of the religion of Judaism is not the Old Testament, as most assume, but rather, it is the Babylonian Talmud and the Kabbalah, the system of black magic which derives from ancient Babylonian and Egyptian Baal (aka Moloch or Satan)-worship. Hence, the “Black Magicians” of Vella’s statement above must be the same Jewish-Masonic-Satanists identified on this website in Appendix 8: From The Trail of the Serpent (1936) by Inquire Within (http://911nwo.com/?p=3629).
De we require more proof of the veracity of Jesus Christ’s message? Jesus referred to the Pharisaic Jews of his days as a “generation of vipers” (i.e., race of serpents), “of their father, the Devil,” and the “Synagogue of Satan.” Amazingly, it appears that in the very process of discovering the culprits of Operation 9/11 we have uncovered the “Mystery of Iniquity” of the New Testament. Certainly, then, the New World Order then is synonymous with the Kingdom of the Antichrist foretold in the Book of Revelation.