That sounds like fun! Here's a list of songs you might want to add to your road trip playlist:

1. 'New York, New York' by Frank Sinatra - This ode to Manhattan is a timeless classic full of optimism and bravado. It's sure to put your passengers in a great mood.
2. 'Viva Las Vegas' by Elvis Presley - You may find it difficult to resist making a pit stop in Sin City after listening to this tune.
3. 'Route 66' by the Rolling Stones - This legendary anthem to one of the most widely recognizable roads in America is sure to be a hit with your friends.
4. 'Sweet Home Alabama' by Lynryrd Skynyrd - This song is chock-full of love for the state of Alabama. It has an opening riff that people will recognize right away and a chorus that's perfect for belting out at the top of your lungs with the windows rolled down.
5. 'No Particular Place to Go' by Chuck Berry - While your road trip may indeed have a particular destination, the lyrics of this song are an ode to the joy of driving for fun. With its catchy riffs and infectious rhythm, you might find yourself rocking out behind the wheel while playing this tune. 
6. 'Georgia on My Mind' by Ray Charles - Ray Charles put a spin on this classic 1930 tune, making it at once a loving ode and a mournful ballad about his home state.
7. 'Do You Know the Way to San Jose' by Dionne Warwick - This song is catchy but also calming, a great choice for early morning or late night driving.
8. 'Fast Car' by Tracy Chapman - The lyrics of this song use traveling as a metaphor for escaping the past and heading towards a brighter future. With its calm, bluesy rhythm, it's also a great choice for a relaxing stretch of empty road. 
9. 'Dirty Water' by the Standells - This song is often played at Red Sox games as a classic ode to Boston. While the lyrics describe some of the city's less savory qualities, with the 'dirty water' standing as a reference to the polluted River Charles and Boston Harbor, the song is widely recognized as a prideful anthem with the chorus repeating, "Oh Boston, you're my home."
10. 'Drive My Car' by the Beatles - This is a great tune to sing along to, especially in the parts where the lyrics mimic car horns and other traffic sounds.
11. 'California Girls' by the Beach Boys - This is a great song to blast at high volume while approaching the western coastline. The lyrics extoll the virtues of women from all over the country, not just California.
12. 'Chicago' by Sufjan Stevens - You might think this song is about the city of Chicago based on its title, but the lyrics tell a story about driving all over the country, letting go of the past, and growing up.
