Reporter: This could mean the beginning of the end of award shows as we know. And they will blame you.

Unnamed Film Actor (UFA) : It won't be my fault. Not entirely (laughs). Other people would have to be aboard to completely shut these down. There is a lot of pressure at least in Hollywood to have these shows. I mean the dress designers…yeah they must hate me and my suggestion.

Reporter: So you want to completely shut these down? No more Oscars?

UFA: Well, if it was solely up to me? Yes. But it isn't (laughs).

Reporter: Why? Why do you hate award shows?

UFA: Hate? Eh…that is a little bit too strong. I don't hate them. I just see them as being unnecessary. There was a time before these award shows and actors just acted, right?

Reporter: So you just want to act?

UFA: Yes, that is it. It is that simple for me. Because I just want to act. I love my job, my profession. This is my passion and that is enough for me.

I don't want to act just to win an award. They put five guys up there and yeah viewers can say they were good in their movies. But there are a lot of other guys who acted well in a movie and they don't get nominated. It is so…so subjective ….100 percent. How do you determine which actor did the best job? Has anybody seen every movie made this year? It is ridiculous.

Reporter: Do you think this might hurt your opportunities for different future roles?

Actor: (laughs) Good one. It might but I am also open to acting in plays, TV series, and cable. I am going to act. They can blacklist me from big films but there is always YouTube and social media (laughs). I can take selfies of myself acting.

I don't want to be part of a production that is solely focused on winning awards. You aren't focused on making something original. You aren't trying to be an artist. You aren't focused on the present. You are going to be more business-like. You are thinking about going to the podium to pick up the hardware and what you are going to say. I am focusing on what my character is going to say.
