Of course! Here is a list of items to get ahead of bringing your new kitten home:

1. Cat Carrier: It's important to keep your cat safe during travel, so make sure to pick out an appropriate-sized carrier for bringing your kitten home and on future vet trips.
2. Kitten Food: Kittens need nutrient-packed food to support their growth, unlike adult cats, so make sure to pick out an appropriate food.
3. Bowls: Food bowls come in many different forms. You could choose an elevated bowl, slow feeder, or automatic feeder, and even treat your cat to a water fountain (which will encourage them to hydrate).
4. Treats: Treats are one of the best ways to help your kitten bond with you!
5. Nail Trimmer: Routine nail trims protect your cat from infections and ingrown nails, as well as protect your furniture.
6: Cat Brush: It's important to keep your cat well-groomed to avoid mats, particularly if your cat has medium or long hair. Long-haired cats should be brushed every day, while shorter hair cats should be brushed around once a week. 
7. Toothbrush and Kitty Toothpaste: To keep your cat's teeth healthy and prevent gum disease, you'll want to introduce your kitten to teeth brushing as early as possible. This helps desensitize them in the future and makes the task easier.
8. Toys: There are a wide variety of kitten toys on the market, so choose some that look fun and experiment with what your cat likes. Every kitten is different!
9. Scratching Post: All cats scratch. If you don't give them an outlet, it might be on your couch! Consider spacing multiple scratching posts around the house.
10. Cat Bed: Your cat may never use their bed, but it's nice to have it if they'd like their own space.
11. Cat Tree: Cats feel safest in high spots, which means a cat tree can help them feel at home in their new place quickly. Choose one with lots of hiding spots and high-up places for your kitten to call their own.
12. ID Tag and Collar: While you hope your kitten never sneaks out, if they do, it's critical anyone who finds them can identify them. Make sure their ID tag has your contact information.
