On a bright summer day, in Toronto's downtown, there lived a shih tzu dog named Jupiter. He was white all over, with some splotches of black, and a cute, black nose that was always wet. His owners, Katie and Brad, were just finishing up working from home. Jupiter was eagerly waiting by the door for his afternoon walk, excited for what sights and sounds and smells he would experience today. Little did he know, Katie and Brad had a special day planned for him, because it was his 6th birthday!

With leash in hand, Katie and Brad stepped out of their house with Jupiter bouncing down the stairs. Their first stop was Kensington Market! Beautiful graffiti lined the walls, people were happily walking around, and mouth-watering smells were pouring in from the various restaurants that had their doors open. Jupiter was the star of the show, with everyone stopping to give him pets and kisses. 

The next stop on Jupiter's special day was the iconic skyscraper of the entire city - the CN Tower. Here, Katie, Brad, and Jupiter stepped inside and rode the elevator up over 1,000 feet to the top. Jupiter ran to the window to get a better view of the city. Jupiter's jaw dropped; he could see everything! Lakeshore stretched out in front of him, like a massive puddle for him to jump into. Buildings stretched as far as the eye could see. 

The last stop of the day was a picnic set up for Jupiter at Trinity Bellwoods Park. This was the best part of the day, as Katie and Brad invited Jupiter's friends to join and celebrate his birthday! His 3 other friends, a golden retriever named Jack, a poodle named Lily, and a corgi named George, were waiting for him. They chased each other round and round in circles, playing fetch with sticks, tennis balls, and frisbees, and soaking in the sun's rays. Katie and Brad also prepared a birthday cake for Jupiter - a cake made out of Jupiter's favorite treats! Jupiter shared it with Jack, Lily, and George, as they sat in a circle and ate together.

With the day finally over, Jupiter exhausted from how fun the day was, climbs up the stairs home. Katie and Brad kiss his forehead as they put him to bed, and he dreams of tomorrow.
