Deep within an old lush wood lived a blue jay named Jack who dearly loved acorns. Every autumn when the acorns began to drop from the trees, he would fly about the forest picking up as many as he could carry at one time. He would put them in the hollow he called home high in the forest’s most ancient oak. 

All the while cantankerous squirrels watched hoping they could take a big bite out of Jack’s growing horde. Like all autumnal blue jays, Jack ate the acorns ravenously. Though Jack also had a magical talent - to sense precisely which acorns had the potential to grow into the most powerful and bountiful of oak trees. Whenever Jack found one of these acorns, he would bury it in the forest floor, carefully covering it again with rich soil. Year by year, Jack’s carefully selected acorns sprouted, growing into majestic oak trees that towered over the forest floor. Jack took pride in knowing that he’d played a small part in shaping the forest's landscape.

Then one June, a ferocious storm swept through the ancient, shattering trees, uprooting mighty oaks, and decimating large tracks of forest. Jack watched in horror as the storm threatened to uproot his beloved oak tree. Seeing their moment, the squirrel broke out and charged the hollow looking to pillage Jack’s hoard. They took every last acorn, nut by nut, until the entire stash was bare, and Jack’s heart was broken. 

When the storm passed, Jack’s blessed acorns were gone, his beloved tree was decimated, and the forest was sundered. He laid down on the ground in total surrender. His life’s work was seemingly destroyed. Preparing to draw his last breath, Jack lifted his eyes and saw the first cotyledon leaf of an oak sapling pushing up through the forest soil. It was one of the acorns he’d planted. Hope would spring a new, and one day the forest would be healed. 

Jack’s legacy lived on in the towering oak trees that sprang up in the rejuvenated forest. It was a fitting testament to all his hard work, knowing that his magic would live on in their bountiful boughs.
