No problem. Here are some tips that can help you get started with taking care of your cat.

1. Groom regularly - while cats groom themselves and are known for being clean, it is good to give them some extra help as it can help with their overall health and hygiene. No matter the hair length of the cat, they all can benefit from it. Having a routine for grooming the cat will help prevent shedding and hairballs.
2. Always provide fresh water - this is essential to the cat's health. Ensuring they have fresh water all the time will help prevent health issues common in cats, such as kidney disease and urinary tract infections. One thing to keep note of is that cats can be picky about the water they drink. If you notice this, then it may be beneficial to invest in the water fountain, as some cats prefer moving water.
3. Proper place to potty - it may be beneficial to have more than one litter box in some situations, especially if you have more than one cat. This allows your cat to have options if they don't feel like using one letterbox for a particular reason. You also want to ensure that the litter box's placed in an area that is easily accessible for the cat and comfortable.
4. Consistently clean the litter box - continuing on the topic of litter boxes, it's very important to always make sure that the litter box is maintained and clean. If it gets to the point where it's too full or dirty for the cat, they may find other areas to relieve themselves, such as the carpet or different items such as pillows or clothing. It's good practice to clean out the litter box daily and do a full cleaning of the box at least weekly.
5. Scratching-post training - it is common, natural, and even considered healthy behavior for cats to scratch. The downside of this is that they may use our home decor as a means to satisfy the urge to scratch. The main reason the cat needs to scratch as it is a means for them to remove old layers from their claws. It may take some time to get them used to a scratching post, but it's well worth the time and effort.
