I wake up super early in the morning. Mom makes me brush my teeth and put on my school uniform. Then I help her get my backpack ready. We get in the car and drive to school. We listen to music, which is fun. After Mom drops me off, I go to the cafeteria and get breakfast. I like French toast sticks and chocolate milk. After I eat, I go to my classroom and say good morning to my teacher. My teacher is nice, but sometimes I get into trouble for talking when I’m not supposed to. If I have a question, I’m supposed to raise my hand first and wait for the teacher to say my name. After I sit down at my desk, we listen to the morning announcements and then start learning stuff. Right now, we are working on writing and saying letters of the alphabet. After we do some letter stuff, the teacher will let us sit on the carpet and have story time. I like story time because my teacher reads us a different book every single day! And then, after story time, we go to specials! Sometimes we have P.E., and sometimes we have music. I like P.E. because we get to run around and play games. My favorite is kickball.

After specials, it’s time for lunch. I love lunch because the cafeteria has hot meals, and I get to choose what I want to eat every day. I also get to sit and talk with my friends when we eat lunch. After lunch, it’s time for recess! If it’s sunny outside, we get to play on the playground. I like swinging on the swings or playing tag with my friends. If it’s raining, though, we have to stay inside and play with arts and crafts stuff. Sometimes that can be fun. Then we start learning again. We work on numbers after recess. Sometimes we count, sometimes we write, and sometimes we add small numbers together to make bigger numbers. When it’s almost time to leave school for the day, the afternoon announcements come on. After we listen to them, we get our backpacks ready and walk outside to the pick-up line. Mom is always there waiting, so I say goodbye to my friends and get in the car to head home.
