The stadium lights appeared extra bright tonight. Sam walked out of the locker room onto the soccer pitch alongside his teammates. They were about to play for the state championship after making it through a grueling batch of playoff games. Half of the team seemed to have some minor nagging injury, but they were all determined to grit their teeth and push through for one final game. The team lined up in their positions and the game began. Sam was a striker and played in a forward position on the field. He had spent the year prior doing sprints and other exercises to gain a speed advantage over his defenders. This benefitted Sam and his team greatly throughout the season as he was often able to consistently stride past the other team and score goals. Sam was the team's leading scorer and he certainly felt immense pressure to strike his team to victory tonight. 

The first half of the game was intense with neither team gaining an edge over the other. Sam's legs were tired; he had made several sprints down the field hoping for a pass to come his way, but his teammates were having little success getting clean passes through. The defensive players on the other team were large and athletic and offered few gaps Sam could take advantage of. Halftime seemed to breeze by, and before long the teams re-entered the pitch. The second half brought more of the same, with neither team having any luck offensively. There were only a few minutes left in regulation with the score tied at zero. Sam's team suddenly found themselves with a golden opportunity. A defender on the opposing team had tripped on a slick spot on the field. Sam's team had possession of the ball, and Sam bolted down the field. He was finally able to get a pass sent his way, and he found himself with one defender to beat. He urged his aching muscles to cooperate as he blazed past his opponent. With a clean look at the goal, he delivered a powerful strike. The ball whipped past the goalie and into the net behind him. Sam had done it! The remaining minutes of regulation passed with no serious offensive attempt by Sam's opponents. He and his team were state champions! Completely overjoyed, he celebrated with his teammates.
