Moe was an unfortunate mosquito. Born with an unusually deep capacity for emotion, Moe often found himself deeply unsatisfied by the life he led as a near-universally hated insect. As he quickly zigzagged through the air, avoiding the clumsy swipes from the sweaty jogger he tried to land on, Moe lamented about how misunderstood he was and the impossibility of trying to convey to the human that he had no intention of sucking his blood. Buzzing quickly away to find refuge in nearby shrubbery, Moe thought to himself that his dreams of making a human friend would likely never come to fruition.

Even in his earliest memory, Moe can recall how different he felt from his mosquito siblings, friends, and peers. Everyone seemed obsessed with only one thing -- sucking blood from as many humans as possible. In fact, there was even a leaderboard in his local mosquito community that highlighted the most prolific among them. Ironically, his own brother was at the top of the leaderboard, drawing even greater contrast to himself and the fact that he refused to feed on humans. Out of respect for the humans he idolized so dearly, Moe had made a promise to himself that he would only ever feed on squirrels, rats, and other small rodents. In his younger days, he used to be teased mercilessly about this. Though he'll never admit it, he will always harbor a small bit of resentment towards his siblings and peers for making him feel like he was less than them simply because of his dietary beliefs.

All his mosquito friends seemed shallow and superficial, and Moe often felt like they couldn't understand him. Humans, however, exhibited the widest spectrum of emotions. He's seen it all -- buzzing above the bowed heads of mourners at a funeral, flying between the swinging arms of the dancers at a wedding, clinging quietly to the wall above the crib as a young mother sang soft lullabies to her firstborn, and hovering discreetly in the corner while an old couple fought in the kitchen for the hundredth time over dishwashing responsibilities. Love, anger, fear, loss, and devastation—it was intoxicating to witness, and Moe wanted so badly to be a part of it, despite the impossibility of it all. A lonely mosquito, bearing witness to a kaleidoscope of human feeling, but always only on the outside looking in.
