Mary went to a garage sale in a neighborhood a few streets down from where she lives. Garage sales were always a great way to pick up quality and sometimes even hard-to-find items for relatively cheap. Scanning the items, nothing stood out to her as most items were the usual clothes, toys, some electronics here and here, and some accessories. Mary went around picking out a few things that she liked, a t-shirt, a watch for her boyfriend, and some books since she was an avid reader.

Mary spoke with the owner of the house and asked if they'd be putting out any other things or if what was out in the yard is all there was going to be. The owner seemed quite fond of Mary, so she told her she does have an extra item that she hadn't put out yet. She brings out an old dusty pocket watch that could have been dated to the early 19th century. The lady came back out and told Mary she'd give it to her for a few bucks. Surprised, Mary asked if the lady was sure about doing that, to which she nodded yes. Mary added the pocket watch to her bag and went back home for the day.

Mary, curious about the item, took it to a local pawn shop that specialized in antiques and watches. The owner examined the old pocket watch and noticed some words hastily etched into the back of the watch "This watch is cursed" upon reading these words, the pawn shop owner immediately hands the watch back to Mary and tells her to get out. Curious about the reaction, Mary would go back to the lady's house who sold her the watch and demanded to know what is wrong with it. 

The lady looked Mary in the eyes and told her that ever since she had that watch, only bad things would happen to her. Things around her house would randomly fall and break, doors would open and close without reason, and footsteps could be heard going up and down the stairs on a nightly basis. Mary demanded she take the watch back and that she no longer had any use for it, but the lady declined and told her it would follow her until it finds a new owner.
