Sure! Here are a few suggestions for great family films you can enjoy this summer. 

1. A High School Musical 3 - This movie is always a hit with tweens as well as adults. In it, you are taken on a fun-filled musical adventure at The Evans Family Country Club. Troy is amazed by all the opportunities that await him at the club, but what will it cost him?

2. Moonrise Kingdom - This is a classic tale of a boy who meets a girl with all the love and emotions that go along with young love. It features a host of quirky characters at summer camp that is far from ordinary. 

3. Sisterhood of the Traveling Pants - What takes place when a group of friends has to separate for the summer? They make a commitment to stay connected using a pair of magical pants. In this film, you can follow the adventures of four best friends who, along with the traveling pants, take on the world with inspiring adventures. 

4. The Goonies - This fun 80s film will take your family on an adventure of a lifetime. When the Goon Docks community comes under the threat of being sold, a group of kids set out to save their town. They take along a dusty old treasure map with hopes of finding One-Eyed Willy's chest of gold. The kids embark on a magical adventure in this beloved classic your family is sure to love. 

5. A League of Their Own - This classic baseball film takes place during the war era when the men are gone away and the women take to the baseball field. The Rockford Peaches are a team of fiery female baseball players who learn all about life and make history by playing the game. 

6. Little Big League - In this movie, A kid named Billy becomes the owner of a baseball team after his grandfather dies and wins over the players by firing the manager they don't like. The only issue is, they are also not willing to start taking orders from a kid. 

7. The Sandlot - With its classic lines and memorable scenes, this is one of the best films to share with your kids during the summer. The Sandlot follows a kid as he moves to a new town and finds friendship with the kids on the local baseball team. The movie is all about teamwork and friendship with plenty of laughs along the way.
