We pull up alongside a small jetty. The man reaches out with sinewed arms and knobbly hands to grab the rope that Kostas throws towards him. He ties the rope onto the buoy where his own boat is tied. He lifts his broad sun-lined face from under the black wool peaked cap. His blue eyes twinkle. Old man of the sea or not, he is fit and well. He grabs our hands and helps us out of our dinghy onto the jetty.

The old man leads us along a rocky path towards a house. Glazed blue ceramic jars line the front, whitewashed wall of the house. A large wooden barrel stands in front of an open door and blackened pots and pans hang from a wooden post. It is an outside kitchen. We all introduce ourselves and the old man, Sestos, invites us to follow him. On the sunny side of his house is a garden with tomatoes and cucumbers scrambling along the rocky ground. I lean down to take a closer look and Sestos hands me a wicker basket. I pick four tomatoes and a cucumber.

Sestos washes the harvested tomatoes in a plastic bowl of water collected from the spring in the side of the rocky cliff at the back of his house. As far as I can see, the bowl is the only plastic article here. Sestos piles the tomatoes, a slab of fetta and some black olives on top of the wooden barrel so we can all help ourselves. Plates are not necessary; this is a picnic after all. The tomatoes are fleshy, firm and fluted. I segment one tomato and place a slice of briny fetta on top. It does not need anything else. It is the taste of the Greek islands.

From just inside the doorway Sestos brings out a small tin. He gently forks out small salted dried fish, locally known as marida, and that we know as whitebait. While we crunch on these morsels and nibble on black olives, Sestos ladles wine out of one of the blue jars into a ceramic jug. He then pours the wine into cups. The wine is white, sweet and surprisingly chilled. I feel blessed and euphoric and it is not just the wine. We are standing around a barrel lunching on the simple delights of the land and the sea.
