Jeffrey was different from the other animals at Park Zoo Elementary School.  He wasn't clever like the monkeys.  He wasn't brave like the lions.  He wasn't speedy like the gazelles.  He wasn't striped like the zebras.  He was awkward and tall, with long spindly legs and a long neck that made him stand high above his classmates. He had a blue tongue and two short horns on the top of his head!  He was the funniest-looking animal in the class. Jeffrey was a giraffe! He was unique in the animal kingdom, possessing none of the graces or athletic abilities of his safari friends.   The gazelles would challenge him to races, knowing that he would lose every time.  

"Let's race to the watering hole, Jeffrey!"  They shouted at him each day.  
"Okay!" Jeffrey replied.  "Maybe I can win this time!" he thought.
"One, two, three...go!" Shouted the gazelles.
They sprinted off, leaving Jeffrey to eat their dust. He ran so hard and fast that he tripped over his long legs!
"Hahahahaha!" The gazelles laughed. All of the animals gathered around to join in the bullying, and soon all Jeffrey could hear was a roar of laughter.
He walked home, defeated, and recounted the story to his father.
"Well, Jeffrey, what you need to do is propose a different challenge," explained his dad.
"But what, Dad?" questioned Jeffrey.
"You'll think of something," replied Jeffrey's dad.
The next day at school, Jeffrey sat at his desk thinking of what to challenge the gazelles to do.  Finally, he remembered that they loved to eat the fruit of the mimosa tree.  
"You know what tastes even better than that?" asked Jeffrey.
"No, what?" asked the gazelles.
"The leaves of the Acacia tree.  I challenge you to an eating contest of acacia leaves," said Jeffrey.
The gazelles laughed at him. 
"You're on!" They replied.
When recess came, all the animals gathered around the acacia tree to watch the eating contest.  With ease, Jeffrey lifted his neck to the high branches and picked off the leaves with his long, blue tongue.
"No fair!" shouted the gazelles. "We can't reach the leaves!"
Jeffrey laughed and said, "Maybe you should have thought about that before agreeing to the contest!"
 From then on he was admired by all the animals at Park Zoo Elementary School for his great height.
