Whenever you hear about dental health, you’re probably told to brush and floss your teeth each night. While these are some of the most important things you can do, your diet should also be taken into consideration.
Your diet impacts your health, not just for your body but for your teeth as well. The food you eat impacts the health of your teeth and gums. For a long-lasting beautiful smile, try chowing down on some of these delicious foods, recommended by our team here at Vellore Woods Dentistry.
1. Leafy Greens
One of the best minerals to consume for dental health is calcium. Leafy greens are rich with calcium, which helps to build the enamel of your teeth.
Not only do leafy greens have lots of calcium, but also they are rich in folic acid. This vitamin can treat gum disease, keeping your mouth healthy and fresh.
Leafy greens include spinach, kale, and other “salad veggies.” These can be enjoyed in a delicious salad or on a sandwich. They can even be added to eggs in the morning for a breakfast omelette.
Like leafy greens, almonds are calcium-rich. They also contain a significant amount of protein, which is great for a healthy smile. The fact that they are low sugar is part of what makes them such a great choice for a snack.
One of the huge benefits of almonds is that they can be so easily added to so many meals. Almonds are great on salads or in yogurt. They can just be eaten by themselves as a snack throughout the day.
Yoghurt contains probiotics, which are good for many reasons. As far as dental health, they take care of your gums and prevent cavities. As with almonds and leafy greens, yoghurt also contains calcium as well as protein. These are all a great way to boost your dental health with just a few dietary changes.
Yoghurt makes a great breakfast meal. You can also add almonds for even more of a protein boost. Remember though that sugar can be damaging to your oral hygiene. For this reason, choose a sugar-free or a reduced-sugar yoghurt for maximum health benefits.
Cheese is the second dairy item on this list, after yoghurt. Like yoghurt, it can prevent tooth decay by affecting the pH levels in the mouth. In addition to this, it also has protein and calcium. Improve and strengthen your tooth enamel by adding cheese to your diet.
Enjoy cheese with eggs, on a sandwich, or with crackers. There are a million ways to add cheese to your diet. Choose a type of cheese that you enjoy and eat your way to a bright smile.
How you eat food can impact your health in the same way that nutrients can. Food that requires lots of chewing causes you to salivate more. This saliva cleans out bacteria and makes your mouth cleaner. This leads to a decrease in tooth decay and wear and tear on enamel.
Apples work in this way. This is part of why they are a great mid-day snack. You can bring them to work, where you might not be able to brush your teeth immediately after eating. Fewer food particles will remain in your mouth after you eat.
Nutrient-wise, apples contain lots of fibre and water, which are both great for oral health.
Carrots work in a similar way to apples. Because you have to chew more to break up these foods, you tend to salivate more when consuming them. This means that your mouth ends up cleaner after snacking. Pack fibre-rich carrots as a guiltless snack during the day. Even if you can’t reach for a toothbrush, your mouth still stays clean.
Enjoy your carrots with salad or on a veggie platter. They are a great source of vitamin A and keep your smile fresh.
Tea is one of the best beverages for keeping your teeth healthy. Green tea and black tea both have polyphenols, which protect against bacteria growth.
Enjoy a tea to go in the morning rather than a coffee to keep your smile healthy. Studies have shown a significant impact on oral health in those who opt for tea. Tea protects your gums and teeth from decay, and it also leads to better-smelling breath and a brighter smile.
These snacks pack a mighty punch. Raisins kill bacteria that cause plaque and eventually cavities. If you are at risk for gum disease or cavities, add these tasty snacks to your diet.
Despite being sweet and delicious, raisins aren’t full of sucrose, like many other foods. Sucrose is a major cause of plaque build-up. It acts as an adhesive to help food stick onto teeth, which is bad for tooth health. Raisins are healthy snacks that can help you to avoid sucrose-rich cavity causers.
9. Sugar-Free Gum
Just like apples and carrots, chewing gum can help generate saliva to wash away harmful bacteria. Chewing a stick of sugar-free gum after a meal cleans the teeth. It is not nearly as beneficial as brushing with toothpaste, but it is a great way to boost oral health in a pinch.
Make sure you don’t chew anything with sugar in it, as this could be even worse for you than not chewing it at all. While it will still cause the helpful salivation, the sucrose in gum can allow food particles to stick to teeth and become plaque. Bring a stick of sugar-free gum to chew after lunch at work.
The Bottom Line
Dental health is incredibly important. Ignoring your oral hygiene doesn’t just lead to bad breath and stained teeth. It can also do irreversible damage to your gums, teeth, and tongue. Including these nutrient-rich foods in your diet can help prevent harmful bacteria, lower plaque, and prevent cavities and diseases.