Since God gave music to the angels to worship Him in eternity past, we have to conclude that it is an eternal attribute of God. Worship using musical instruments was happening long before the nation of Israel existed and indeed the creation of the earth. God created innumerable angels who were placed under three archangels: Lucifer, Gabriel and Michael. The name Lucifer means ‘light bearer’ or morning star, presumably from the reflection of God’s glory on the precious stones that covered him. He shone above all other angels in his beauty, wisdom and perfection. He had musical instrumentation built into his make up, and this could only have been used for worship in the presence of God.
Son of man, take up a lamentation for the king of Tyre, and say to him, ‘Thus says the Lord GOD: “You were the seal of perfection, Full of wisdom and perfect in beauty. You were in Eden, the garden of God; Every precious stone was your covering: The sardius, topaz, and diamond, beryl, onyx, and jasper, sapphire, turquoise, and emerald with gold. The workmanship of your timbrels and pipes was prepared for you on the day you were created. Ezekiel 28:12-13.
Your pomp is brought down to Sheol, and the sound of your stringed instruments; the maggot is spread under you, and worms cover you. How you are fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning! how you are art cut down to the ground, you who weakened the nations! Isaiah 14:11-12.
Lucifer was singled out among the archangels and anointed by God to use his gift of music in leading the rest of the heavenly hosts in worship. Whether there were other angels or celestial beings that played instruments as well as Lucifer is not clear, but he undoubtedly was the orchestra leader, choir director and master musician. There is no other logical reason why God would create him with instruments, except for worship.
You were the anointed cherub who covers; I established you; You were on the holy mountain of God; You walked back and forth in the midst of fiery stones. Ezekiel 28:14.
Before his fall Lucifer was created as a symphony of worship to God. However a seed of iniquity grew in him until he rebelliously declared,
I will ascend into heaven; I will exalt my throne above the stars of God; I will also sit on the mount of the congregation, On the farthest sides of the north; I will ascend above the heights of the clouds, I will be like the Most High. Isaiah 14:13-14.
His beauty, perfection, influences and anointing deceived him into believing he could actually replace God, and be worshiped as God. His worship toward God would have deteriorated over a period of time, as his heart progressively became antagonistic toward God. It does not seem possible to lead worship to God one day and then attempt to dethrone Him the next. The Message translation brings out the insatiable desire of Lucifer to rule over the angelic hosts, and God.
You said to yourself, “I’ll climb to heaven. I’ll set my throne over the stars of God. I‘ll run the assembly of angels that meet on sacred Mount Zaphon. I’ll climb to the top of the clouds. I’ll take over as King of the universe.” Isaiah 14:13-14 (The Message).
We have to be continually conscious that the calling, gifts, talents and anointing God has so graciously given us are used exclusively for His glory and not our own. It is a fearful thing to be used so mightily by God in the area of music ministry if any trace of self is still alive in us. The devil knows how susceptible those involved in music ministry can be to pride and self-seeking. To escape falling prey to devilish traps in these areas, the music ministry has to exude a spirit of humility and submission to leadership at all times.
Comments will be approved before showing up.