Send the link below via email or IMCopy
Present to your audienceStart remote presentation
- Invited audience members will follow you as you navigate and present
- People invited to a presentation do not need a Prezi account
- This link expires 10 minutes after you close the presentation
- A maximum of 30 users can follow your presentation
- Learn more about this feature in our knowledge base article
Do you really want to delete this prezi?
Neither you, nor the coeditors you shared it with will be able to recover it again.
Make your likes visible on Facebook?
Connect your Facebook account to Prezi and let your likes appear on your timeline.
You can change this under Settings & Account at any time.
History of Track and Field
Transcript of History of Track and Field
at a sports festival in
Athens, Greece. The marathon was an event of the ancient Olympic Games. The marathon is a modern event that was first introduced in the modern olympic games of 1896 in Athens. From 776 BC, the
Olympic Games were
held every four years
for almost 12 centuries. Track and Field athletics in the U.S. dates back from the 1860's. The Intercollegiate Association of Amature athletes of America, the nation's first national athletic group, held the first collegiate races in 1873 and in 1888 the Amateur Athletic Union (which governed the sport for nearly a century) held it's first championship. As track developed as a modern day sport, a major issue for all athletes was their status as amateurs. For many years track and field was considered an amateur sport! Athletes could not accept training money or cash prizes. Track and field is one of the oldest sports. During the middle ages track and field disappeared. The true development of track and field as a modern sport started in England during the 19 century, and in 1849 the Royal Military Academy held the first organized track and field meet of modern times. In 1896 the first modern Olympic Games were held in Athens, Greece, from April 6th to April 15th. It was held there because Ancient Greece was the birth place of the Olympic Games. In 1913 the international Amateur Athletic Federation (IAAF) was formed by representatives from 16 countries. The IAAF was charged with establishing standard rules for the sport, approving world records, and ensoring that the amateur code was adhered to; it continues to carry out these duties today. The participation of women in track and field is a recent development. In 1921 representatives from 6 countries formed an athletic federation for women, which merged with the IAAF in 1936. Participation by women has grown rapidly in many countries particularly in the United States, where many schools have added women's track and field to their athletic programs. The first event ever run in track and field was 600 feet long, for men only. Now as you can see, this is not an amatuer sport! But if you can not do these events as amazimg as we can....we are professionals. Just keep trying and join track it's amazing!!!