DESIGN AND TECHNOLOGY - Mr P Downing Head of Department
Mrs K Jones
The Design and Technology department teaches in mixed ability groups. We aim to produce work that will challenge all students whilst supporting the less able.
Key Stage 3 - 4 lessons each fortnight for 1 term
Milestone assessment 2019 - 2020
Introduction to Design & Technology
Students spend their first year learning how to use the full range of materials, hand and computer aided tools to design and make a tea light holder in wood and metal and a colour changing nightlight using plastic and electronics.
During year 8 the emphasis is on developing problem solving skills through a longer project based around a phone/technology stand. The aim during this year is to design and build a unique product to solve a problem using the Laser and more complex metalworking equipment.
During the final year of KS3 students are taught how to build a small wooden box. The focus is on core skills needed for GCSE with a strong emphasis on developing, Technical drawing and computer aided design skills using Sketch-up.
Key Stage 4 (GCSE) - In six lessons a fortnight
We spend every day around things that have been designed; from the buildings we live and work in to the objects we use every day.
Design & Technology explores the design process we go through to create functional products and prototypes in metal, plastics and wood using the full range of facilities including two traditional workshops and a fully equipped CAD/CAM area (3D printing and Laser Cutting).
Homework is set regularly and is based upon developing high level research, design and theory understanding.
Breakdown – NEA, exam percentage (Exam board AQA)
Materials and Components, Industrial and Commercial processes, Analysing and Designing products, Sustainability and Technology.
Non-Examined Assessment 50% (Afterschool sessions are essential)
20 page document exploring the design process through:
Research, Designing, Making, Testing and Evaluation
Key Stage 5 AS/A Level Product Design (Exam board AQA)
Students will study a wide range of materials, manufacturing techniques and processes. Through the course they will develop a good understanding of how designers and makers work, and have worked, in the real world.
Through the AS and A-level course students will build on the skills developed at GCSE applying these to a real world problem and creating an innovative prototype/model or final product: this will be done using hand tools and traditional machines as well as Computer Aided Design and Manufacturing processes including 3D printing and Laser cutting.
Core Technical Principals
(Materials, Processes, Product Development and Digital Technologies)
Non-Examined Assessment (50%)
Substantial Design and Make task
(Identifying a project, designing, making and evaluating a prototype)