Secondary Transition is the process of preparing students for adult life after they leave high school. Transition planning begins at age 14, or younger if determined appropriate by the IEP team, as students consider their goals for the time after graduation through career awareness exploration activities. The transition process continues through high school as academic instruction and community experiences help clarify and support students’ goals. The entire process is based on individual student’s needs, taking into account each student’s strengths, preferences, and interests.
Transition can be thought of as a bridge between school programs and the opportunities of adult life, including higher education or training, employment, independent living and community participation.I look forward to working with our students and being part of their IEP team(which includes the student, family members, teachers, and service providers) to successfully prepare for his/her post-secondary goals and transition to adult life.
Secondary Transition: Frequently Asked Questions
Why is secondary transition important?
It is required by federal law (IDEA 2004) and PA regulations (Chapter 14). Studies show that many students receiving special education services do not pursue education or training beyond high school and are not as successful as the general population in the workplace and in living independently. Transition planning & programming helps to close these gaps.
Which students must have transition planning?
All students with disabilities, ages 14-21, who qualify for special education services.
When does secondary transition planning start?
It is required by PA regulations (Chapter 14) that transition be addressed in the IEP of the student in the year he/she turns 14, but may begin earlier if the IEP team decides that early planning is appropriate.
Who is involved in the transition planning process?Transition planning involves the student, family, all relevant educational staff, personnel from outside agencies, and other applicable community members.