* What the astronauts really saw on the moon.
* Things you don’t know about the moon.
Strange lights and moving shadows have been seen on the moon by astronomers so often that NASA has even published a catalog of them. From the year 1540 to 1967, NASA lists over 570 strange moon events in a report called «Chronological Catalogue of Reported Lunar Events.» The report is also known as NASA Technical Report # R-277.
Lights on the moon were being seen so regularly that NASA started a study, called Operation Moonblink, to investigate them. NASA commissioned observatories from around the world to just watch and photograph the moon. Within months there were more than twenty-eight documented lunar events. Several of these events were confirmed by astronomers outside the program. Photographs of these events have never been released to the public. Why?
All Around the World
It turns out that the 570 «lunar lights» events cataloged by NASA are just a few of literally thousands of such observations that are regularly being made around the world by amateur astronomers. In fact, NASA took these 570 events from over 2,600 such events they had observed. In countries such as Japan and Great Britain, where astronomy is a national passion, these lunar activities have been well documented on film as well as still photographs. Huge objects, four to five miles in diameter have been seen moving across vast lunar craters at speeds up to 6,000 miles per hour! In addition, beams and long-distance rays of light have also been seen, as well as clouds, fog, and mists. All these anomalies on the moon have been cataloged for decades by credible scientists.
Moongate: Suppressed Findings of the U.S. Space Program, published in 1982, detailed a NASA film taken by astronauts on the moon that the author was able to get his hands on. It shows Apollo 11 astronauts planting the American Flag on the moon. Immediately after, a gust of wind blows the flag and it billows out. The astronauts run towards the camera and cover the lens with their hands. From then on, all flags sent up with the astronauts had wires in them to hold them out.
How Was the Moon Created?
Basically, nobody knows how the moon was created; however, there are two main schools of thought:
One is the Big Whack theory. It says that something, maybe an asteroid, hit the earth millions of years ago, leaving a cloud of debris. The particles were eventually drawn together and formed the moon.
The other theory is that the moon broke off from the earth when it was a molten mass spinning rapidly, so rapidly that it formed a dumbbell shape and one end broke off. This theory was originally proposed in 1880 by Sir George Darwin, the son of famed evolutionist Charles Darwin.
The important thing is this, all modern theories of how the moon was formed are based on the premise that at one time the earth and the moon were one.
Eighth Grade Science
Here’s what your eight grade science teacher didn’t tell you. (It’s not her fault; she didn’t know either!) When the astronauts landed on the moon and brought back moon rocks in 1969, scientists scrutinized them carefully. They were shocked by what they discovered. Here’s what they should have told you but didn’t:
* The moon rocks are over a billion years older than our earth!
* The moon dust is a billion years older than the rocks!
* Both the rocks and moon dust the astronauts brought back are older than our sun and our entire solar system!
* Chemical analysis showed that the composition of the moon rocks and moon dust was completely different, not even closely related to one another as would be expected.
What this means is that it appears as if the moon was created somewhere else and someplace else! Also, it means that the moon rocks somehow got placed on the surface from somewhere else a billion years after the dust had formed.
That’s just the start. The moon’s orbit is nearly a perfect circle. Not only that, but the moon does not spin. One side, the same side, is always facing the earth.
Scientists have not found any other naturally occurring body in the entire universe that exhibits these two characteristics. The only objects I know of that do this are the satellites we launch. The moon behaves exactly like a satellite! The odds against the moon falling naturally into this kind of circular, non-spinning orbit are astronomical! No pun intended.
Ultrasensitive seismic equipment has been placed on the moon by the astronauts. When Apollo 12 and Apollo 13 left the moon, they jettisoned the ascent stages of their spacecraft. The pieces of the craft fell back and hit the moon. Despite the relatively small size of these objects, when they struck, the entire moon reverberated for over eight minutes! The moon registered as being more hollow than full! Scientists at NASA said, «It reacted like a gong!» They are at a loss to explain this, and so they avoid discussing it with the public.
According to Soviet Col. Marina Popovich, Russian scientists have concluded that Phobos, one of the moons of Mars, is also an artificial structure, and hollow, as well!
The Shard is an object that was photographed by Orbiter 3, a United States spacecraft that was launched before the Apollo space missions took place. It is a monument and it is a mile and a half high! World-renowned geologists agree with Dr. Bruce Cornet, who says: «No known natural process can explain such a structure.»
The Shard is a huge and very distinctive feature. No astronomer or scientist denies its existence. Isn’t it odd that you never heard of it before? According to Dr. Farouck El Baz, there are many undiscovered caverns suspected to exist beneath the surface of the moon. Several experiments have been flown to the moon to see if there were actually such caverns. The public has never been given the results of these experiments.
The Tower is another major structure on moon that has been photographed from different altitudes and five different angles. The Tower is five miles high! Standing close to The Shard, The Tower is comprised of cubes, some as large as a mile wide. These two monuments were built by someone, they did not occur naturally. NASA has clear photographs of these two monuments. These photos belong to you; you paid for them, but NASA has never shown them to the public.
Contact NASA and tell them you want a copy of all Orbiter 3 photo series, unretouched. Call NASA Chief Administrator Charles Bolden at 202-358-0001. Or, fax him at: 202-358-4338.
On July 29, 1953 New York Herald Tribune science editor John J. O’Neill saw a twelve-mile long bridge on the moon. He reported his find to the Association of Lunar and Planetary Observers. At the time, they laughed at him. Then a month later an astronomer from England, Dr. H. P. Wilkens, came forward and said that he too had seen The Bridge. Wilkens told the British Broadcasting Company:
«It looks artificial. It’s almost incredible that such a thing could have formed in the first instance, or if it was formed, could have lasted during the ages in which the moon has been in existence.»
The Bridge was confirmed again by a member of the British Astronomical Association, Patrick Moore. Moore said The Bridge had appeared overnight.
The Man in the Moon
Researcher and writer George Leonard spent years poring over NASA lunar photographs. Leonard has said, «The moon is occupied by an intelligent race or races which probably moved in from outside the solar system. The moon is firmly in possession of these occupants.» Leonard goes on to say:
«Evidence of their presence is everywhere, on the surface, on the near side and the hidden side, in the craters, on the maria, and in the highlands. They are changing its face. Suspicion or recognition of that triggered the U.S. and Soviet moon programs.»
«Somebody Else Is on the Moon»
The above headline is also the title of Leonard’s 1977 book. In it, he publishes photographs of The Bridge and photos showing tracks in the moon dust and large domes in the center of artificially lit craters. There are domes and ruins on the moon. Leonard states that a NASA scientist told him he was right, but that the discoveries had not been made public yet.
Rumors swirl around what the astronauts have or have not seen. Underground sources claiming to have intelligence connections say the astronauts saw plenty, and that they were sent to the moon specifically to confirm indications of intelligent life. Naturally, the astronauts, as a group, deny seeing anything. However, the evidence is so overwhelming against their denials that it’s obvious we have not been told the truth.
Researcher and author Timothy Goode states that a personal friend of his who was with British military intelligence was with a scientist who was having a discussion with a very prominent astronaut. The astronaut told the scientist that NASA had been warned to stay off the moon by other beings. That’s why after 30 years since the last landing we have never been back.
Russia’s Luna 9 has also photographed artificially made moon structures. The Russians have discovered several other objects, among them huge obelisks. Russian scientist and engineer Alexander Abramov has calculated that these obelisks are arranged in exactly the same position as the tops of the great pyramids of Egypt. The locations of each of these monuments is based on a grid of forty-nine squares called an abaka.
Pyramids on the Moon
The structures the Russians identified as obelisks have also been reported in the U.S. They are especially visible in The Sea of Tranquility area, right where the Apollo astronauts landed. U.S. observers have sometimes referred to them as narrow pyramids. On November 22, 1966 the Washington Post featured them on the front page. The headline read: «Six Mysterious Statuesque Shadows Photographed on the moon by Orbiter.»
The Hubble Space Telescope
On April 16, 1999, NASA finally released for the first time Hubble Space Telescope images taken of the moon. Astronomers, researchers and scientists worldwide were stunned. Ever since the Hubble had been put in space, NASA had been telling the scientific community that the Hubble Space Telescope did not have the capability to take images of the moon. When asked, NASA consistently said that the telescope’s instruments were too sensitive to record the moon surface because it was too bright. This, in spite of the fact that the telescopes instruments were calibrated by focusing on the clouds surrounding the earth, which are several times brighter than the moon’s surface. NASA claimed that even the dark side and shadow edges of the moon’s surface were too bright. When confronted with this obvious contradiction, NASA refused to comment.
Upon the release of the moon photos, mainstream astronomy publication, Sky and Telescope Magazine noted the discrepancy and stated:
«The Space telescope Science Institute (STSI Division of NASA) released
pictures of a celestial object that most people thought the Hubble Telescope was not allowed to view: our own moon.»
The recently released images from the Hubble were poor and once again, NASA refused to release any high resolution images or any infra-red images that the Hubble also records. The Hubble has taken stunning high resolution images of objects that are millions of miles away, such as the planets Saturn and Jupiter, yet NASA claims that the Hubble can’t do the same for the moon which is only 250,000 miles away.
Enough is Enough
There is so much evidence of other beings on the moon that I could go on forever. The bottom line is this: There were and currently are other beings on «our» moon. Here’s some things you can do:
1. Ask NASA for your copies of the Orbiter 2 and Orbiter 3 lunar photos.
2. Ask NASA for your copy of film footage taken of the dark side of the moon during the moon missions. They have it; why haven’t you seen it? Why have they never released it to the public?
3. Get a telescope. Look at the moon for ten minutes a night for the next couple of months. You may be surprised at what you see.
Lunar Probe Attempts
In their first attempts to land a probe on the moon, both the U.S. and the Russians failed miserably.
The United States
Ranger 3: Missed the moon completely.
Ranger 4: Crashed into the moon.
Ranger 5: Missed the moon by 450 miles.
Ranger 6: Electrical system failed.
The Soviet Union
Luna 5: Crashed into the moon going full speed.
Luna 6: Missed the moon.
Luna 7: Crashed on the moon.
Luna 8: Crashed on the moon.
Luna 9: Landed successfully.
Not Enough Gravity?
After Luna 9’s successful landing things got much better for both space programs. Luna 9 was able to take gravitational readings from the moon’s surface. The problem appears to have been miscalculations of the moon’s gravitational forces. The first lunar missions were based on the moon being a solid, homogenous object. After Luna 9 scientists were able to determine that the moon was more like a hollow ball, with several large centers of gravity just below the moon’s surface, almost as if there were huge structures built underground. These large concentrations of gravity are known as mascons.
As NASA scientist Robin Brett once said: «It seems easier to explain the non-existence of the moon, than its existence.»