HTML5 Game Development - Lessons and Development Planning - Revised
Learn effective development planning and documentation for HTML5 game development with this free online course.
Take this certificate on your own.
Start now and learn at your own pace.
CertificationView course modules
The course will first discuss the tools that you can install into your copy of Visual Studio including Apache Cordova tools that will enable you to debug and analyze your code from within Visual Studio. This is something that was previously not possible with Cordova. You will then study Microsoft Azure which is a cloud computing platform and infrastructure that you can use to build, deploy, and manage applications and services through a global network of Microsoft-managed data centers.
The course will then teach you about the common documentation used within the game development industry. You will look into Game Design Documents and Technical Design Documents and study their content and usefulness in a game development studio. The course will also cover UML diagrams and how they help visualize the design of your system. You will then learn about the mistakes the course presenters made when constructing their previous build of the game and be shown how planning can ensure that such mistakes do not arise.
The start of something great always begins with an idea. Almost every game enthusiast at some point wants to turn their idea into a real game. The difference between dreaming and doing is a plan. This course is designed to teach computer games developers everywhere how to construct a proper plan that can help them visualize their ideas. Check out the course today, and get one big step closer to making your game a reality.
Introduction to Lessons and Development Planning
Introduction to Lessons and Development Planning - Learning outcomes
Introduction to Lessons and Development Planning - Lesson Summary
Lessons Learned and Proper Documentation
Lessons Learned and Proper Documentation - Learning outcomes
Lessons Learned and Proper Documentation - Lesson Summary
Having completed this course you will be able to:
- Identify updates and tools for your visual studio development environment
- Explain the importance of making effective plans for developing your game
- Discuss topics and issues you will need to address in your game plans
- Describe the Documentation that is the standard for Games Companies
- Recognize UML Diagrams and their utility in helping visualize your system
All Alison courses are free to enrol, study and complete. To successfully complete this Certificate course and become an Alison Graduate, you need to achieve 80% or higher in each course assessment. Once you have completed this Certificate course, you have the option to acquire an official Certificate, which is a great way to share your achievement with the world. Your Alison Certificate is:
Ideal for sharing with potential employers - include it in your CV, professional social media profiles and job applications
An indication of your commitment to continuously learn, upskill and achieve high results
An incentive for you to continue empowering yourself through lifelong learning
Alison offers 3 types of Certificates for completed Certificate courses:
Digital Certificate - a downloadable Certificate in PDF format, immediately available to you when you complete your purchase
Certificate - a physical version of your officially branded and security-marked Certificate, posted to you with FREE shipping
Framed Certificate - a physical version of your officially branded and security-marked Certificate in a stylish frame, posted to you with FREE shipping
All Certificates are available to purchase through the Alison Shop. For more information on purchasing Alison Certificates, please visit our FAQs. If you decide not to purchase your Alison Certificate, you can still demonstrate your achievement by sharing your Learner Record or Learner Achievement Verification, both of which are accessible from your Dashboard. For more details on our Certificate pricing, please visit our Pricing Page.