Ap blethint History, Family Crest & Coats of Arms
- Origins Available:
From the Celtic land of Wales came the name of Ap blethint. This name initially evolved from the Welsh personal name Blethyn.
Early Origins of the Ap blethint family
The surname Ap blethint was first found in Denbighshire (Welsh: Sir Ddinbych), a historic county in Northeast Wales created by the Laws in Wales Act 1536, where Meredith Ap Blethyn was Prince of North Wales in the 11th century. William the Conqueror seized Prince Meridith's castle at Oswestry in Shropshire after 1066 but he retained his Welsh estates.  
"At the Survey we see that King William was Lord of this manor (Mileham), but soon after Alan, son of Flaald, obtained it by the gilt of William the Conqueror; also the castle of Oswaldstrey in Shropshire, which belonged to Meredith ap Blethyn, a Welshman or Briton." 
Important Dates for the Ap blethint family
This web page shows only a small excerpt of our Ap blethint research. Another 137 words (10 lines of text) covering the years 1273, 1366, 1391, 1524, 1579, 1601, 1627, 1669, 1590, 1579 and 1590 are included under the topic Early Ap blethint History in all our PDF Extended History products and printed products wherever possible.
Ap blethint Spelling Variations
Although there are not an extremely large number Welsh surnames, there are an inordinately large number of spelling variations of those surnames. This variety of spellings began almost immediately after the acceptance of surnames within Welsh society. As time progressed, these old Brythonic names were eventually were recorded in English. This process was problematic in that many of the highly inflected sounds of the native language of Wales could not be properly captured in English. Some families, however, did decide to modify their own names to indicate a branch loyalty within the family, a religious adherence, or even a patriotic affiliation. The name Ap blethint has seen various spelling variations: Blevin, Blevyn, Ap Blethyn, Ap Plethyn, Plethen, Blethin, Blethen, Blevins and many more.
Early Notables of the Ap blethint family (pre 1700)
Prominent amongst the family during the late Middle Ages was William Blethyn, (d.1590), Bishop of Llandaff in 1579. He was born in Wales, and educated at Oxford, at either New Inn...
Another 31 words (2 lines of text) are included under the topic Early Ap blethint Notables in all our PDF Extended History products and printed products wherever possible.
Migration of the Ap blethint family
In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, many people from Wales joined the general migration to North America in search of land, work, and freedom. These immigrants greatly contributed to the rapid development of the new nations of Canada and the United States. They also added a rich and lasting cultural heritage to their newly adopted societies. Investigation of immigration and passenger lists has revealed a number of people bearing the name Ap blethint: G. Blethen, who arrived in San Francisco in 1851.
- ^ Bardsley, C.W, A Dictionary of English and Welsh Surnames: With Special American Instances. Wiltshire: Heraldry Today, 1901. Print. (ISBN 0-900455-44-6)
- ^ Lowe, Mark Anthony, Patronymica Britannica, A Dictionary of Family Names of the United Kingdom. London: John Russel Smith, 1860. Print.
- ^ Page, William (ed), A History of the County of Norfolk. London: Victoria County History, 1906. Print