Mails and telegrams were at one point the epitome of communication, but everything changed with the introduction of the Internet and WWW. The Internet has risen as global ubiquitous media for communication, changing the way we communicate, learn and even do business. However, even for this communication to exist, socket programming is very important.
Want to be a master of communication? Want to learn how sockets plays crucial role in system communication and how HTTP works under the hood. Well, socket programming is a must when it comes to development of communication applications. So, what exactly is socket programming?
A socket is an interface that works as a communication protocol between the application and the network. When trying to establish communication with a server, the application will create a socket that will dictate the style of communication that will exist between the two.
Now you can develop your very own Apps using socket communication by using this comprehensive course and learning how to program sockets in C from scratch. Designed by experts, the course brings together a practical as well as theoretical amalgamation of concepts associated with sockets and basic C communication, including building HTTP servers. Using this C Socket Programming Tutorial, become an expert in socket programming in C applications.
The course will also teach you:
Concepts of port communication - how ports work when it comes to communicating
Sockets and their use - what are sockets and how they operate between the network and the client
Data transfer between systems - how data transfers between the systems
HTTP protocol - how HTTP protocols are designed and how they work
Building HTTP server - how to build a fully functional HTTP server
Advance C programming concepts - what are different concepts and theories associated with C programming
Get started on designing the next big communication App with the help of this easy comprehensive course, which is designed specifically with keeping you in mind.
Eduonix creates and distributes high quality technology training content. Our team of industry professionals have been training manpower for more than a decade. We aim to teach technology the way it is used in industry and professional world. We have professional team of trainers for technologies ranging from Mobility, Web to Enterprise and Database and Server Administration.Eduonix creates and distributes high quality technology training content. Our team of industry professionals have been training manpower for more than a decade. We aim to teach technology the way it is used in industry and professional world. We have professional team of trainers for technologies ranging from Mobility, Web to Enterprise and Database and Server Administration.
Frequently Asked Questions
It is an online tutorial that covers a specific part of a topic in several sections. An Expert teaches the students with theoretical knowledge as well as with practical examples which makes it easy for students to understand.
A Course helps the user understand a specific part of a concept. While a path and E-Degrees are broader aspects and help the user understand more than just a small area of the concept.
A Course will help you understand any particular topic. For instance, if you are a beginner and want to learn about the basics of any topic in a fluent manner within a short period of time, a Course would be best for you to choose.
We have an inbuilt question-answer system to help you with your queries. Our support staff will be answering all your questions regarding the content of the Course.
How it works
The offer includes all live courses, Deals and E-Degrees.
Bogo Offer will be applied automatically upon adding 2nd Course, Deal or E-degree in the Cart. Offer Price will be reflected in Checkout Total
You can buy multiple courses or deals using your cart but they have to be in combo of 2 to get benefit of the offer.
We are free to withdraw any product from this offer based at our own discretion.