What are galvanized steel pipes?
Galvanized steel pipe can increase the service life of steel pipe and prevent rust to a certain extent.This paper will introduce the classification and main application of galvanized pipes.
One kind of galvanized pipe is hot-dip galvanized pipe.The molten metal reacts with the iron matrix to produce an alloy layer, which makes the matrix and the coating bond. To make hot-dip galvanizing, first you should conduct acid pickling of steel pipe to remove the iron oxide on the surface.After pickling,the steel pipe should be cleaned with ammonium chloride or zinc chloride solution, and then sent to the hot-dip bath for hot-dip galvanizing.Hot-dip galvanized coating is relatively uniform, has strong adsorption capacity and long service life. The zinc-iron alloy layer, that alloy layer, pure zinc layer and steel pipe integrated by the reaction between the steel pipe and the plating solution, makes the corrosion resistance relatively strong.
The other type is cold galvanized steel pipe,also called electro galvanized steel pipe.The amount of galvanizing is relatively small, and the corrosion resistance and service life are much worse than those of hot galvanized pipes. The zinc layer and steel pipe are separately stratified. The zinc layer is relatively thin, simply attached to the surface of steel pipe, which is easy to fall off. Therefore, it is not allowed to use cold galvanized steel pipe as water pipe.
Galvanized pipes are usually used to transport coal gas and heating. Galvanized pipes used to be as water pipes. But after several years, a lot of rust and dirt are produced. The flowing yellow water will not only pollute the sanitary ware, but also cause bacteria on the inner wall. Corrosion can also cause excessive levels of heavy metals in water, further threatening human health. Therefore, it is not suitable for water pipes.
Hebei Haihao High Pressure Flange & Pipe Fitting Group is willing to assist you in selecting the right type of galvanization or coating for your application.We are committed to providing you good quality with reasonable price.Email:firstname.lastname@example.org