Better Air, Better Life.
It’s never too late to start taking better care of ourselves. A lot of us are trying to eat cleaner and exercise regularly. As active adults we work hard at it. But there’s one thing that’s often overlooked – the importance of breathing clean air in our quest for a “better life.”
What Is A Chemical Gas And Why Do I Want To Get Rid Of It?
They’re called VOCs and are common asthma and allergy triggers such as the chemical gases coming from your carpet, the dry cleaned clothes you just brought home, the perfumed air, or the aerosol spray that is used to clean surfaces. Many common household products emit these gases and we live with them, day in and day out. Now we don’t have to.
Filter Technology vs. Airocide
Many have tried to clean the air with filter-based devices and found that they had little or no affect on how they felt. A lot of people share that experience.
Size Really Does Matter.
Filter-based technology is effective at capturing the larger airborne matter, but has little to no affect on the things we can’t see.
Why Our Air Purifier Is Different.
The Airocide air purifier destroys organic matter both large and small, even viruses and VOCs (organic gases). This NASA developed technology, uses cutting edge science that has been proven to eradicate everything from airborne asthmagens and allergens, to dust mites and pet dander. It has even been clinically proven to destroy MRSA, and Anthrax spores.
NASA Is All About Results…
And We Are Too.
A little over a decade ago NASA developed an air purification device specifically designed to eliminate organic gases from the space station. Initially they went after the smallest kind – ethylene gas – given off by plants they were experimenting with in Earth’s orbit.
Today, this technology is known as Airocide and it’s in use in food processing centers like Del Monte to destroy airborne microbes and gases, in wine caves like Shafer to destroy mold and in food chains like Whole Foods. It’s found in doctor and dental offices, even schools, to prevent infection from airborne viruses and bacteria. And now, it’s available for use in your home.
Your First 60 Days With Airocide.
Something Is Happening To The Air.
Before you notice relief from your allergies, you’ll notice a difference in the way the air smells. It’s cleaner, somehow crisper. You won’t be able to put your finger on it, but you’ll know something is different.
Here's What's Happening.
Airocide is knocking down the bio-burden, the microscopic airborne particles like mold spores, bacteria, viruses and organic gases that are too small for filters to remove.
Experiencing Better Sleep With The Airocide Air Purifier.
As you experience clean air over several days you begin to feel a difference, your body finds relief, often through improved and more restful sleep. Some may sneeze less or wake up less congested, others may have fewer colds and many will experience more energy; all because our bodies are no longer battling the same level of air contamination 24/7.
What Air Purifier?
Airocide is so unobtrusive it seems to disappear. By now it has become part of the environment, safely and effectively removing harmful airborne particles to a level you never before thought possible. Living with Airocide you notice improved air quality, fewer allergy triggers, reduced stuffiness and itchy eyes. You truly smell and feel a difference.
Now you can do more, be more and live more by adding the Airocide air purifier to your already healthy lifestyle. It’s easy. No filters to change, no ozone to worry about, just fresh, crisp air.
Hear From Active Adults Like You And See Why They Love Airocide.
Then try it for yourself. You have nothing to lose. If you don’t feel better in 60-days, Airocide will give you a full refund and even pay for return shipping.