Why do you need a dehumidifier? By evaporation, which can be, for example, at a swimming pool with a pool of 40 m water surface up to 60 litres of water, high humidity is in the room. The exact amount is depending on the amount of water in the room temperature and the air spaces. High humidity is not always visible, if the air temperature is too low or cools a surface below the dew point temperature, condensation, that dehumidifier leads to without any mold, discoloration and decay. You know the problem of the high humidity and the need for a dehumidifier in many other areas: in libraries, museums, in vintage cars, drying and storage procedures of every kind, as E.g. from food materials of paper, or wood storage, but also in pharmacies, laundries and houses. A good dehumidifier will avoid these problems. Luftentfeuchter-all dehumidifiers work functioning and species according to three different Methods. There are: dehumidifier, which operate air cooling with water excretion (condensation) dehumidifiers with liquid water vapour binding duty of the condensate to working dehumidifier, which absorb water vapour air dehumidifier with the help of a solid substance on the condensation principle this type of dehumidification follows the principle of a refrigerator.
The humid air is sucked in by a fan in the dehumidifier and using a cooled heat exchanger (evaporator). The air temperature falls below the dew point and the water condenses on the coil fins. The condensate falls into a drip tray and is discharged to the drain. From every liter of condensate is regenerated in the cooling process of evaporation heat. This heat energy extracted from and the power absorbed by the compressor to an additional condenser so that the air is heated and blown back into the Hall. In the summer, this residual heat over a water capacitor which is connected to the air dehumidifier can added to pool water or used for the heating of domestic hot water. This technique can be as the adsorption drying combined with other methods, and 20 C usable even at temperatures up to -. A good workmanship of the dehumidifier as different versions as wall, duct, ceiling or chest device can be found and are required depending on the needs and size of the room. Best a professional technician call and consult. The LED display shows the current function of the unit and the maintenance of a dehumidifier is not extensive with a good fitting and treatment. And for well-being in the room a dehumidifier is definitely his money.