Spring Term: 2019-20
This term we will be working towards modules in the NOCN Using Employability Skills qualification. Oak will be looking at the process of product development, including gathering initial ideas, collecting market research, advertising, budgeting and costing, and creating products for sale. The group will design and make products to sell at the annual Halloween party. Any profits will go towards making products to sell on the run up to Christmas. Oak will reflect on their practice at the end of an area of learning and will create targets that they will implement during future projects.
See Work-related Learning.
This term, Oak will continue to prepare for the workplace by covering the fundamentals of IT, which will initially involve exploring different sources of information and recognising copyright constraints on the use of information. The group will then move on to accessing, searching for, selecting and using internet-based information and assessing its fitness for purpose. Finally, they will select and use IT to communicate and exchange information in the form of email.
This term, Oak will be focusing on their writing skills in preparation for the Edexcel Functional Skills reading paper. They will be completing a variety of writing tasks and considering purpose, tone and audience. Students will be creating informative and persuasive texts, developing an understanding of how different texts are presented. The pupils will develop their writing by completing a range of literacy activities aimed at developing their functional literacy skills and improving their vocabulary and understanding of sentence structure/grammar.
For the first part of this term Oak will complete some activities on shopping for the home before beginning a new unit on skills for independent life. This aims to encourage students to think about living independently and what it means to them (positive and negative). They will look at their responsibilities and the landlord’s responsibilities when living in a home of their own. They will look at skills needed for independent living and difficulties they may face and how to deal with these difficulties.
Oak study Functional Skills. This is the application of mathematics to solve real-world problems. Oak are studying Functional Skills at either entry level or level 1.
This term Oak are looking at common measures. They will begin by enhancing their skills with money, and will also be looking at measure of length, weight and capacity. Oak students will be practising applying these skills in context and developing their problem solving abilities.
*Personal, Social, Health & Citizenship Education (PSHCE)
This term, the focus of PSHCE will be around Health and Wellbeing. The title of the module is ‘Who am I?’ and will support learners to think about themselves and others, both physically and emotionally. The pupils in Oak will identify and reflect on their feelings, lifestyles and relationships, and develop strategies for self-regulation of their emotions. Lessons will cover personal strengths, self-esteem, mental health issues, friends, family, eating disorders and sexual orientation. We will liaise with our Emotional Health and Wellbeing professional and our school nurse in case our learners need emotional support.
Physical Education (PE)
This term, Oak will be going offsite to a local sports leisure centre to focus on playing different invasion games, working on being a team player and being safe in PE.
This term, Oak will continue to attend a local sports leisure centre, and will be focusing on working as part of a group and learning about adapting a healthy lifestyle. Students will take on various responsibilities within a group, such as setting out equipment and checking for health and safety issues prior to the activities being performed. Students will develop their own fitness programs and record their achievements throughout the term. Students will reflect on their progress and be given the opportunity to give ideas to further develop their programs and fitness.
Oak will be looking at beliefs and ideas that people of different religions and faiths hold. They will explore their own beliefs and develop an understanding of the difference between beliefs and facts. During the autumn term, Oak will be looking at a range of different festivals and the importance of them to the people of each faith. The festivals for study are Harvest (a Christian festival), Diwali (a Hindu festival), Hanukkah (a Jewish festival) and Christmas (a Christian festival). Oak will compare the festivals and look for any similarities and differences between them. Oak will then reflect on their own celebrations and consider why celebrations are important to people. They will be involved in planning a Harvest assembly and the annual seniors carol concert.
During the first half of the spring term, the pupils will consider views on marriage and/or romantic partnerships and sexuality from the 5 main world religions: Christianity, Hinduism, Islam, Buddhism and Sikhism. The pupils will be given time to explore the ideas and beliefs on marriage and sexuality from all of the religions, comparing and contrasting them throughout the term. We will explore how people of different religions find partners and whether there is any involvement of the wider community when choosing a spouse. We will look at marriage and commitment ceremonies and the promises and vows that people make to each other, briefly discussing the difference between religious and civil weddings. Pupils will look at the ‘roles’ of the spouses within relationships according to each of the religions. They will then consider how people within each of the relationships may feel and why, and consider what they feel are important features of a successful and happy marriages. Pupils will be given numerous opportunities to share their own ideas and beliefs and to ask questions about the different approaches to marriage, relationships and sexuality.
**Transition to College
Moving on to a college or new setting is something that proves very challenging for many of our students.
The transition to college course is designed to reduce anxiety and build confidence when attending/visiting a local college. Oak will be visiting Northop College (Coleg Cambria). They will begin by gradually getting used to the new environment, viewing and accessing different facilities. They will then take part in a weekly lesson led by a college tutor in the DT workshops. The group will have use of the college facilities for the day, where alongside their lesson they will complete paperwork for their accredited course with school staff. Throughout the year, students will also have the opportunity to practise their life skills through visits to local amenities alongside the college visits.
Oak will undertake work experience during the school year. Work experience aims to provide all young people with an opportunity to:
- Obtain a wider awareness of the world of work as part of their general education
- Learn outside the classroom
- Relate their studies to the world of work and training
- Increase their practical skills, confidence and independence
Oak will complete accreditations in the classroom to support their placements.
This year, Oak will think about what they would like to do when they leave school/college and how their skills and personalities would be suited to different roles. Students will explore the different methods of applying for a job and practise completing application forms and CVs. Outside speakers will visit students to deliver sessions on various jobs and employment opportunities. Careers sessions will support work experience placements and there will be collaboration with work experience staff regarding accreditation work.
World of Work
This term, Oak will be completing the final sections of the ‘Carrying Out Tasks at Work’ unit from the OCR Life and Living Skills qualification. The unit aims to equip the learners with the ability to carry out different tasks at work, follow appropriate health and safety procedures and confirm that each task has been carried out to the standard required.
They will then move on to their final unit of the OCR Life and Living Skills qualification, ‘Effective Communication for Work’. The unit aims to develop communication skills to allow appropriate communication in the workplace, to choose a suitable method of communication, how to share information with others and to follow simple instructions accurately.