Here’s a study highlighting a case where 3.5 month old healthy twins both died, two days after receiving DPT, polio, & hepB vaccines.
Not to worry. It wasn’t the vaccines.
It was determined to be “SIDS”.
…For… both infants… at the same time…?
The neurotoxic, hepatotoxic, and immune system-compromising injections they received just two days prior had nothing to do with it.
We have two vulnerable infants who were likely born several weeks premature. Technically, these infants were probably only a month and a half old when they received these vaccines, based on their adjusted age. When you consider the amount of aluminum they were injected with, plus the acetaminophen administered, I would call that an “outside stressor”, but – that’s me…
It’s all just a coincidence?
Did you know that the term “SIDS” or “sudden infant death syndrome” was not termed by the medical community until shortly after vaccines were introduced in the 1960s?
But, I guess that’s also a coincidence…
Did you know that cases of SIDS occurs most frequently at 2 months, 4 months, and 6 months of age (when vaccines are administered)?
How many infants who die shortly after receiving vaccinations are labeled as “SIDS” cases?
Infant mortality rates regress against number of vaccines given:
Read the study here.
“Torch found that two-thirds of babies who had died from SIDS had been vaccinated against DPT (diphtheria–pertussis–tetanus toxoid) prior to death.”
“Of these, 6.5% died within 12 hours of vaccination; 13% within 24 hours; 26% within 3 days; and 37%, 61%, and 70% within 1, 2, and 3 weeks, respectively.
…Fine and Chen reported that babies died at a rate nearly eight times greater than normal within 3 days after getting a DPT vaccination.”
If linking SIDS to vaccines at 2 or 3 weeks post-vaccination is a stretch in your mind, know that even the CDC recognizes that adverse events from vaccines may not occur until 2-3 weeks later, and in some types of reactions, the adverse events happen to be clustered at 2-3 weeks post-vaccination.
One reason for the late reaction is because of what the aluminum adjuvants in pertussis vaccines do once injected into the body. There is typically a delayed translocation of the aluminum from the injection site to the brain and lymph nodes. Neurotoxicity and chronic neurological damage is therefore also delayed.
- Delayed translocation of aluminum adjuvants: Read the study here.
- Biopersistence and brain translocation of aluminum adjuvants: Read the study here.
But, why do some babies die, some have seemingly minor health effects such as chronic ear infections, others have developmental delays, some develop neurological disorders, and others simply seem fine to survive this onslaught?
A potential clue: MTHFR gene mutations. Up to 60% of the population has at least one copy. You can have varying degrees of mutations on this gene. The more deletions or mutations you have, the less your body is able to detoxify the aluminum, the polysorbate 80, the mercury, the formaldehyde, etc. – the more damaging the health effects and more severe your reaction will be. And this is just one piece of the puzzle. Nutrition, stress, toxic body burden, pharmaceutical drugs and antibiotics – can all affect whether or not your child may or may not be able to withstand the adverse effects of vaccines.
Vaccine Court Rules.
Unfortunately it’s not just a presumption or a correlation that vaccines can cause death, or “SIDS”.
A Special Master of the US vaccine court has ruled that an almost 5 month old baby who was vaccinated for seven diseases at once, per the recommended CDC schedule, died from – the vaccines.
This was filed July 10, 2017:
“In this case, I have concluded, after review of the evidence, that it is more likely than not that the vaccines played a substantial causal role in the death of J.B. without the effect of which he would not have died. The role of inflammatory cytokines as neuro-modulators in the infant medulla has been well described and is likely the reason for a significant number of SIDS deaths occurring in conjunction with mild infection. I have concluded that it is more likely than not that the vaccine-stimulated cytokines had the same effect in this vulnerable infant during sleep.”
It can no longer be debated that the neurotoxic action of these harmful substances in vaccines – especially aluminum, can cause excitotoxicity, encephalitis, and death. It has been proven, in the most difficult court to win in… Vaccine Court.
How many parents don’t even think to connect their child’s sudden death, to the vaccines? And how many infant deaths are rules SIDS even though parents questioned the vaccines?
The thought, is too much to bear.
More to investigate:
The real cause of cot death (SIDS) by Dr. Viera Scheibner (PhD) https://healthimpactnews.com/2018/what-are-the-real-causes-of-sudden-infant-death-syndrome-sids-why-are-vaccines-excluded/
Video of Dr. Viera Scheibner speaking on the discovery of life-threatening infant breathing patterns shortly after vaccinations: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qfWxVKLqJLc
Autism & MTHFR gene variants:
MTHFR, folate, & pregnancy:
1996 CDC document on Vaccine Side Effects and Adverse Reactions:
(There doesn’t appear to be an updated version. All of the sources on the CDC website for vaccines are over a decade old.)
Why are so many people choosing not to vaccinate?