Diabetes is a disease that affects most parts of the patients body. If left uncontrolled, it may attack your eyesight, not allow your wounds to heal and even affect your gums! In extreme situations it might lead to a dental emergency too. Thanks to the advancement in modern dental treatment procedures that it has tools to protect the various parts of your oral health, that may be adversely targeted by your high blood sugar.
Let us quickly have a glimpse of the issues that might occur to your dental health, if you are suffering from Diabetes:
Tooth damage: Higher blood sugar levels result in the faster build up of bacteria in the mouth, as they feed themselves from the sugary foodstuff. This leads to plaque formation in the teeth which eventually leads to gum diseases! The acid that is formed wears away the enamel and hence teeth gets discolored too.
Thrush: This is a fungal infection caused by the yeast, Candida albicans. It is more likely in people with diabetes. Signs of red white patches inside the mouth hint at a thrush.
Dry mouth: Due to certain physiological anomalies, people with Diabetes suffer from the condition of ‘dry mouth’ or Xerostomia. Lack of sufficient saliva (which is known to have antiseptic properties) the teeth becomes susceptible to decay, disease and thrush.
How are the GUMS particularly affected in Diabetes patients?
Diabetes hampers and reduces the patient’s capability to fight bacteria. This leads to the development of bacteria and plaque within the oral cavity. Hard tartar accumulates under the gum line which causes both irritation and swelling. It could culminate to some amount of bleeding also!
The condition described so far is dentally termed as ‘gingivitis’. When gingivitis is neglected and left untreated it develops into serious periodontists this is the advanced form of a gum disease which goes down to affect the soft tissues and the bone mass in your jaws.
Indeed, diabetes is an ailment that lowers the ability of a person to resist infection. Slow healing capabilities makes the problems of gingivitis and periodontists more acute for diabetes sufferers. However, a diabetes patient can only keep his or her blood sugar levels under control. The condition is rarely curable in totality. But there are certain to-dos that a diabetic individual needs to adhere to in order follow a proper oral care
Your diabetic Dental Care Regime
- Control your blood sugar levels with proper diet, insulin intake or whichever way it is possible.
- Brush your teeth with soft-bristled brushes, at least twice daily. Harsh and vigorous scrubbing might irritate the gums.
- While struggling to reach every nook and corner of your dental outlay to do a thorough cleaning, instead of going hard on your toothbrush, use an electric brush – they really work wonders!
- Floss regularly, especially to remove tartar from under the gum line and keep them bacteria-free.
- See your dentist immediately as son as you are diagnosed with diabetes. There are certain oral care measures for such patients about which he might talk to you.
The other way to follow a diabetic dental care
Another solution for damaged teeth is Dental Implants. Completely damaged teeth that cannot be retained back in your mouth can be replaced by Implants. There is an entire generation today still suffering with ill-fitting dentures and decayed missing teeth because of the lack of availability of the Implants technology.
If you are desiring a permanent alternative for addressing poor oral health, you could opt for the Dental Implants in order to avert any dental emergency that might arise.it is only a six to eight weeks’ procedure after which you will once again be able to enjoy hard, crunchy and delicious foods.