FilmQ03_Ch10: The Muslim World- Islamic Civilization Expands
How to Use Video as a Source
Step #1: Familiarize yourself with film questions prior to viewing the film. By reading the questions and understanding the vocabulary contained within, you allow yourself the luxury of viewing the film without having to look at the questions continuously.
Step #2: View and Listen Attentively. Unlike a book, a video provides information via visual images and audio. Both forms of data are ‘more valuable together’ than separately. For example, turn the volume off on your TV during your favorite program. Then, raise the volume while ‘blacking out’ the image. Under which conditions was the data most richly delivered? Always make sure that you have unobstructed viewing of a film and that the sound is audible.
As you view the video, pay attention to visual and/ or audio cues that reflect the issues raised by the questions below. Your responses should refer to video content as well as your current knowledge and understanding of history.
Step #3: Organize Your Thoughts. Unlike a book, the data from a video is often delivered at a constant rate. With a book, you can slow your reading speed when you encounter a particular segment that is complicated. You can also turn back to a previous page to review information. A film is a bit different in that you may not always have the option to use ‘slow motion’ or ‘rewind’. Therefore, maintaining focus on the imagery and sound is important. Targeted Notes will reduce the amount of time you’re looking away from the screen. By writing quick and simple phrases of a few words each, you maintain greater attention to film events.
Targeted notes use key words/ phrases that will ignite a thought or idea when you read them later. There is no concern for grammar or spelling while doing this. After the film has ended, you look at your targeted notes and manipulate the data to compile responses in complete sentences.
Organizational Tip: Vertically divide the sheet of paper where your responses will go. On the ‘left’ half, take targeted notes for each question given. After viewing the video, use the targeted notes to compose complete responses to each question (on the ‘right’ half of the sheet).
When made available, contribute your response, comments, criticism, and questions (in complete sentences) to the class via the Verso application (rather than on paper). The goal is to have everyone contribute at least once in preparing a review sheet of this video. The content you share now will be required on future quizzes and exams.
SOURCE: Millennium Video Series, The 11th Century: Century of the Sword, CNN Productions, Inc. 1999. [~9 Min. total]
Your responses to these film questions will form the foundation of, or supplement, your notes for this lesson. While the focus of the film is the spread of Islamic civilization, don’t ignore the role of commerce/ trade in diffusing cultures and spreading ideas.
Context: Arabian Peninsula, Europe, Africa, & Asia, c. 7th – 11th C.
1. Where did the Islamic faith originate?
2. How would you describe the lifestyle of the peoples that were rapid adopters of Islam?
3. What is a possible explanation for the wide acceptance of commercial activity by Muslims?
4. Why might it be said that Islam was a major catalyst for change in non-Islamic societies?
5. Which city was the ‘jewel’ of 11th Century Islamic civilization?
6. Why are the scholars of the Islamic Iberian peninsula (Fatimid Emirate) a bridge to the classical period of Europe?