Rainbow songs are an essential part of one of my favorite preschool themes: rainbows! Whether you are a studying weather theme, color theme, St. Patrick’s Day theme, or even just having a rainbow theme (we have lots of ideas for that at the very end too), these songs will be sure to make it a great time! And personally, I love to do rainbows and unicorns. Anyone else talk about mythical creatures?
Rainbow songs are a simple and fun way for children to work on the names of colors, and there is so much science to learn about with rainbows too.
Music is one of the most powerful ways that children learn, so we love adding music to our own preschool curriculum. Any time you can make a song about it, children will have increased listening, and music is perfect for all children to learn with.
Need more songs for your day or for a preschool circle time? We have you covered:
Start and End your Day with Music!
Circle Time Songs
Music and Movement Songs
- Pumpkin and Halloween Songs for Kids
- Thanksgiving Songs for Kids
- Christmas Songs for Kids
- Winter Songs for Kids
- ABC and Alphabet Songs
- Days of the Week Songs
- Songs that Teach
- The Ultimate Guide to Preschool Songs
Rainbow Songs for Kids
We’ve looked for the best rainbow songs out there, and these are our top picks for singing or playing rainbow songs for kids!
Color Song for Children by The Learning Station
Our friends at The Learning Station hit another home run with this great color song! Each color is shown on a t-shirt, and kids who are wearing that color are encouraged to do a specific action. The actions rhyme with the color, which brings a super important reading skill to the song. Colors, movement, rhyming, literacy – what more do you need?!
Rainbow by Nancy Kopman
I love this rainbow song so much for introducing some science! It reinforces the names of colors and rainbow color order, but also teaches WHY a rainbow appears! Note that it includes the colors “indigo” and “violet,” giving the chance for a quick vocabulary lesson too.
Somewhere Over the Rainbow by Israel IZ Kamakawiwo’ole
Chances are you’ll know this beautiful Hawaiian version of “Somewhere Over the Rainbow,” but your kids might not! IZ’s smooth voice is accompanied by pictures of real rainbows.
Rainbow by Charlie Hope
This rainbow song is gorgeous and so calming. Use it to practice critical listening skills. It can also be used as a smooth transition to quiet time or a calm activity. After the song ends, ask your little learners about the rainbow in them.
The Rainbow Colors Song by A.J. Jenkins
This rainbow song has a simple, catchy tune, which means that kids will learn it faster and enjoy singing along. It does a good job of putting the colors into rainbow order, so if your kids can remember the song, they’ll remember the order!
Rainbow, Rainbow by The Mother Goose Club
This sweet rainbow song for kids reinforces the colors of the rainbow with a fun backdrop. It’s a very soothing melody, so it can be used as a transition to quiet time or a calm activity, or even as background music during small groups or centers. It also uses the words “indigo” and “violet.”
The World is a Rainbow by Greg and Steve
You might remember this sweet rainbow song from your own childhood! The video is the audio only, so it’s another great tool to practice critical listening. “The world is beautiful when we live in harmony!”
Exercise and Learn the Colors of the Rainbow by Jack Hartmann
One of our favorites, Jack Hartmann, is back with this fun colors song. Each rainbow color is given an accompanying workout movement, and kids can’t help but get up and exercise with him! Brain breaks just like this are powerful tools to use throughout the day – check out our list of more brain break dance songs for kids.
Roy G Biv by They Might Be Giants
They Might Be Giants has an AMAZING rainbow song! It stars an adorable little gnome named Roy G Biv. Even my husband was grooving when I played this one at home!
Rainbow Colors Song by The Singing Walrus
The rainbow colors are presented in a fun rock song! It emphasizes how we see rainbow colors everywhere and then gives some fun examples. Some of the lyrics are sung, but they also encourage kids to chant along to the beat at times. Chanting and singing are actually very different skills, and both are important to early music education!
The Rainbow Song by Signing Time
I love it any time our little learners get a chance to learn some sign language! You might have to watch it a few times before they’ll master them, but this catchy tune will teach the signs for the colors of the rainbow. The signs are first demonstrated by a hearing child and then a deaf child.
What’s your Favorite Color? by Super Simple Learning
What’s YOUR favorite color? Adorable puppets share their favorite colors, and then they all combine at the end to make a rainbow. Your kids will love this bright and happy colors song.
Our friend Angela over at Teaching Mama also has some great color songs to use too!
Do you love rainbows as much as we do? Check out our library of rainbow activities here!