Emotions are the motivating force in our lives. This motivation can be productive, empowering and creative, or it can be addictive, negative and abusive. Whether we are happy or sad, healthy or diseased, liberated or imprisoned in our own mentally created hell, depends upon our ability to manage our emotions. Our emotions are constantly manipulated by advertising and politics, trying to sell us wares and sway our opinion. Rather than providing practical training to control the mind, our culture medicates everyone from preschool children to seniors because they lack the tools to adapt to emotional pressure. Millions are prescribed tranquilizers, antidepressants and other mood-modifying drugs; or they self-medicate with alcohol, “recreational drugs” and countless other addictive substances or activities.
Consider the depression epidemic as one example of emotional imbalance:
o Depressive disorders affect approximately 18.8 million American adults, or about 9.5% of the U.S. population aged 18 years and older in a given year. This includes major depressive disorder, dysthymic disorder [minor depression] and bipolar disorder.
o Preschoolers are the fastest-growing market for antidepressants. Between 1998 and 2002, antidepressant use increased from 1.6% to 2.4%, a 49% increase.
(These and other statistics on depression can be found at www.upliftprogram.com/depression_stats.html#3.)
Alcoholism and other addictive disorders are equally serious problems. Compared with Eastern culture, Western culture is both emotionally immature and unbalanced.
The ancient science of yoga shows the way to reclaim mastery of our emotions. By recognizing painful conditions such as alienation, guilt, self-hatred, addiction and fear, along with the destructive habits associated with these wrong perceptions, and developing new, healthy habits, negative emotions can be gradually thinned out and replaced with positive ones. The practice of yoga promotes “emotional strength” by teaching us to: concentrate and remove distractions from the mind; express compassion by listening and seeing the Divine in all; be a witness of our thoughts; act from awareness, rather than react emotionally; feel contentment and gratitude for gifts in this life; not allow our happiness to depend on external conditions; be nonviolent and control our senses; learn restraint from habits of stealing and greed; and, finally, constantly remember God.
My teacher, Swami Vishnu-devananda, was the founder of the International Sivananda Yoga Vedanta Centers, a master of hatha and raja yoga and a very practical man. He was sent to the West by his guru, Swami Sivananda, in 1957 to teach the mind strengthening tools of yoga. He clearly recognized that with our entire Western technological know-how and industriousness, we have very little understanding or control of our emotions. He stated half-jokingly that his mission in the West was to teach people to “stand on their own heads.”
Hatha and raja yoga are ancient Indian disciplines designed to bring balance and integrity to both body and mind as a basis for higher spiritual realization. Both recognize the same eight steps to gain self-mastery. The first five are external, aimed at controlling the mind and are emphasized in hatha yoga. The three internal practices of concentration (dharana), meditation (dhyana) and superconscious absorption (samadhi) directly focus and quiet the mind. However, to practice true one-pointed concentration (dharana), one must develop extraordinary mental strength. Most people’s minds are too distracted with worries, anxieties, desires, fantasies or just dullness and disassociation to perform one-pointed concentration.
Raja yoga pinpoints the causes of mental distraction and categorizes them into five afflictions (kleshas):
1. Ignorance of the existence of the eternal Self, resulting in alienation from our interconnectedness with God and all creation.
2. Egoism, or the “I-ness” of separation from others and identification with our minds, bodies and all of the accompanying accessories, such as relationships, possessions, jobs, reputations, nationality, religion, ethnicity and anything else considered to be “ours.”
3. Desire and attachment that drives us to possess and consume objects.
4. Hatred and disgust for objects that the ego determines must be avoided or destroyed.
5. Fear of death.
These five kleshas distract us from our true unchanging Self–and from attaining true knowledge and bliss (satchidananda). Removing the kleshas is the key to liberating ourselves from the human condition of mental suffering.
Yoga transforms our klesha habits and quiets the mind. Patanjali, the compiler of the Yoga Sutras, defined yoga as “yogas chittavritti nirodhah,” which means “yoga is the suppression of the modifications of the mind.” These modifications are emotionally charged “whirlpools” of thought that disturb our peace of mind. The kleshas generate the emotional charge behind thought waves. The root klesha is ignorance, which has planted countless seed desires in the subconscious, which in turn generate fear, jealousy, anger, hatred and prejudice, which swirl up as emotions in our consciousness. These emotions sit like land mines waiting to explode into our conscious minds when awakened by their corresponding sense objects that appear in our day-to-day lives.
For example, if we have a desire for French pastry, we may go for weeks without it being dominated by that desire, until we pass a pastry shop and catch a glimpse of an enticing pastry in the window. Then either we rush in and make an impulsive purchase, or we are disturbed for the rest of the day with frustration or even anger at the thought of the tempting pastries. If we actually enjoy the pastry, the impression of attachment to pastries becomes stronger, and we may find that our daily route soon takes us past this pastry shop. If we are not mindful, the pastry attachment can become an addiction. The pastry itself is not bringing us happiness or unhappiness, but the mind, through the delusion of attachment, becomes convinced that happiness lies hidden in the pastry. Patanjali’s general antidote for all of the kleshas is unbroken discrimination. If we are aware, we will recognize when the mind is falling into habits powered by negative attachment and fear and then practice letting go. The whole negative drama is nipped in the bud. To maintain unbroken discrimination requires purity of mind and one-pointed concentration. This is extremely difficult for the untrained mind and must be developed step by step.
Patanjali describes five states of mind: distracted; dull, or asleep; gathering; one-pointed; and waveless. An undisciplined mind flounders between distraction, delusion and gathering. Real concentration is not possible without one-pointedness. The five first steps of Patanjali’s eight-limbed yoga provide a foundation of emotional strength to enable us to become the master of our mind rather than a slave to negative emotions. The scattered and dulled rays of the mind are gathered back into the concentrated, or one-pointed, state.
The higher practices of yoga then refine the concentration into meditation and finally to the highest state, samadhi. Yoga is not just doing attractive postures and feeling more healthy and relaxed; it is a precise formula for transforming our entire lives from ignorance to truth, from darkness to light and from a life of material death to spiritual immortality.
The preparatory five steps are: 1) yama – ethical disciplines including nonviolence, truthfulness, nonstealing, continence and abstinence from greed; 2) niyama – practices to develop internal purity including cleanliness, contentment, austerity, study of scriptures and self-surrender; 3) asana – postures; 4) pranayama – breath control; and 5) pratyahara – abstraction of the senses. These accessories to concentration and meditation give students not only survival techniques for emotional crises but tools to permanently transform negative emotions into their positive potential.
Each of these practices is simple but essential to bringing about physical and emotional health. When we have awareness of where we hold tension in the body and breath, self-regulating those imbalances with hatha yoga is amazing emergency first-aid–but only a first step to reclaiming our emotions. The body is a field of manifestation for our emotional imbalances. The raja yoga psychology goes to the core of our emotional misunderstanding and unravels layers of dysfunctional emotional training. This deeper work demands greater commitment and patience as we face our emotional formations and engage in the step-by-step process of yoga transformation.
I have had the great fortune to work with a master of hatha and raja yoga. I have experienced the empowerment of emotional transformation in my own life as well witnessed hundreds of yoga practitioners overcome huge obstacles to lead strong, healthy, productive lives. It takes will, faith and some basic knowledge of yoga and its psychology, along with regular practice.
Swami Srinivasananda is a senior disciple of Swami Vishnu-devananda and the director of the Sivananda Ashram Yoga Ranch in Woodbourne, New York. He was initiated into the Sannyasa Hindu order in 1979 and is now studying world religions at All-Faiths Seminary International in New York City, with its founder, Rabbi Joseph Gelberman. As a senior teacher, he trains yoga teachers and lectures widely on yoga practice and teachings.