An algorithm, in simple terms, is a set of steps used by a computer program to accomplish a certain task. For IT professionals, the concept of an algorithm isn’t new and you already have a good idea of how they work. But, with computer algorithms becoming more advanced and sophisticated, keeping up with them is a challenge for even the most experienced professionals. Wilfrid Laurier University’s Online Master of Computer Science program, therefore, has launched a course that helps computer professionals learn advanced techniques for designing and analyzing algorithms. The program also enables you to explore the uses of an algorithm in a variety of real-world application areas including search engines, social networks and computer networks. In this article, we examine how algorithms affect these application areas and why staying abreast with advancements is paramount for IT professionals who want to grow in this career field.
Google Search Engine Algorithms Explained
Google Search Engine Algorithms are the most advanced and intelligent algorithms whose functions are to retrieve data and deliver search results that are relevant to the user’s query. When a user enters a keyword in the Google’s ‘Search’ box, the algorithms deliver results in an organized manner on the SERPs (Search Engine Results Pages), based on relevance. Google updates its search algorithms several times a year, introducing a few minor as well as notable changes that impact search result rankings, website traffic, and SEO. Algorithms such as “Panda” assist Google in analyzing content based on specific characteristics and “Penguin” assists Google in checking URLs and addressing spam. There are organizing and task-specific algorithms as well with their own specific roles.
Now that you have a basic idea of Google Search Engine Algorithms, you might be looking to master the skills of analyzing and developing search algorithms of your own. The Practical Algorithm Design course offered by Wilfrid Laurier University’s Online Master of Computer Science program prepares students in various techniques of search algorithm design. From exploring the fundamentals to taking a deep dive into real-world applications, this comprehensive program has been designed to make IT professionals more aware of Google’s algorithmic approach.
Social Media Algorithm Explained
Social media algorithms help social media platforms rank, filter and organize the content users see based on a specific set of criteria. Just like Google Search Engine Algorithms, social media algorithms are also complex and ever-changing. Having knowledge in these can help you navigate and understand the world of social media in a better way.
For example, the Instagram algorithm prioritizes quality and relevancy to display the best content to users. And, you already know how hashtag algorithm is taking the marketing landscape by storm. Especially when it comes to Facebook and Instagram, using hashtags is the best way to find the most relevant content or reach out to particular brands.
Considering the popularity of social media, it would not be inaccurate to say that having proficiency in social media algorithm design is one of the next biggest opportunities for IT professionals. Since these algorithms are managed by dedicated teams of software engineers and other IT professionals, you can also be a part of such a team by enrolling in the Practical Algorithm Design course as part of the online Master of Computer Science degree program offered by Wilfrid Laurier University.
Computer Network Algorithms Explained
Optimizing computer networks require an advanced knowledge of computer network algorithms. These algorithms solve network problems. For example, a routing algorithm is a set of step-by-step operations used to efficiently route Internet traffic. When a data packet leaves its source, there are several different paths it can take to reach its intended destination. The routing algorithm determines the best path to take.
Computer network algorithms can also be designed to identify bottleneck edges in a distributed network and find better connectivity points. There are also network security algorithms that can detect intrusion and secure networks. Since network security and reliability has become a top concern for many organizations, there is a huge demand for networking professionals in the industry.
By enrolling in Wilfrid Laurier University’s practical algorithm design program, you will be able to learn the advanced real-world skills you need to excel in algorithm design. The University is known for offering world-class graduate education in an effective online learning environment.
Are you interested in how to improve network security? Check out How Can You Improve Network Security and Software Reliability?