- Andrew Jackson
Andrew Jackson was the seventh president of the United States. He ruled between 1829 and 1837. Through his rule and modern beliefs, he formed a basis for the modern Democratic Party. He was known for his stand for democracy and liberation of the American citizens. However, this legacy seemed to be mixed due to his support for slavery of the removal of Indians. During his reign, he managed to decrease the federal debt to around $33million, the lowest since 1791. He is also remembered for the introduction of the rotation of office theory. This was so as to reduce corruption bureaucracy. However, of all the things that he did during his rule, the most controversial was the support for Indian removal.
Martin Van Buren
Martin Van Buren was the eighth president of the united state. He served between 1837 and 1841. He served as president for only one term. He is remembered for his role in the development of modern political organization. However, during his reign as president, he was faced with lots of economical challenges. His stand on slavery abolition was well known as he announced and made known his stand during his inauguration ceremony as president.
William Henry Harrison
William Henry Harrison was the ninth president of the united state. He served as the president between 1841 and 1884. He used to be an American soldier and was the first president who died in the office of the presidency. He is among the presidents who served for the shortest time since he only served for thirty two days. Although it was proven that he died of cold, this brought up many political crisis on the questions about his succession in the election. Some believed that his death was caused or even influenced by his political opponent who lost during succession as the president. William died penniless and did not even get the chance to elected judges. His ambition to serve the people of the United States was disrupted by his sudden death and left his son and wife financially unstable. During his campaigns, Harrison promised the American people of the changes he was planning to implement in America, but unfortunately he did not get the chance to serve the people.
John Tyler was the tenth president of the UnitedState. He served as president since 1841 to 1845. He became the president following the death of his predecessor. He is mostly remembered for the annexation of the Republic of Texas 1845. However, it was noted that he was not in good terms with members of his party, Whig Party. He was denounced by the Whig Party and when he sought re-election, he did this on a different party ticket. He is not only thought to have made the presidency stronger, but also led to the civil war.
James K. Polk
James Knox Polk was the eleventh president of the United States. He ruled as the president from 1845 to 1848. He is known for his success in regards to foreign policies. When Mexico rejected America’s annexation of Texas, he led America successfully into the Mexican American war. He also implemented the Walker tariff and a treasury system that was implemented until 1913. He also remembered for issuing the very first postage stamps in the United States. He had promised to only run for one term in office and he did exactly that.
Zachary Taylor was the twelfth president of the United States. He became president in 1848. He was elected on a Whig party ticket and was the last president to have slaves being held while in office. His controversial support for slavery angered many citizens. He died while in office.
Millard Fillmore was the 13th president of the United States. He reigned between 1850 and 1853. He assumed presidency after the death of his predecessor. He was against the abolition of slavery and enhanced foreign policy. This was seen through his advocacy for trade with Japan.
Franklin Pierce was the fourteenth president of the United States. He served between 1853 and 1857.
James Buchanan was the fifteenth president of United States and served between 1857 and 1861. He emphasized through violence and politically between the abolitionist and the proslavery factions of settlers.
He was the sixteenth president of the United States and served from 1861 to 1865. He outspoken the opponent of the expansion of slavery in the US. He also came under attack in all sides since he was a leader of moderate faction of the republic.
War between Mexican and American
The war was due to conflicts between the Mexican and the Americans; in 1846 to 1848. The US claimed the annexation of Texas while Mexico considered it as part of their territory. James k Polk set a goal on the expansion of the territorial of the united state to the pacific coast, however, the united state were the powerful, hence they were not defeated in their war (Feldman, 2004).
American civil war
This war occurred between the states of the American. It was a civil war in the US. It occurred between, 1861 to 1865. Secession was declared to the eleven southern slave states from the united state to form the confederate states of America and which was led by Jefferson Davis.