The collection is a compilation of gifts from numerous donors, of documents relating to Judaism in numerous countries and the United States. Documents include betrothal contracts, bills of divorcement, eulogies, memorial plaques, candle labels, Jewish calendars, sukkah decorations, certificates of ritual slaughter, prayers, poems, sermons, and other types of documents.
Collection is unarranged.
The Judaica Collection at the Smithsonian is the oldest of its type in the United States. The archival collection is comprised of various documents, prints, sukkah decorations, marriage contracts, and memorial candle labels from Europe and the Middle East. The bulk of the collection was transferred in the 1960's to the National Museum of History and Technology (later, the National Museum of American History). A portion of the collection (artifact-related) still resides in the National Museum of Natural History. For a detailed description of items found in the collection see Cohen Grossman, Grace and Richard Ahlborn. "Judaica at the Smithsonian: Cultural Politics as Cultural Model." Smithsonian Studies in History and Technology, Number 52, 1997.
The first Judaica collections were acquired by the Smithsonian specifically for the World's Columbian Exposition in 1890. The next large Judaica collection was acquired in 1902 with the purchase of a torah case and Sukkah ornaments from Ephraim Deinard, bibliophile, Hebrew author and independent book dealer. A native of Latvia, Deinard immigrated to the United States in 1888. By 1913, Deinard had amassed a large collection of Judaica from Europe and the Middle East. He eventually deposited, between 1920 and 1927, almost 600 objects to the Smithsonian. The collection remained on loan until 1955 when Deinard's heirs donated the collection.
It was 10 years later with the opening of the National Museum of History and Technology (National Museum of American History), that there was a renewed interest in collecting Judaica objects. A small number of Judaica objects have been acquired since then. The archival collection is housed at the Archives Center, National Museum of American History.
Cohen Grossman, Grace and Richard Ahlborn. "Judaica at the Smithsonian: Cultural Politics as Cultural Model." Smithsonian Studies in History and Technology, Number 52, 1997.
This collection has related artifacts in the Division of Home and Community Life.
The collection was donated by the following donors:
J.H. Kantrowitz.,Purchase,1889; Mrs. S. Sulzberger, Gift; Leopold Luchs, Gift; Dr. Cyrus Adler ,Gift; Mayer Sulzberger, Purchase; Rev. Henry Cohen, Gift.,1897; William Wesley and Son, Purchase; Father S. Krauss, Gift.,1902; S.S. Howland, Bequest.,1902; Ephraim Deinard, Purchase.,1902; Mrs. Simon Kann,Gift.,1920;
Henry S. Hartogensis,Gift,1920; Ms. L. Lieberman,Gift,1924; Ephraim Deinard,Gift; Cara Goldberg Marks, Michael Neil Marks.,Gift; Michael Harris, Gift, 1982; Richard E. Ahlborn,Gift, 1986; Sylvia E. Lipkowitz, Gift, 1987; and
Neeman, Zipora,Gift, 1988.
Collection is open for research.
Collection items available for reproduction, but the Archives Center makes no guarantees concerning copyright restrictions. Other intellectual property rights may apply. Archives Center cost-recovery and use fees may apply when requesting reproductions.
2.93 cu. ft. (2 record storage boxes) (1 document box) (1 12x17 box) (1 oversize folder)
This finding aid was digitized with funds generously provided by the Smithsonian Institution Women's Committee.
These papers consist of correspondence with members of the United States Coast Survey chiefly concerning tide gauges; descriptions and drawings of working parts of
clocks and tide gauges; mathematical equations and tables; records of data connected with Coast Survey work; office notes and vouchers; drafts for articles written and collected
by Avery; USCS mathematical and scientific publications; and Avery's phonetic alphabet primers. Also included is correspondence concerning a proposal to print Avery's primers
in Great Britain and an obituary of Avery.
Notations within the papers are frequently done in stenography. Knowledge of stenography will be helpful in understanding this material. Correspondents include: Robert
Stanton Avery, Alexander Dallas Bache, John Batchelder, Thomas Craig, Julius Erasmus Hilgard, Samuel P. Langley, Macmillan & Co., Levi W. Meech, Benjamin Peirce, Charles
Anthony Schott, William Wesley and Son, and B. Westermann & Co.
Robert Stanton Avery (1808-1894) graduated from Harvard Divinity School in 1846, but soon turned his attention to mathematics and its application to the physical sciences.
Avery taught school in the South, and in 1853 joined the United States Coast Survey (USCS) where he became chief of the Tidal Division. His duties included receiving observer
reports taken from tide gauges established on the coasts of the United States and computing tide estimates based on the data received. When Avery retired from the USCS in
1885, he devoted his remaining years to the development of the techniques of phonetic spelling.
The Carnegie Institute Museum of Art records are owned by the Archives of American Art, Smithsonian Institution. Literary rights as possessed by the donor have been dedicated to public use for research, study, and scholarship. The collection is subject to all copyright laws.
Carnegie Institute, Museum of Art records, 1883-1962, bulk 1885-1940. Archives of American Art, Smithsonian Institution.
Funding for the processing of this collection was provided by the Brown Foundation. Funding for the digitization of this collection was provided by the Terra Foundation for American Art.