Everyone is looking to burn fat faster to achieve their goal weight. An effective way to burn more fat than the usual amount from your exercise routine is to begin incorporating intervals. Interval training was once exclusively used to train professional athlete but is now used for general fitness. Implementing intervals into your daily exercise routine could help you reach your weight goal faster.
The term, “burning fat,” is misleading because the underlying reason for losing fatty tissue is creating a calorie deficiency. To lose fat, you need to burn more calories than you consume. Reducing your daily caloric intake and increasing your physical activity will help you burn more calories and in turn reduce your overall body fat. The average pound of fat is equal to about 3,500 calories, which means you will need to burn 500 calories more daily to lose 1 pound of fat weekly.
Interval training is the basic principle of adding bursts of intense activity to the activity you’re currently doing. For example, if you’re briskly walking for exercise you may increase your speed to a job for 30 seconds to a minute and then resume walking again. If you’re running at 6 mph, every five minutes you may sprint for 20 seconds and resume running at 6 mph. Interval training can reduce muscle soreness because the constant increase of activity helps reduce buildup of chemicals in your muscles that cause soreness, according to MayoClinic.com.
By incorporating intervals in your normal exercise routine, you will increase the calories burned, which causes you to lose fat faster. Just a few minutes of increased activity can burn significantly more calories. Intervals will also help add diversity to your normal routine, keeping things new and original. Interval training will also help improve your cardiovascular system, which means you’ll be able to exercise longer without overworking your body.
Interval training should be implemented with caution. If you have a health condition or if you’ve been living a sedentary lifestyle, consult your doctor before implementing this type of training into your lifestyle. Stretching is essential before interval training because the sudden increased activity could cause harm to your tendons or muscles. Begin implementing interval training with caution, and slowly increase the amount of intervals you do on a weekly basis.
Combine interval training with a calorie-restricted diet to burn the most fat. The MOVE! weight-loss program recommends that people less than 200 pounds consume around 1,500 calories and people more than 200 pounds eat up to 2,500 calories. Reducing your calorie intake and increasing your physical activity is the most effective way to lose fat.
- Jupiterimages/Brand X Pictures/Getty Images