Spring Term Information
Welcome back Hawthorn Class! I hope you have had a lovely Christmas break and that you are ready to begin the new term with lots of exciting learning opportunities.
In English this term we will be exploring the book, The Promise by Nicola Davies and focusing on creating a third person character description and a Newspaper report based on a significant event from the book. Our fiction will focus on an adventure story, with our class novel being, ‘Who Let the Gods Out’. This marvellous book is packed full of action and mystery and is tied together with a wonderfully witty humour that the children will love!
Our Maths skills will develop through focusing on our knowledge of statistics, developing our understanding of reading and interpreting data. Following this, we will be looking at fractions and decimals. In order to support them with the knowledge needed for the Year 5 curriculum it will help if they are confident in their times tables (up to 12 x 12).
Science this term will focus on properties and changes of materials. This will include; comparing and grouping together everyday materials on the basis of their properties, describing the changes that happen when materials are dissolved in liquid into to form a solution and how to recover these substances. They will use knowledge of solids, liquids and gasses to decide how mixtures might be separated, including through filtering, sieving and evaporating. They will have the opportunity to conduct experiments and comparative fair tests, to demonstrate and give reason for the particular uses of everyday materials, including metals, wood and plastic.
Our topic this term is ‘Cheshire & a Contrasting European Region: Auvergne-Rhone-Alpes’, through this we will discover all about our local area, Winsford, and how this compares to an Alpine region in France. We will develop our navigation skills, using the eight compass points and 6 figure grid references to locate both regions on maps. We will also explore the similarities and differences between the human and physical geographies of both areas, including; land use, tourism, forestry, mountains and rivers.
PE will be on Tuesdays and Fridays. Children will be expected to be in the correct PE kit for this. It is best if your child brings in their kit on a Monday and then takes it home on a Friday to wash.
During this term, Hawthorn Class will be participating in Swimming lessons at the Winsford Lifestyle Centre. This will take place every Thursday afternoon, and it is important that all children have their swimming kit (including a towel) with them on this day.
Homework (Maths, English and Spellings), will be set every Monday and is due back by Friday. There will be a weekly homework club every Monday to support children with this. As part of the children’s weekly homework it is essential that children regularly spend time reading and practicing their times tables (1-12) at home. Please ensure your child reads regularly at home, writing in their reading record when they do so.
This year, Hawthorn class have an exciting opportunity to participate in Brass lessons. This will continue to take place every Friday afternoon; children have been provided with their own instruments and must continue to bring them in every Friday for use in their weekly lessons.
Please do not hesitate to come and speak to us if you need any more information or have any questions.
Miss Hickman & Mrs Nash