All minerals in the body are considered essential in maintaining our health in optimum level. However, deficiencies and abnormalities in the amount of level of these vital components are things that we cannot easily avoid to happen. Although it is possible for us to avoid this from happening, mineral imbalances in the body are still common to occur. This is quite risky since deficiencies can actually cause serious complications in our health, which can lead to unfortunate outcomes. One of the most important minerals in our system is none other than iron. We all know that iron is a very useful substance since it aids in the distribution of oxygen to the different tissues in the body. But what happens when our iron level suddenly becomes less than the normal or expected amount in the body? For us to understand this better; here are some facts about the lack of iron symptoms.
Iron deficiency or abnormally low iron count in the body is actually recognized as the leading nutrient deficiency in the whole world. This type of condition is medically termed as iron deficiency anemia, wherein there is a significant decrease in the level of iron in the blood. Menstruating women, growing children and pregnant mothers are the ones that are highly susceptible to having this kind deficiency. Other causes of iron imbalance in the body include poor nutritional diet, malabsorption disorders and chronic blood loss. So what are the different symptoms of iron deficiency in the body?
One of the major roles of iron is to help distribute oxygen to the different tissues of the body. Oxygen acts as the cells fuel in order to function properly and effectively. Without oxygen, cells will eventually die. As a result of this, patients with low iron levels are considered to have low stamina and are easily tired and hit with fatigue. Anemic individuals are also prone to having SOB or shortness of breath even in just doing mild activities or exercises such as walking. Iron depletion can also cause pallor or paleness in the skin color. Aside from this, nail disorders are also very possible to happen such as nail thinning, brittleness, ridges and even discoloration. In addition to nails, hair can also become brittle and easily damaged.
Children with this kind of problem are also prone to having appetite changes and decrease in interest with food. Craving for usual stiffs like ice, plain starch or clay is also an evidence of iron deficiency. This is otherwise known as pica. Others may also experience having headaches particularly in the frontal portion of the head. Painful atrophy of the tongue may also become evident which exhibits redness, soreness and the production of white coverings. Aside from these, weakened immune system is also possible to happen, which increases the risk for infections and contaminations. Menstrual cramps in women can also lead to this type of problem. In addition to these, the heart may also work twice as hard in order to increase its pumping rate as compensation to reduced oxygen level in the blood. Hypotension, cold hands and legs, dizziness, irritability, lightheadedness and sleep problems are also some of the common symptoms of iron deficiency.