By the God of your father who will help you, and by the Almighty who will bless you with blessings of heaven above, blessings of the deep that lies beneath, blessings of the breasts and of the womb.
Today is the American Thanksgiving Day.
It is a good day to read this scripture and consider that God is the source of the blessings the United States of America has been given. As our article on the United States in prophecy explains, America is the recipient of the promises of national greatness that were originally given to Abraham and later bestowed on the two sons of Joseph (Genesis 48:13-20).
Today’s scripture reveals three specific aspects of the physical blessings given to the descendants of Joseph:
- Blessings of rainfall providing fruitful crops.
- Blessings of natural resources that come from the earth.
- Blessings of fertility.
These physical blessings have been major factors in America’s growth and position as the world’s superpower and bastion of freedom.
Though national sins threaten the continuance of those blessings, it remains vitally important for Americans to recognize and thank God for those blessings! This scripture shows that the great God is the source of America’s blessings, and that He is the One who deserves the thanks and praise.
Consider the history of today’s observance. Thanksgiving was proclaimed a national observance in 1863 by U.S. President Abraham Lincoln. Here is an excerpt from Lincoln’s Thanksgiving Day proclamation (penned by Secretary of State William Seward):
“No human counsel hath devised, nor hath any mortal hand worked out these great things. They are the gracious gifts of the Most High God, who, while dealing with us in anger for our sins, hath nevertheless remembered mercy.
“It has seemed to me fit and proper that they should be solemnly, reverently and gratefully acknowledged, as with one heart and voice, by the whole American people. I do, therefore, invite my fellow-citizens in every part of the United States, and also those who are at sea, and those who are sojourning in foreign lands, to set apart and observe the last Thursday of November next, as a day of thanksgiving and prayer to our beneficent Father, who dwelleth in the heavens.”
This year marks the 150th year since Thanksgiving was proclaimed an American observance by President Lincoln. Now 150 years later, do Americans still truly recognize God as the source of their blessings?
For further thoughts on this day, view our video commentary “Thanksgiving Day: Have We Forgotten?”
Tomorrow on the Daily Bible Verse Blog: “Give Thanks Always.”