Many of us had parents who nagged us about turning the lights off after we left a room. Some of us continue that tradition with our own kids, following behind them and flipping off switches as they go. Reducing your electricity use is as good for the environment as it is for your monthly energy bill, and you don’t have to act like the “light police” to do it.
There are a few ways that you can be more energy efficient when it comes to lighting, including installing skylights, placing lights strategically, and switching to LEDs, or Light Emitting Diodes.
Skylights are a nice way to bring in natural light, giving you a reduced need for electric bulbs. The biggest downside to skylights is that you can’t direct the light, and it only lets light in when the sun is shining through. It can also be pretty expensive to install a skylight if you don’t already have one.
Many people will also choose to strategically place their fixtures, which can also be costly if you need to remodel in order to do this. Strategically placing lights is relatively simple, though. All you need to do is place fixtures where the light will spread for maximum effect, with the result that you need fewer individual lights. A lot of people will choose strategic lighting if they want to showcase certain items in their home or business as well.
LED lights are your best option when it comes to simple, eco-friendly illumination in your home or business. They can cost you more upfront, but you’ll save money in the long run. If you’ve been considering the switch but are unsure where to start, we are here to help you. There are many benefits to using LEDs and very few downsides.
Why Become Energy Efficient?
- You’ll save money on your energy bill by replacing incandescent bulbs. You can typically save up to 80% on your energy bill when you switch.
- It is more environmentally friendly and eco-conscious to make the switch. We all need to do our part to take care of our environment.
- You can sell electricity back to the grid, giving you a little more income. There are many subsidies that will pay you back for the amount of energy you have saved.
- You can improve your environment. Traditional bulbs may contain halogen and mercury, both of which are harmful when it is released into the air.
No one likes to constantly have to change their light bulbs. Did you know that most LED lights can last up to 10 years? They have such a long life that you can save money by not needing to replace your light bulbs every few months.
Since most LED lights operate on significantly less energy than traditional light bulbs, they are much cooler and don’t overheat your living space. They also offer better illumination, which can be comforting in many home settings and commercial building as well. It can also increase employee productivity if you use them in your business.
LED lights are very easy to install, and since they need fewer replacements, you hardly ever have to maintain them. Installing LED lights is the same as installing a traditional light bulb. They will fit in the fixture that you already have installed. However, if you require assistance, we are here to help you every step of the way.
Because most LED lights use a fraction of the energy of incandescent bulbs, you can see some significant savings on your energy bill each month. LED lights will cost you more upfront, but that cost is more than worth it. Think of the cost as an investment into saving money, energy, and the environment.
If you have ever looked at LED lights and thought they were too expensive, you’ll need to consider a few things. First, you’ll save money each month on your energy bill. Most people will see their initial cost recouped within a few months, just through the savings on their bill.
Second, you won’t need to change your bulb as often. Most light bulbs need to be replaced every six months or so, depending on frequency of use. LED bulbs last up to 10 years, also depending on use, which means one LED light could last you as long as 20 traditional bulbs.
Also, you can get lighting rebates for switching to LEDs. If you are planning on switching your commercial property to LED lighting, these rebates can cover your costs completely. This means that there is no actual upfront cost to you.
When traditional bulbs start to lose their energy, they start to emit less light and become dim. This can cause significantly reduced illumination, but it allows you to know they need to be replaced. LED lights stay bright and sharp throughout their lifespan.
LED lights contain no mercury, which is great for your home, business, and the environment. When a traditional bulb breaks, most people worry about the mercury being released. Also, mercury isn’t good for landfills.
If you’ve ever dropped a light bulb, you know that they are pretty fragile. LED lights are more durable and tougher to break. You can bump into them, or they can be vibrated and withstand the force.
Subsidies for Upgrading to LED
There are a lot of subsidies that allow you to upgrade to LED lighting for little or no cost upfront. These subsidies help people switch their homes and businesses to more energy efficient lighting, and they allow us to make it more affordable for you.
Talk to us today about which subsidy is the best option for you! Some subsidies may only be available in certain areas while others are available nationwide. We can help you determine which subsidy will save you the most money and serve as the best option for you in the long run.
Energy Savings Scheme (ESS)
The Energy Savings Scheme allows us to take a significant percentage off the cost of installation and energy efficient products. Since this began in 2009, it has saved people almost $3 million just on their energy bills.
Emissions Reduction Fund (ERF)
If you know about the Direct Action Plan, you might know about this subsidy already. The government wants people to cut back on their emissions and help our environment. With this fund, you’ll actually be paid back each year for the amount you have saved in energy.
We’ll install LED lighting in your business and keep track of the amount of energy you use. After a year, you will be reimbursed for the amount of Australian Carbon Credit Units (ACCUs) that were offset by your account.
Victorian Energy Upgrades (VEU)
Victorian Energy Upgrades used to be called the VEET scheme, and only some business have been able to use the VEU subsidy program. We are able to buy Victorian Energy Efficiency Certificates because our products help reduce energy use.
Buying these VEECs allows us to offer a massive discount on your cost of upgrading. If you’ve been considering an upgrade for your business or home, now is the time.
Retailer Energy Efficiency Scheme (REES)
The Retailer Energy Efficiency Scheme is only available to home and business owners in Southern Australia. This works by giving us a certain target to meet per business or home.
We are allowed to use this subsidy if we can save you 900 gigajoules of energy. This cost will be taken off of your upfront price as an immediate discount. Call us today to discuss this subsidy.
What You Should Know About LEDs?
LED are normally the most efficient option for your home and even some businesses. They are a better option than halogen downlights, and they can save you money as well.
LEDs last longer than a halogen bulb, typically 5 times longer but sometimes up to 10 times longer. They do cost more upfront in most cases, but you will save more in the long run, so the upfront cost won’t seem that bad.
Light Emitting Diodes normally have a lifetime span of 15,000 to 50,000 hours, which means fewer replacements. They are also between four and seven times more efficient than incandescent and halogen lighting.
However you want to choose a reputable company to buy your LED lights from. Some packaging can be misleading, and you don’t want to buy poor quality lighting. Poor quality LEDs will become dim, they may flicker, they might not be bright enough for you, or they can be less energy efficient than they claim.
Contact Us Today
Whether you are looking for LED lights for home or business use, we can help you. Contact us today to schedule an estimate and evaluation. We will help you determine what your best option is and choose the right subsidy for you.
Many homes and businesses are switching to more energy efficient LED lighting solutions, so what are you waiting for? We can help you save money, energy, and the environment. We are dedicated to bringing you the highest quality products and customer service. Now is the time to make the switch, so give us a call.