Information and discussion on all aspects of British photographic history
Time: June 17, 2011 to October 16, 2011
Location: Australian National Maritime Museum
Street: 2 Murray Street, Darling Harbour
City/Town: Sydney NSW 2000, Australia
Website or Map: http://www.anmm.gov.au
Event Type: exhibition
Organized By: Australian National Maritime Museum
Latest Activity: Jun 12, 2011
When Captain Robert Falcon Scott set off on his second voyage to explore Antarctica - the British Antarctic Expedition 1910 - he could not have predicted it would be his last. He died on the return journey from the South Pole two years later. Public perceptions of Scott have varied greatly over the years, from hero to the flawed leader, and discussions of what really happened still captivate people.
To commemorate the centenary of the expedition and celebrate its achievements the Natural History Museum, London, the Canterbury Museum, Christchurch, New Zealand and the Antarctic Heritage Trust, New Zealand, have collaborated to create an international travelling exhibition. The premier venue for this unique exhibition is the Australian National Maritime Museum, Sydney, New South Wales.
Powerful stories will be revealed of human endeavour and struggles for survival, from the journey to the South Pole, to the death of the Polar Party and scientific discoveries made on the expedition. At the centre of the exhibition will be a stylised representation of Scott's expedition hut at Cape Evans that gives a real sense of the everyday realities and work of Scott's expedition team. Original artefacts, the equipment, clothes, and personal effects, and rare scientific specimens will be displayed for the first time in Australia. This groundbreaking exhibition goes beyond the familiar tales of the journey to the South Pole and its tragic end, to explore the expedition from every angle and celebrate its achievements.
Photo: Scott and the Polar Party at the South Pole. Licensed with permission of the Scott Polar Research Institute, University of Cambridge
Add a Comment