In less than two weeks, kids will be hitting their neighborhood in costume to obtain a horde of candy. While we love the Halloween holiday as much as everyone else, we also know that consuming too much candy means a greater risk of toothaches and tooth decay. However, your Newhall, CA, dentist has a few tips for safeguarding little smiles!
Cavity Risks for Children
How does a cavity develop in a child’s smile? Well, when kids consume lots of sugary treats, especially the sticky and chewy ones, bits of them remain stuck on or between the teeth. Bacteria will begin breaking down these particles, coating the teeth in a sticky layer of plaque in the process. Eventually, the plaque will begin to weaken and erode the protective layer of outer enamel, exposing the sensitive inner portions of dentin to harmful bacteria. Cavities then form, which grow in severity unless treated. Children may report aching or sensitive teeth, and an infection could develop unless a filling is placed.
Protecting Little Smiles
To limit the risk of painful dental cavities, be sure your kids are brushing their teeth when they wake up and again before going to bed, for two minutes each session. Flossing before bed is also vital for safeguarding oral health. When they do enjoy their candies, encourage them to do so following dinner and to drink water afterward, which helps cleanse the mouth and also means brushing and flossing will be occurring soon. You can also offer your kids the chance to exchange their excess candy for a small toy or video game. Seeing us every six months also means we can monitor the smile for signs of developing cavities, treating them before they cause discomfort, and cleaning the smile to remove all plaque buildup!
Handing Out Candy Alternatives
You can also do your part to help safeguard smiles in your neighborhood. For example, what if instead of candy, you gave out temporary tattoos, stickers, or small Halloween-themed party favors? They often cost as much, if not less, than sweets, and don’t put smiles at risk. You can also hand out sealed packages of nuts, trail mix, or crackers. Protecting smiles doesn’t mean taking fun out of the holiday, it just means being a bit more creative. If you have any questions about protecting oral health and keeping your kids free of tooth decay, then contact our team to schedule a consultation.
Do You Have Questions About Children’s Dentistry?
Our team can help you and your children keep smiles healthy and free of cavities and infection. To learn more about how we restore smiles of all ages, then please schedule a consultation by calling Newhall Dental Arts in Newhall, CA, today at (661) 259-7760.