On September 19, 1946, Winston Churchill gave a speech
in Zurich, Switzerland, in which he called for the governments of the countries of Europe to unite into a United States of
Europe. What got started then, half a century ago, is now threatening the present and future freedom of the United States
of America. Things started moving very swiftly back then. On December 17 of that same year, a group of people calling themselves
the European Federalist Union met in Paris.
May 14, 1947, a movement was formed called the United Europe
Movement. Their goal was to turn each independent sovereign country of Europe into a State in a single country called the
United States of Europe. Several meetings were held each year in different cities by different groups supporting the movement.
On March 17, 1948, Belgium, France, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, and the United Kingdom signed an agreement called the Brussels
Treaty. May 17 of that year, 800 delegates formed the International Co-Ordination of Movement for Unification of Europe, and
met in the Hague. They were charged with preparing a plan that would eventually bring about the complete economic and political
integration of Europe.
May 9, 1951, a plan was adopted which took all the separate
coal and steel companies of Western Europe and integrated them into one economic giant. This began the economic amalgamation.
Over the next years, more meetings were held, more treaties
A European Court of Justice was formed. A two chamber parliament,
called the European Executive Council, was formed.
December 1955 the European Union flag was adopted. A blue field
with gold stars. German, French, Italian, and Dutch, were named the official languages of the EU.
And in February 2002 all historical forms of money were done
away with. No more drachmas or liras. Now Europe was one country, with one currency, called the Euro.
It took just about a half a century to wipe out the structure
of European government as it had been for hundreds of years.
The men in high places who had finished their work in Europe,
now turned their attention to America.
And without so much as asking We The People if we want to see
our American Country given away, our freedoms and our sovereignty trashed, they are proceding on a road to do just that.
The road to do what? To do in America what they have done in
Europe. Take Mexico, Canada, and the United States, and merge them into one single government, with one single set of laws
and one single currency. And none of the Constitutional freedoms that we built this country upon.
This is such a complicated subject, and such a surprising subject,
that I am going to rely on the written words of other people, who have put the case much more plainly than I can. I am first
going to quote from an article by Congressman Ron Paul, titled A North American
"August 28, 2006
Globalists and one-world promoters never seem to tire of coming
up with ways to undermine the sovereignty of the United States. The most recent attempt comes in the form of the misnamed
"Security and Prosperity Partnership Of North America (SPP)." In reality, this new "partnership" will likely make us far less
secure and certainly less prosperous.
According to the US government website dedicated to the project,
the SPP is neither a treaty nor a formal agreement. Rather, it is a "dialogue" launched by the heads of state of Canada, Mexico,
and the United States at a summit in Waco, Texas in March, 2005.
What is a "dialogue"? We don't know. What we do know, however,
is that Congressional oversight of what might be one of the most significant developments in recent history is non-existent.
Congress has had no role at all in a "dialogue" that many see as a plan for a North American union."
In the mind of the American public, the name most associated
with a one world government and all of its ramifications, is that of David Rockefeller. He founded the Trilateral Commission,
and in June, 1991, he addressed their gathering. This is an excerpt of his statements:
"We are grateful to the Washington Post, The New York Times,
Magazine and other great publications whose directors have attended
our meetings and respected their promises of discretion
for almost forty years.
It would have been impossible for us to develop our plan for the world if we
had been subjected
to the lights of publicity during those years.
But, the world is now more sophisticated and prepared to march towards a
world government. The supranational sovereignty of an intellectual elite and world bankers is surely preferable to the national
auto-determination practiced in past centuries."
In this one paragraph he reveals that for almost a half a century,
the news reporting agencies in our country have censored themselves. They agreed to not report on the plans and operations
of these elite world planners who are determined to destroy the American government and replace it with their own idea of
worldwide Utopia. In his statement, Mr. Rockefeller implies quite correctly, that if the people knew what they were doing,
they would never have been allowed to get away with it.
While we have been arguing about other things, both important
and trivial, great wheels of political maneuvering have been turning over and over, rolling on to their stated destination.
And most people have been totally unaware. Those few people who have been aware of where things were headed, have been patted
on the head and told that we were listening to the world through tin-foil lined hats. But take a close look. That which, decades
ago, they said they were going to do, they are now doing.
What they are now doing is an outrageous giveaway of the United
States, intolerable, even in peacetime. But at the present time, when we are at war with global Islamic terrorism,international
drug smugglers, and unlawful migration on our southern border, it is an insane madness beyond the ability of human words to
describe. But, they are even now going ahead with it. They announced it once, so they can claim that they fulfilled their
duty. But they are not asking our permission. Listen to these words. These quotes are taken directly from the Office of the
Press Secretary, March 23, 2005
"For Immediate Release
Office of the Press Secretary
March 23, 2005
Joint Statement by President Bush, President Fox, and Prime
Security and Prosperity Partnership of North America
We, the elected leaders of Canada, Mexico, and the United States,
gather in Texas to announce the establishment of the Security and Prosperity Partnership of North America.
Over the past decade, our three nations have taken important
steps to expand economic opportunity for our people and to create the most vibrant and dynamic trade relationship in the world.
Since September 11, 2001, we have also taken significant new steps to address the threat of terrorism and to enhance the security
of our people.
But more needs to be done. In a rapidly changing world, we
must develop new avenues of cooperation that will make our open societies safer and more secure, our businesses more competitive,
and our economies more resilient.
I am still quoting from the WH press release
Our Partnership will accomplish these objectives through a
trilateral effort to increase the security, prosperity, and quality of life of our citizens. This work will be based on the
principle that our security and prosperity are mutually dependent and complementary,"unquote
Who ever said that our security and freedom is dependent on
the security and freedom of Mexico?
"/-----------The statement goes on for many paragraphs, and
describes in detail what the plans are. /
quote "/we will establish a common approach to security to
protect North America from external threats-""
do you understand that that statement holds in it the idea
of United States soldiers being called to defend Mexico?"
-----resuming quote" (we will)consolidate our action into a
North American framework to confront security and economic challenges". Do you understand that within that statement is the
power to regulate our monetary processes depending on what Mexico and Canada want?
We will establish a common approach to security to protect
North America from external threats, prevent and respond to threats within North America, and further streamline the secure
and efficient movement of legitimate, low-risk traffic across our shared borders. --As part of our efforts, we will:
Implement common border security and bioprotection strategies;
Enhance critical infrastructure protection, and implement a common approach to emergency response;"
within this statement is the surrender of control over our
natoional borders, and even surrender of control over our roads and freeways and bridges--that's what infrastructure is.
quote-- enhance intelligence partnerships;" that's a sharing
of vital security information
quote--Implement a border facilitation strategy to build capacity
and improve the legitimate flow of people and cargo at our shared borders." that means surrendering control of our borders
"quote"Improve productivity through regulatory cooperation""that
means American businesses would be subjected to international regulations
""quote"Enhance the stewardship of our environment,--that means
more international regulation concerning
ecological concerns, making you an international criminal for
cutting a tree down on your own land, and other outrageous invasions of our privacy
Stripped of all of its fancy political talk, this means that
the United States of America will no longer be a sovereign nation unto itself, with the power to make its own laws and protect
its own borders. Our border security will not be under our excluusive control anymore. Our infrastructure---that means our
roads, our highways, our productivity--our businesses, will all eventually be controlled and governed by a tri-lateral international
government, tangled in anti-constitutional red tape. We will have become a colony again. With our Constitution trashed and
our freedoms buried. The Freedoms that we invented and put into our Constitution, that made us the greatest country ever to
exist on this planet, will be compromised and sold out, in the name of international globalism.
The clearly stated goal of the Trilateral Commission has always
been to foster a "New International Economic Order" that would supplant the historical economic order.
The first "Report to the Leaders" concerning the progress of
these plans has already been made.
I am quoting the information posted at www.spp.gov, which
is the official government information source on the subject.
Following the March 23, 2005, launch of the SPP, each nation
established Security and Prosperity working groups to fulfill the vision of the North American Heads of State." Note
here, they talk about fulfilling the vision of the North American Heads of State. Not the American people.
"The working groups will consult with stakeholders; set specific, measurable, and achievable goals and implementation dates;
and identify concrete steps the governments can take to achieve these goals. An initial report is due to Heads of Government
on June 23 with semi-annual progress reports thereafter.
The North American Competitiveness Council. Increasing private
sector engagement in the SPP by adding high-level business input will assist governments in enhancing North America's competitive
position and engage the private sector as partners in finding solutions."
Translation of this quote. Increasing private sector engagement,
high-level business input, will assist governments. This means Big, international Government is going to get together with
big international businesses, and work to gether to put themselves in charge of everything, without telling We the People
that our Constitution and Bill of Rights will be trashed in favor of their own global tyranny.
Resuming the quote from the Report to the Leaders:
"In June 2005, you received the first report on making North
America more prosperous and secure through the Security and Prosperity Partnership of North America (SPP). The report included
a list of early accomplishments and detailed workplans containing initiatives, milestones, and completion dates. Today, we
are pleased to present the second report.
"On March 31, 2006 you met in Cancun to review progress on
the SPP. You noted achievements and asked us to continue to build on the momentum of the ambitious agenda of collaboration
found in the workplans."
This report contains much more detailed information, as to
how these great wheels of governmental burocracy are already turning, making plans and putting them into operation. You've
heard the words globalism, and globalization, and new world order. That is what these expressions mean. It means that within
a decade, America will be a colony again, having to consult with Canada, Mexico, and evenatually the UN, before we can make
a move of independence in any aspect of our lives.
In the beginning of our country, 13 colonies got together and
discovered something called freedom, and individual rights, given to us by a just God. There was strength in the togetherness
of the colonies, to establish the new idea of freedom. Now the movers and shakers and influential leaders in the world
power structure are joining their own kind of bullying strength together, in an alliance to suffocate our freedoms and turn
us into a colony again.
They claim that their plans are just a way to spread our freedom
around. But they lie.
This first Report to the Leaders is signed by Carlos Guteierrez,
Secretary of Commerce, Michael Chertoff, Secretary of Homeland Security, Condoleeza Rice, Secretary of State, Fernano Canales
Secretario Economico, Carlos Abascal ,Secretario del Gobernacion, and Luis Ernesto Derbez, Secrertario Relationes Exterior,
of Mexico, and David L. Emerson,Ministry of Industry, Anne McLellan, Deputy Prime Minister, Minister of Public Safety and
Emergency Preparedness., and Pierre Stewart Pettigrew, Minister of Foreign Affairs, of Canada
The government denies that there is a signed agreement between
the three nations. They call it a "dialog". So if it is only a "dialog", then why are all these high ranking officials signing
their official report about it?
Let's quote again the official government statements on the
official government website, in their "myth VS. Fact" section. They declare that it is a myth That The SPP was an agreement
signed by Presidents Bush and his Mexican and Canadian counterparts in Waco, TX, on March 23, 2005.
They declare the Fact is that: The SPP is a dialogue to increase
security and enhance prosperity among the three countries. The SPP is not an agreement nor is it a treaty. In fact, no agreement
was ever signed.
I ask again, If no agreement was ever signed, why are all these
top officials signing their first official report about it?
Back to the quotes
They say it is a Myth that The SPP is a movement to merge the
United States, Mexico, and Canada into a North American Union and establish a common currency.
They say it is a Myth that The SPP is being undertaken without
the knowledge of the U.S. Congress.
They say it is a Fact that U.S. agencies involved with SPP
regularly update and consult with members of Congress on our efforts and plans.
They say it is a Myth: that The SPP infringes on the sovereignty
of the United States. They say it is a myth that: The SPP is illegal and violates the Constitution.
This website, operated by our government, boldly tells We the
People that our government is literally giving away our national sovereignty. And then they declare that it doesn't violate
the Constitution, it doesn't violate American sovereignty, and the Congress is being properly informed. Congress is not supposed
to be just "informed" . The president is is supposed to submit international treaties to Congress for debate and approval
before they put them into effect, not after.
The Executive Branch of our government is acting like the Legislative
branch does not exist.
In the very beginning, twenty working groups were formed. And
these international committees of anonymous bureaucrats are well on their way to establishing a super-government for North
America that will not be bound by our Constitution. The plan is to have this arrangement implemented by 2010.
The rulings and guidlines and international agreements of the
Security and Prosperity Partnership of North America, will eat up our freedoms and the United States will surrender its Constitution.
According to Jerome R. Corsi, an author and political commentator,
our nation-state prerogatives would be superseded by the authority of a North American court and parliamentary body. and even
though they officially deny it, there are plans underway to surrender our currency the same way the European Union surrendered
theirs. Our dollar would eventually merge with the Canadian dollar and the Mexican peso, and and be called the Amero. They
will do it as soon as they think they can get away with it.
'Already underway is the plan for a NAFTA Superhighway: 1,200
feet wide, stretching from Lazaro Cardenas on the west coast of Mexico, entering the United States at Laredo, Texas, and continuing
straight north to Winnipeg, Canada, with another route to Kansas City thence north easterly to Detroit and Montreal.
Containerized goods from Asia will be offloaded onto Mexican
trucks, with Mexican drivers, and distributed throughout the economic system. Go to http://www.nascocorridor.com/ to view
the plan and progress. There will be no internal boundaries to restrict the flow of people, goods or services.
In fact, the first customs stop on the Superhighway will be
in the heart of America - Kansas City! Along the way, primary U.S. labor unions will be by-passed in favor of Mexican labor,
including the Longshoremen's Union, the Railroad United Transportation Union, and the Teamsters.
How will such a massive flow of goods and foreign traffic be
monitored? According to author Jerome Corsi, "Across the NAFTA Super-Highways will flow millions more Mexicans, now armed
with North American border passes and biometric identification, as defined by the Security and Prosperity Partnership of North
America working groups organized within the Department of Commerce."
On April 30, 1992, President George H.W. Bush signed Executive
Order No. 12803 on infrastructure privatization, a move that cleared the way for private capital to invest in U.S. infrastructure
projects, including highways.
You know that the Supreme Court recently trashed the Fourth
Amendment to the Constitution by declaring that Public Domain means any big -money interest that wants to can seize your home
for a private business. How many private homes are foreign based businesses going to steal from American citizens, in order
to build this monster highway through our heartland, without our permission?
Our political leaders have told us that this is not a treaty
and does not need congressional approval. This is an absolute deliberate lie. This is is a surrender of our Constitution.
It will effect every corner of our lives. It has already robbed the American citizen of his right to own his own land. The
Supreme Court just said so. If a big business wants your land, he can have it. Even if that big business is a foreign business.
At this very minute, citizens of Texas are fighting to keep
the bulldozer from destroying homes they have owned for generations. Why are they wanting to bulldoze the property of Citizens
of Texas? To build this monstrous highway to tear our heartland in half for foreign business interests. Robert Pastor, a member
of the NAU task force, has said they want the NAU to be in operation by 2010. Katrina was a natural disaster that displaced
over a hundred thousand people off their land before we even noticed they were in trouble. The building of the NAFTA highway
over the next four years will drive just as many citizens out of their homes and off of their land. Will we notice them?
President Ronald Reagan once said, "A nation without borders
is not a nation." While we've been looking elsewhere, our own government has implemented this plan to erase our borders with
Canada and Mexico. The NAFTA Superhighway will allow vehicles, people and goods to travel from Mexico, into the American heartland,
and up to Canada with little impediment, making America's borders obsolete. Coupled with Bush's blanket amnesty program,
the new North American Union and the NAFTA Superhighway (NASCO) will fully expedite the wholesale dismantling of American
sovereignty. It would seem that the while the rest of the world is already lining up to get their piece of the American pie,
Americans will be the last to understand what is happening.
You are re-acting to this horrifying news with dis-belief.
No, no, you say, that can't be true. This is America. You must be mistaken. This can't happen to America. You are telling
me a fairy tale! Alright. Let's talk about "fairy tales" for a minute.
When the house hit the ground, and Dorothy peered out the door,
and saw that nothing out there was the same as before, she said, "Toto, we're not in Kansas anymore." In that fairy tale,
Dorothy suddenly discovered that her home was gone. Everything was suddenly very different. Well, here in the real-life world,
everything is suddenly very different. And this is not a lovely dream. This is a waking nightmare. We're not in Kansas anymore,
either. And if we are not careful, we will wake up one morning in 2010, and find out that Kansas doesn't even belong to us
anymore. Fairy tale Oz was filled with a lot of lovely little people who liked to sing and dance. The only villian was an
ugly witch who was easily gotten rid of by being doused with a bucket of water.
But as much as we all like fairy tales, we can't live in them.
We have to face the real ugliness of the real world we live in. This new world we suddenly find ourselves in at this point
in history is real, and it is ugly.
We thought we beat the enemies of America and freedom, when
we beat the Nazies. But every generation has brought forth its own bad guys.
The bad guys in this real life nightmare do not melt. The Islamic
terrorists do not melt. The drug smugglers and people smugglers on our border do not melt. The Atzlanistas, --you never heard
of the Atzlanistas--- they are a political and military movement, in existance for at least half a century, who want to tear
stars off our flag and turn our southwest into a property of Mexico. They are out in the open now, and are boldly waving their
flags and shouting their slogans. They declare their intentions to drive Americans off American land. They claim it is their
land, and intend to take it back, no matter who gets hurt. They don't melt. And the highly placed, elected and unelected,
movers and shakers on the world political scene, they don't melt either. And if we do not stop them, they will destroy our
American way of life, rob us of our culture, our history, and our freedom, and turn us into a colony of the United Nations.
When the children of Israel moved to Egypt to re-unite with
Joseph, and live comfortably during the famine, they went to work for the Egyptians, in what they thought was a beneficial
business arangement. They did not know they were going to wind up in slavery for four hundred years. The liars and tyrants
that are trying to enslave the American people in this North American Union are trying to convince us that it is "good for
The Constitution of the United States has a provision in it
that allows We the People to call for a Constitutional Convention, through the vote of the State legislatures. It appears
that it is time for We the People to take advantage of that provision, and by Constitutional action, reclaim our freedoms
from the assorted facists and new world order tyrants that want to take them from us.