Under dome in Simi, kids ponder space, aviation
People inside the NASA Discovery Dome at the Simi Valley Library watch a NASA movie about space.
As Cameron White emerged from the dark inflatable NASA Discovery Dome in the Simi Valley Library community room, he was enthusiastic about the film he had just seen projected on its ceiling.
The 10-year-old Simi Valley resident said: “It was really cool. I’ve never seen anything like it. When the planes were flying over, they felt like they were in 3-D and they felt like they were going to come right on top of me.”
The library, in partnership with NASA, hosted the program inside the dome, a large and inflatable space planetarium. NASA loans the dome to groups like the library to teach people about the space agency and its projects.
The animated film “Take Flight,” provided by NASA, was a story narrated by two animated characters —Orville and Wilbur Wright — who told the story of flight, bridging its history and its potential future.
Cameron said he learned about the four forces of flight from the movie. They were described in detail:
- Lift — how air pressure on the wings created the force of flight.
- Weight — the mass of aircraft combined with the gravity of the planet.
- Thrust — how fast can we fly, fuel, oxygen and acceleration.
- Drag — the force that opposes the direction of motion.
Grace White, Cameron’s 12-year-old sister, liked when the Wright Brothers saw the future.
“I liked it when NASA showed the plane that could go five times the speed of light,” Grace said.
She said she dreams of being able to get to Hawaii in 45 minutes.
Grace said she also learned about the four components of flight.
Santiago Tarango, 9, from Simi Valley, said he also liked taking a look at things to come “and making planes better and safer in the future.”
The film revealed that in addition to one-hour flights from New York to Paris, NASA engineers are working on developing more environmentally friendly aircraft by creating such elements as green fuel and components to lessen noise pollution. They are also working on aircraft that can deliver medication and much more.
Stephanie Steiner, of Simi Valley, said her 2-year-old son Henry was hoping to see planets, but did like seeing the airplanes.
Before the movie started, Henry stared up at the ceiling and said, “Galaxy, space, astronauts.”
Michael Whitehead, teen services librarian at the library, said several movies are being shown, one of which is about the solar system and one about a journey to Mars. The next movie in the series is scheduled for Monday.
“The movies cater to all age groups,” Whitehead said.
Only about 20 people are allowed to sit on the floor of the dome per presentation, so there are several viewings during the day.
Whitehead said staring at the ceiling of the black dome and all the elements inside the windy area create a special atmosphere.
“It all adds to the whole experience of feeling that you’re in this otherworldly space,” Whitehead said.
“Because there was a lot of wind in the dome, you felt like you were actually in the plane,” Cameron marveled.
If you go
What: Space Out @ Simi Discovery Dome
Where: Simi Valley Public Library, 2969 Tapo Canyon Road
When: 2-5 p.m. Monday