The soldier participant list is unfinished, as you will read below, the project is a work in progress.
In 2016, a volunteer team of twenty women from the National Society of the Daughters of the American Revolution (NSDAR) set forth in the arduous task to verify the American soldiers who participated in the Battle of Guilford Courthouse. Their efforts are now available for your research in book format, whether it is to connect with your ancestor or learn about the experiences of over two thousand soldiers. You can look through the official participants list at the Battlefield Visitors Center to locate information about these soldiers via the pension application. The park is working diligently to make this data accessible online, but until that date, please feel free to call us at 336-288-1776 if you have questions about a particular soldier.
The Work of the Daughters of the American Revolution to Commemorate the Americans who served at the Battle of Guilford Courthouse
The information in this volume was compiled entirely through many hours of volunteer work of a team of 25 women from the National Society of the Daughters of the American Revolution (NSDAR). The project was planned and executed as a service for the Guilford Courthouse National Military Park whose mission is to preserve the battleground and history of the Battle of Guilford Courthouse fought on March 15, 1781 near present day Greensboro, NC during the American Revolutionary War. Project team members were from Guilford Battle Chapter, Rachel Caldwell Chapter, and a member-at-large. They were not professional historians or scholars. Instead, they were diligent women, familiar with current standards of documentation, who were dedicated to building a unique memorial to the patriots who came together on that fateful day near Guilford Courthouse where (as stated in pension application of Joseph Newton R7635) “the memorable battle was fought, which will never be forgotten by me, or the American people.”
Digging through Historical Records
Methodology to Uncover the Historical Record
It was recognized that early in the project that all pension application evidence was not equal. The strength of the evidence can be represented by a continuum. On the end of the continuum, the events of the battle were described in such great detail that little doubt remained that the applicant was an eye witness. In contrast, at the other end of the spectrum, there were examples of widows who gave testimony that they “thought” their departed husbands had taken part in the battle. All examples generally found within this continuum were included in this volume.
Last updated: July 27, 2019