I am sure you have learnt about PHP Filters in your PHP course. PHP filters are very useful in dealing with data security and data management. Data security and data management is a major concern in all PHP applications. Data management refers to the handling of data and maintaining it for use and processing of the application in PHP. Data for an application in PHP programs can have two sources, one could be the internal organization which runs the application and the other could be the external data. The data from the internal organization is easy to handle as it is pre-organized in the required formats. The main challenge faced while working with the external data. The external data could include the data from the user input, cookies, web services, server variables and database query results.
PHP (Hypertext Preprocessor) is the popular server side scripting language for server-side logics, Web Applications, developing Data-driven projects, creating Dynamic websites, etc. Presently the scripting language is considered as a boon for web developers’ community which enables them to create dynamic websites.
PHP Master Program at ADMEC Multimedia Institute will train the students in advanced PHP techniques including CMS Development, database designing, e-commerce websites, and database optimizations. The course is spread across 3 months duration. Additionally the faculties at the institute proffer training in PHP framework like CakePHP. Furthermore for concept clarity students can review the articles on advance PHP (written by experts).
File system in PHP, as the words suggests, it is the system to manage the files of the server. To understand the details of the process of file system in PHP completely, we first need to clear our concepts as to what exactly is a file. A file may be a text document (notepad, word, etc), an image, a spreadsheet or anything similar. Proper management and functioning of the files is very essential for a good application to work smoothly.
If you learning PHP and having the problem in understanding loops then this blog would be very beneficial to you. As you all know that Loops are very important for any programming Language. A loop is a construct that causes a block of code to be repeated a certain number of times. The repetition continues while the condition set for the loop remains true, once the condition becomes false, the loop ends and the control is passed to the statement following the loop.
Three main looping constructs in PHP are:
PHP is probably the most popular scripting language on the web. It is used to enhance web pages. With PHP, you can do things like create username and password login pages, check details from a form, create forums, picture galleries, surveys, and a whole lot more. If you've come across a web page that ends in PHP, then the author has written some programming code to liven up the plain, old HTML.
PHP is known as a server-sided language. That's because the PHP doesn't get executed on your computer, but on the computer you requested the page from. The results are then handed over to you, and displayed in your browser. Other scripting languages you may have heard of are ASP, Python and Perl. (You don't need to know any of these to make a start on PHP. In fact, these tutorials assume that you have no programming experience at all.)