The Karnak Temple Complex comprises a vast mix of decayed temples, obelisks, pylons, sanctuaries dedicated to the Theban gods and the greater glory of pharaohs. Construction of temples started in the Middle Kingdom (during the reign of Senusret I) and continued through to Ptolemaic times. Approximately thirty pharaohs contributed to the buildings, enabling it to reach a size, complexity, and diversity not seen elsewhere. Few of the individual features of Karnak are unique, but the size and number of features are overwhelming. The deities represented range from some of the earliest worshiped to those worshiped much later in the history of the Ancient Egyptian culture.
One famous aspect of Karnak is the Hypostyle Hall in the Precinct of Amun-Re, a hall area of 5000 m2 with 134 massive columns arranged in 16 rows. 122 of these columns are 10 meters tall, and the other 12 are 21 meters tall with a diameter of over three meters.
TEMPLE OF HATSHEPSUT & COLOSSI OF MEMNON
Dedicated to the Pharaoh Hatshepsut - 1507 – 1458 BC (she was the fifth pharaoh of the Eighteenth Dynasty of Egypt), it is located beneath the cliffs at Deir el Bahari, on the west bank of the Nile near the Valley of the Kings. The mortuary temple is dedicated to the sun god Amun and is situated next to the mortuary temple of Mentuhotep II, which served both as an inspiration, and later, a quarry.
The Colossi of Memnon are two massive stone statues of the Pharaoh Amenhotep III, who reigned in Egypt during Dynasty XVIII
Luxor Temple is a large Ancient Egyptian temple complex located on the east bank of the Nile River in the city today known as Luxor (ancient Thebes). It was constructed primarily during the reigns of Amenhotep III and Ramesses II (all during the New Kingdom -1500 -1200 BC). Other kings, including Tutankhamun, Horemheb, and Alexander the Great, also added decoration or minor structures to this gem-like temple. It is approached by an avenue of human-headed sphinxes, which link it to the Karnak complex some 3 km away. The entrance pylon, built and decorated by Ramesses II, was once graced by two obelisks (one of which is still in situ and the other of which is now in Paris) and six colossal royal statues.