Black Cumin Benefits
Black Cumin Powder (Nigella sativa) of the Ranunculaceae family is one of the most commonly used medicinal plants throughout the Middle East. Black seeds are known to have many medicinal properties and are widely used in Greco-Arab and Islamic medicine. Nigella sativa seeds have been used for centuries as a spice and food preservative, as well as a protective and curative remedy for numerous diseases. The seeds are the main source of the active compounds of the plant. Here, we discuss dietary and medicinal uses of black cumin seeds in general.
Black seeds were used by ancient Egyptian and Greek physicians to treat nasal congestion, toothache, as a diuretic to promote menstruation, and to increase milk production. The seeds, known as black seeds, black cumin, or “Habatul-Barakah” in Arabic, have long been prescribed in Greco-Arab and Islamic medicine as well as in Indian and Chinese traditional medicine (Chapter 10) for prevention and treatment of a wide range of diseases, including bronchial asthma, headache, dysentery, infections, obesity, back pain, hypertension, and gastrointestinal problems.
Black Cumin Seeds
Black seed is one of the most famous herbs used in Islamic phytotherapy. In a famous adnth, the Messenger of AllIh said, “black seed is a cure for every disease except death.” In another tradition, we learn that the companions of the Prophet used to take five to seven black seeds, crush them, combine them with oil, and apply it to their nostrils. Ibn πabnb also confirms that the Prophet used to prescribe black seed as snuff. In a more detailed tradition, the Prophet Muham- mad said, “In black seed is a healing from every illness except al-sIm.” It was said, “O Messenger of AllIh, what is al-sam?” He replied, “Death.” Then he said, “These two [honey and black seed] are not predisposed to the heat or the cold or natural constituents, but they are both a healing wherever they are.” In another hadith, the Messenger of Allah said, “Let these black seeds fall upon you for they contain a cure for every disease except death.” He also said, “The best medicine is cupping, costus, and black seed.” According to Ibn Habib, the Prophet used to take black seed soaked in honey every morning and evening to preserve his memory and to fight phlegm.
Therapeutic potential and toxicological properties of the seeds have been extensively studied. In recent years, scientific journals have published numerous articles pointing to potential therapeutic properties N. sativa, including antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, antimicrobial, hypotensive, antinociceptive, choleretic, uricosuric, antidiabetic, and antihistaminic, immunomodulatory, anticancer, and antifertility effects.
Antioxidant Activity Oxidative damage to macromolecules and cellular structures is implicated in the pathophysiology of several diseases. The cause of this oxidative damage has been connected to an imbalance in the prooxidant (free radicals) and the antioxidant (scavenging) factors, either as a result of increased generation of free radicals caused by excessive oxidative stress or due to the poor scavenging capability in the body. Reactive oxygen radicals (ROS), produced mainly by macrophages and neutrophils, are electrically charged molecules that attack cells, tearing through cellular membranes to react and create havoc with the nucleic acids, proteins, and enzymes present in cells and tissues. Therefore, the interest in herbal- derived antioxidant agents and their use in preventing and treating these diseases have recently increased. One of the potential properties of N. sativa seeds is the ability of one or more of its constituents to reduce toxicity due to its antioxidant activities.
In vitro investigations reveal that the seeds have the following properties:
. Protection of erythrocytes against lipid peroxidation and protein degradation.
. Protection of laryngeal carcinoma cells from LPS/cortisol-induced apoptosis.
. Inhibition of the hemolytic activities of snake and scorpion venoms.
The following in vitro studies indicate that the observed antitoxic effects of the seeds could be attributed to their antioxidant properties:
. Pretreatment of LPS-activated peritoneal macrophages with aqueous extract of the seeds caused a significant decrease in nitric oxide (NO) production.
COMMONLY USED HERBAL MEDICINES IN THE MEDITERRANEAN
. Thymoquinone efficiently inhibited iron-dependent microsomal lipid peroxidation in vitro in a concentration-dependent manner.
. Thymoquinone induced significant protection of isolated hepatocytes against tertbutyl hydroperoxide induced toxicity evidenced by decreased leakage of L-alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and alkaline phosphatase (AP).
. Thymoquinone reduces at no toxic concentrations, NO synthesis, and decreases both gene expression and protein synthesis levels of inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) in supernatants of LPS-activated macrophages.
. Activation of polymorphonuclear leukocytes with thymoquinone showed protective effects against superoxide anion radical either generated photochemically, biochemically, or derived from calcium ionophore, indicating to its potent
superoxide radical scavenger.
Üçal, Muammer, et al. “Comprehensive Profiling of Modulation of Nitric Oxide Levels and Mitochondrial Activity in the Injured Brain: An Experimental Study Based on the Fluid Percussion Injury Model in Rats.” Journal of Neurotrauma, vol. 34, no. 2, Mary Ann Liebert, Inc., Jan. 2017, p. 475.
Üçal, M., Kraitsy, K., Weidinger, A., Paier-Pourani, J., Patz, S., Fink, B., … Schäfer, U. (2017). Comprehensive Profiling of Modulation of Nitric Oxide Levels and Mitochondrial Activity in the Injured Brain: An Experimental Study Based on the Fluid Percussion Injury Model in Rats. Journal of Neurotrauma, 34(2), 475.
Üçal, Muammer, Klaus Kraitsy, Adelheid Weidinger, Jamile Paier-Pourani, Silke Patz, Bruno Fink, Marek Molcanyi, and Ute Schäfer. 2017. “Comprehensive Profiling of Modulation of Nitric Oxide Levels and Mitochondrial Activity in the Injured Brain: An Experimental Study Based on the Fluid Percussion Injury Model in Rats.” Journal of Neurotrauma 34 (2). Mary Ann Liebert, Inc.: 475.
Healthy immune system
The complex fatty acid profile
Supports cardiovascular health
Help support hair, nails, and skin.
Decrease inflammation throughout the body
Helps with allergies
Ingredients: Wild harvested Black Seed
Parts Used: Raw Black Seed
Forms: Two ounces of powder or 60 vegetable capsules (550-600 mg).
How to use:
Powder: Take one tsp of dried powder in 8 oz. of favorite juice or smoothie, two times a day.
Capsules: Take 2-4 capsules a day with water or a favorite beverage.
The gel caps we use are Vegicaps (vegetable) and are all-natural. No Animal By-Products, Starch Free, Wheat Free, Dairy Free, Preservative Free, Ethylene Oxide, and Sulfite FREE!
Legal Information: The Food and Drug Administration has not evaluated these statements. This product is not intended to diagnose, treat, cure, or prevent any disease.
Copyright ©2020, All rights reserved