Whether you can’t run or get out of bed in the morning, that foot pain is annoying! You rest, you ice, you stretch, you roll a ball on the bottom of the foot, and the pain isn’t getting better. What’s worse? You have no idea why your foot hurts in the first place!
Plantar fasciitis is one of the most misdiagnosed and mistreated conditions in the body, mainly because plantar fasciitis is diagnosed by the location of pain. The truth, is that the plantar fascia which we believe to always be the cause of pain in the bottom of the foot is rarely injured!
People suffering from pain on the bottom of the foot, most often have limited ankle mobility. Limited ankle mobility makes the bottom of the foot have to work harder during daily activities and exercise. Over time pain will develop in the bottom of the foot from overuse.
Adhesion in the posterior calf muscles is the most common cause of limited ankle mobility. Adhesion is the most common cause of limited mobility and pain in the body. It’s also the most misdiagnosed! Adhesion develops from overuse; repetitive motion and/or prolonged position.
The posterior calf muscles run from the back of the lower leg into the bottom of the foot. These muscles can cause pain in the bottom of the foot if they have adhesion! Adhesion must be removed in order to be relieved from your pain!
So how do you know if you have adhesion? Luckily there is a very easy test you can do at home!
Start by placing a ruler sticking out from a wall. Stand facing the wall, split stance, with the painful foot against the wall. Bring your knee into the wall until it touches. The heel must stay in contact with the floor when the knee is touching the wall! Continue sliding the foot back until the heel just stays in contact with the floor while the knee touches the wall. Measure the distance the toes are from the wall. Normal range of motion is 5-6 inches. Anything short of 5 inches is a limited and restricted test.
Adhesion is the most common reason why this test is limited!
So what’s next? If you found this test to be limited, you need to find out why so that you can get out of pain as fas as possible!
Let the experts at Thrive Spine and Sport help you! At Thrive Spine and Sport, we specialize in the diagnosis and treatment of adhesion and overuse conditions like plantar fasciitis. Currently, we are the only full body certified Integrative Diagnosis providers in the State of Iowa. Integrative Diagnosis is the most advanced diagnosis and treatment system for musculoskeletal pain. To fast track your recovery, call 319-423-0925 or fill out an appointment request here.
Thanks for reading!