Adolf Hitler is appointed Chancelor by President Paul von
"We made revolutions, and ran as
eternal God seekers ahead
of the masses of the people.
We gave to the international proletariat a
second Bible, one that was adequate to the times and we aroused the passions of
the third estate.
Marx from Germany, declared war on
capitalism and the Jew,
Lassalle, organized the
masses of the people in Germany itself.
Jew, Edward Bernstein, popularized the ideology, Karl Liebknecht and
Rosa Luxemburg, called the Spartacist movement to life.
Kurt Eisner, founds the People's
State of Bavaria.
She wanted to forge her own
destiny, determine the future of her children - and she should not have
been blamed for it." - rabbi Manfred Reifer, a well known leader of the Jews of
Bukovina, wrote in the Jewish magazine Czernowitzer Allegemeine Zeitung,
September 2, 1933
"Germany will be perfectly ready to disband her
entire military establishment and destroy the small amount of arms remaining to
her, if the neighboring countries will do the same thing with equal
Germany is entirely ready to renounce aggressive weapons
of every sort if the armed nations, on their part, will destroy their
aggressive weapons within a specified period, and if their use is forbidden by
an international convention.
Germany is at all times prepared to
renounce offensive weapons if the rest of the world does the same.
Germany is prepared to agree to any solemn pact of non-aggression
because she does not think of attacking anybody but only of acquiring
security." - Adolf Hitler, May 17, 1933 address to the Reichstag
Anglo-German Naval Agreement (AGNA) of 18 June allowed German tonnage to
increase to 35 per cent of that of the British navy.
Hitler called the
signing of the AGNA "the happiest day of his life".
France and Italy
are not consulted before the signing, directly undermining the League of
Nations and setting the Treaty of Versailles on
the path towards irrelevance.
withdraws from the League of
Nations and the World Disarmament Conference.
Hitler throws the Ashkenazi
communists out of government positions.
Joseph Stalin begins removing
Ashkenazi from government positions.
This jumps starts
a new Ashkenazi migration to
Palestine where they plan the founding of the state of Israel and to America
where they go to work in the FDR
spearheading their socialist agenda.
This lays the foundations for
World War II in retribution for
their expulsion from power in Russia and Germany.
1939 The Transfer
Agreement is made between the Third Reich and the Zionists allowing
60,000 German Jews to migrate to Palestine by transfering their
capital in the form of German export goods.
German backing for
Zionism is limited to support
for a Jewish homeland in
Palestine under British control, not
a sovereign Jewish state.
A Jewish state in Palestine, the Foreign
Minister informed diplomats in June 1937, would not be in Germany's interest
because it would not be able to absorb all Jews around the world, but would
only serve as an additional power base for international Jewry, in much the
same way as Moscow served as a base for international
British government imposes ever more drastic restrictions on Jewish immigration
into Palestine in 1937, 1938
SS security service concluded a secret
alliance with the clandestine Zionist agency
Mossad le-Aliya Bet to smuggle
Jews illegally into Palestine.
As a result of this intensive
collaboration, several convoys of ships succeed in reaching Palestine past
"Throughout the 1930s,
John Foster Dulles
restructuring for German firms under a series of decrees issued by Adolf
Hitler." - Webster G. Tarpley & Anton Chaitkin
General Electric, DuPont -
controlled by the international bankers
Rockefeller, Chase and Warburg - are intimately related to the growth of the
Nazi war armaments
"We were not foolish enough to try
to make currency gold, of which we had none, but for every mark that was issued
we required the equivalent
of a mark's worth of work done or goods produced ... we laugh at the view
that the value of a currency is regulated by the gold and securities lying in
the vaults of a state bank." - Adolph Hitler
Germany issued debt-free
and interest-free money.
The German government financed its entire
regime without gold or debt.
Hitler began his National credit program by
devising a plan of public works.
Projects earmarked for funding included
flood control, repair of public buildings and private residences, and
construction of new buildings, roads, bridges, canals, and port facilities.
The projected cost of the various programs was fixed at one billion
units of the Arbeit Schatzurkunde.
One billion non-inflationary
bills of exchange, called Arbeit Schatzurkunde, were then issued against
Millions of people were put to work on these projects, and
the workers were paid with the Arbeit Schatzurkunde.
1934 "Marxism is the modern form of Jewish prophecy." -
Reinhold Niebur, speech at the Jewish Institute of Religion, New York,
SS position paper urges active support of Zionism by the
government and the Party as the
way to encourage migration of German Jews to Palestine.
1935 National Socialist Party Congress, the Reichstag
adopts laws prohibiting marriages and sexual relations between Jews and Germans
and proclaims the Ashkenazi an alien minority nationality.
1938 Jewish migration, both legal and illegal, from Germany
(including Austria) to Palestine increases dramatically.
1939 "It is not an accident that
Judaism gave birth to
Marxism, and it is not an
accident that the Jews readily took up Marxism; all this was in perfect accord
with the progress of Judaism
and the Jews.
The Jews should realize Jehovah no longer dwells in
heaven, but dwells in us
right here on earth; we must no longer look up to Jehovah as above us and
outside of us, but we must see him right within us." - rabbi Harry Waton
"A detailed examination of the background information of those who
registered hostile attitudes to
Jews reveals that they were of various age, national, educational, and
status groups, and that they left the USSR at different periods." - William
Korey noting attitudes of 329 refugees from the
Soviet Union in the early
Top six "antiSemitic"
assertions by this diverse group of people include:
Jews occupy a privileged and favored position in
2) Jews are
3) Jews are
clannish and help each other.
Jews are aggressive and
5) Jews are sly, calculating, and
'use a situation.'
6) Jews are deceitful, dishonest, unprincipled,
insolent, and impudent.
"The millions of Jews who live in America,
England and France, North and South
Africa, and, not to forget those in Palestine, are determined to bring the
war of annihilation against Germany to its final end." - Central Blad Voor
Israeliten, September 13, 1939
Léon Joseph Marie Ignace
Degrelle points out that the history of Adolf Hitler and Germany can only be
understood through the eyes of the Germans, the harsh subjugation of Germany by
"I do not deny anything that Hitler did, but I also
point out what the Communists and their Western allies did, and I let the
public be the judge." - Léon Joseph Marie Ignace
Adolf Hitler and Josef Stalin invade Poland
"German men and women were hunted like wild
beasts through the streets of Bromberg.
When they were caught, they
were mutilated and torn to pieces by the Polish mob.
Every day the
Thousands of Germans fled from their homes in
Poland with nothing more than the clothes that they wore.
there was no doubt that the
Polish army was making plans for the massacre of Danzig.
On the nights
of August 25 to August 31 inclusive, there occurred, besides innumerable
attacks on civilians of German blood, 44 perfectly authenticated acts of armed
violence against German official persons and property.
took place either on the border or inside German territory.
night of August 31, a band of Polish desperadoes actually occupied the German
broadcasting Station at Gleiwitz.
Now it was clear that unless German
troops marched at once, not a man, woman or child of German blood within the
Polish territory could reasonably expect to avoid
slaughter." - William Joyce
"Only hours after the outbreak of
hostilities between Germany and Poland, Mussolini, renewing his efforts for
peace, proposed to all the interested powers an immediate suspension of
hostilities and the immediate convocation of a conference between the great
powers, in which Poland would also participate.
were, without any delay, accepted by all governments concerned except Great
Britain." - Prince Michel Sturdza, foreign minister of
This web site is not a commercial web site and
is presented for educational purposes only.
This website defines a new
religious ideology to which its author adheres. The author feels that the
falsification of reality outside personal experience has forged a populace
unable to discern propaganda from reality and that this has been done
purposefully by an international corporate cartel through their agents who wish
to foist a corrupt version of reality on the human race. Religious intolerance
occurs when any group refuses to tolerate religious practices, religious
beliefs or persons due to their philosophical ideology. This web site marks the
founding of a mystery school aptly named The Truth of the Way of the
Lumière Infinie - a rational gnostic mystery religion based on reason
which requires no leap of faith, accepts no tithes, has no supreme leader, no
church buildings and in which each and every individual is encouraged to
develop a personal relation with the Creator and Sustainer through the pursuit
of the knowledge of reality in the hope of curing the spiritual corruption that
has enveloped the human spirit. The tenets of The Truth of the Way of the
Lumière Infinie are spelled out in detail on this web site by the
author. Violent acts against individuals due to their religious beliefs in
America is considered a "hate crime."
This web site in no way condones
violence. To the contrary the intent here is to reduce the violence that is
already occurring due to the international corporate cartels desire to control
the human race. The international corporate cartel already controls the world
banking system, corporate media worldwide, the global industrial military
entertainment complex of America and is responsible for the collapse of morals,
the elevation of self-centered behavior and the destruction of global
ecosystems. Civilization is based on coöperation. Coöperation does
not occur at the point of a gun.
American social mores and values have
declined precipitously over the last century as the corrupt international
cartel has garnered more and more power. This power rests in the ability to
deceive the populace in general through corporate media by pressing emotional
buttons which have been preprogrammed into the population through prior mass
media psychological operations. The results have been the destruction of the
family and the destruction of social structures that do not adhere to the
corrupt international elites vision of a perfect world. Through distraction and
coercion the direction of thought of the bulk of the population has been
directed toward solutions proposed by the corrupt international elite that
further consolidates their power and which further their purposes.
views and opinions presented on this web site are the views and opinions of
individual human men and women that, through their writings, showed the
capacity for intelligent, reasonable, rational, insightful and unpopular
thought. All factual information presented on this web site is believed to be
true and accurate and is presented as originally presented in print media which
may or may not have originally presented the facts truthfully. Opinion and
thoughts have been adapted, edited, corrected, redacted, combined, added to,
re-edited and re-corrected as nearly all opinion and thought has been
throughout time but has been done so in the spirit of the original writer with
the intent of making his or her thoughts and opinions clearer and relevant to
the reader in the present time.
Fair Use Notice
This site may contain copyrighted material the use of which has
not always been specifically authorized by the copyright owner. We are making
such material available in our efforts to advance understanding of criminal
justice, human rights, political, economic, democratic, scientific, and social
justice issues, etc. We believe this constitutes a 'fair use' of any such
copyrighted material as provided for in section 107 of the US Copyright Law. In
accordance with Title 17 U.S.C. Section 107, the material on this site is
distributed without profit to those who have expressed a prior interest in
receiving the included information for research and educational purposes. For
more information see: www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/17/107.shtml. If you wish to
use copyrighted material from this site for purposes of your own that go beyond
'fair use', you must obtain permission from the copyright owner.
© Lawrence Turner
All Rights Reserved