Uterus Teacher Resources
Find Uterus lesson plans and worksheets
Showing 1 - 24 of 60 resources
The Three Different Ways Mammals Give BirthPD Learning Network
5 mins 4th - 12th CCSS: Adaptable
All mammals have warm blood, are vertebrates, breathe with their lungs, have hair or fur on their bodies, and produce milk for their young. But not all mammals give birth to their young in the same manner. Watch a video that explains how...
Reproductive System – Pregnancy and Development (Part 4)Lesson Planet
11 mins 9th - 12th CCSS: Adaptable
A uterus grows to more than 500 times its original size over the course of a pregnancy. The 43rd video in a series of 47 focuses on pregnancy and embryo development. The narrator begins with fertilization, discussing cell divisions that...
Reproductive System – Female Reproductive System (Part 1)Lesson Planet
10 mins 9th - 12th CCSS: Adaptable
Pupils learn about menstruation and the female reproductive system in the 40th video of 47. Beginning with the anatomy and moving into hormones and ovulation, the narrator teaches an abundance of vocabulary and information regarding...
Seeing the Seafloor Using Sound - Multibeam Sidescan SonarLesson Planet
6th - 8th
Students are told that sound is not just stuff that our ears hear. They are explained that it is a tool for measuring and looking at objects in a new way. Students are introduced to sound waves and sonar imaging. They are explained...
The Female Reproductive SystemLesson Planet
5 mins 9th - 12th
A slide presentation is shown while the structures and functions of female reproduction are covered with narration. Estrogen is treated with some detail as well. Learners can easily take notes following the outline on the screen. This...
Childbirth - 3D Video AnimationLesson Planet
1 min 9th - 12th
Watch a virtual baby be born! This fascinating animation shows the way a baby is birthed. Only the uterus, mother's spinal cord, and baby are animated in this tasteful clip. Show your junior high or high school class this clip if a live...
How to Make a Baby (in a Lab)Lesson Planet
7 mins 7th - 12th CCSS: Adaptable
With over five million babies being born through in vitro fertilization in the last 40 years, sex education is taking on a whole new look. After first walking through natural process of reproduction, this short video goes on to explore...
Reproductive Systems - Male and FemaleLesson Planet
8th - 12th
This is a nice, subdued series of slides that can be used to teach about the human reproductive systems, male and female. Early in the presentation, a warning slide previews uncomfortable words. Four diagrams are included, two of the...
Animal Organs and the Study of Reproduction, Embryology and CancerLesson Planet
11th - 12th
Students examine organs from dogs and cats to study reproduction, embryology, and the identification of cancer. They record their observations at both the gross and microscopic levels. They present their information to the class.