OMAHA - The experience of modern day slavery through the lives of those who are ENSLAVED, will be the topic of the 18th annual Shirley and Leonard Goldstein Lecture on Human Rights. This year’s lecture will take place on April 6, 2017, at the University of Nebraska at Omaha (UNO) Dodge Street Campus.
This year’s guest speaker is a humanitarian photographer, Lisa Kristine. Her photographs reveal two undeniable truths – the extreme brutality of the situation, and the resilience of the human spirit.
Kristine has traveled to nearly 100 countries, on six continents, capturing modern day slavery through images. In an effort to uncover the breadth and depth of human pain, she has plunged over 100 feet down an illegal mineshaft in Ghana, and endured Nepal’s temperatures of more than 120 degrees. The images portray survivors who are now rebuilding their lives and helping others to freedom.
Complementary to the Goldstein Lecture, a display of Kristine’s work will be split between UNO's Dr. C.C. and Mabel L. Criss Library, and Barbara Weitz Community Engagement Center (Weitz CEC). The exhibition will run for two months, with opportunities to attend ancillary programming and events, and will be open to the public. Keynote speakers, nonprofit organizations, attorneys, professors, and survivors will lead these events in conjunction with the theme of modern day slavery. A schedule of events and more information will be available soon.
ENSLAVED was created to inspire sustainable change at the local, national, and global level through education and visual storytelling, with the hope that one day we can eradicate slavery.
About the Shirley and Leonard Goldstein Lecture on Human Rights
The annual Shirley and Leonard Goldstein Lecture on Human Rights is sponsored by the UNO College of Arts and Sciences, Religious Studies Program, and SPHRS (Spirituality, Public Health, and Religious Studies). The Goldstein Lecture brings a distinguished scholar or leading expert on human rights to UNO each year.
To view a list of former speakers, visit the Shirley and Leonard Goldstein Lecture on Human Rights website.
About SPHRS (Spirituality, Public Health, and Religious Studies)
SPHRS is a UNO-based organization through the Department of Religious Studies, and a building partner organization housed in the Weitz CEC. The organization supports and helps to coordinate a variety of partnerships, initiatives, and activities at UNO, UNMC and in local and global communities. SPHRS operates as an umbrella organization focused on spirituality, wellness, and/or religious/cultural diversity that connects faculty, students, administrators and community members; provides resources and expertise to support these people and their projects; increases opportunities for learning; and creates and supports internships and placements for students at the local, regional, national and international levels.
Community engagement and service are fundamental components of UNO's identity. This commitment to engagement is reflected in UNO's academics, student body, partnerships, and institutional framework. Learn more about UNO's campus commitment to community engagement.
Are you a community member interested in public events?
Sign up for our monthly collaborative email, For Community Consideration. A partnership of public events and special interest opportunities between UNO's Barbara Weitz Community Engagement Center (CEC), UNO Libraries, and the Willis A. and Janet S. Strauss Performing Arts Center (SPAC).
Looking for community engagement resources?
Try out the Community Engagement Roadmap. This online tool, organized by audience, connects you to different campus resources that start, enhance, and promote meaningful community engagement and outreach.
If you are sponsoring a special or public event happening in the CEC or would like to share a news tip or story please let us know.
Special Projects Associate
To learn more about the CEC please like our Facebook