Bible Names H-M: Magog
Magog in Easton's Bible Dictionary
region of Gog, the second of the "sons" of Japheth (Gen.
Chr. 1:5). In Ezekiel (38:2; 39:6) it is the name of a
probably some Scythian or Tartar tribe descended from
They are described as skilled horsemen, and expert in
the use of
the bow. The Latin father Jerome says that this word
"Scythian nations, fierce and innumerable, who live
Caucasus and the Lake Maeotis, and near the Caspian
spread out even onward to India." Perhaps the name
the Assyrian Mat Gugi, or 'country of Gugu,' the Gyges
Greeks" (Sayce's Races, etc.).
Magog in Fausset's Bible Dictionary
Genesis 10:2; Ezekiel 38-39. A race, like Gomer (the
Cimmerians), dwelling in the N. country. Its weapon was the
bow, its warriors were all horsemen. Probably the European
Scythians, dominant in the region between the Caucasus and
Mesopotamia for 30 years from 630 to 600 B.C., who were
famous for the bow and fought almost wholly on horseback.
They invaded Israel, and besieged Ascalon under the Egyptian
Psamineticus. They appear in Ezekiel inhabiting "the sides
(the remote recesses) of the N.," adjacent to Togarmah
(Armenia) and the "isles," i.e. maritime regions of Europe
(Ezekiel 39:2; Ezekiel 39:8; Ezekiel 39:6; Ezekiel 38:6;
Ezekiel 38:15). Connected with Meshech (the Moschi) and
Tubal (the Tibarenes).
Their own traditions represent them to have lived
first in Asia near the Araxes, afterward to have possessed
the whole country to the ocean and lake Maeotis, and the
plain to the Tandis or Don. Mixed with the Medes they became
the Sarmatians, from whence sprang the Russians. Derived
from Sanskrit mah "great" and ghogh "mountain" (Persian).
(See for the prophetical sense, etc., (See GOG.) The Syrians
in the middle ages applied Magog as a geographical term to
Asiatic Turkey; the Arabians applied it to the region
between the Caspian and Euxine. Forced by the Massagetae
from the N. of Caucasus, they swept down into Asia Minor,
took Sardis (629 B.C.), and thence passed into Media and
defeated Cyaxares, 624. Their name thus was a terror in the
East just before Ezekiel's prophecies, and naturally
symbolizes rude violence. Their origin is clearly Japhetic,
as Genesis 10:2 implies.
Magog in Hitchcock's Bible Names
covering; roof; dissolving
Magog in Naves Topical Bible
-Son of Japheth
Ge 10:2; 1Ch 1:5
Eze 38:2; 39:6
-Symbolical of the enemies of God
Magog in Smiths Bible Dictionary
(region of Gog). In Ge 10:2 Magog appears as the second son of
Japheth; in Eze 38:2; 39:1,6 it appears as a country or people
of which Gog was the prince. The notices of Magog would lead
us to fix a northern locality: it is expressly stated by
Ezekiel that "he was to come up from the sides of the north,"
Eze 39:2 from a country adjacent to that of Togarmah or
Armenia, ch. 58:6 and not far from "the isles" or maritime
regions of Europe. ch. Eze 39:6 The people of Magog further
appear as having a force of cavalry, Eze 38:16 and as armed
with the bow. ch. Eze 39:3 From the above data, may conclude
that Magog represents the important race of the Scythians.
Magog in the Bible Encyclopedia - ISBE
ma'-gog (maghogh; Magog): Named among the sons of Japheth (Gen
10:2; 1 Ch 1:5). Ezekiel uses the word as equivalent to "land
of Gog" (Ezek 38:2; 39:6). Josephus identifies the Magogites
with the Scythians (Ant., I, vi, 1). From a resemblance
between the names Gog and Gyges (Gugu), king of Lydia, some
have suggested that Magog is Lydia; others, however, urge that
Magog is probably only a variant of Gog (Sayce in HDB). In the
Apocalypse of John, Gog and Magog represent all the heathen
opponents of Messiah (Rev 20:8), and in this sense these names
frequently recur in Jewish apocalyptic literature.
John A. Lees
Magog in Wikipedia
Magog, Hebrew מגוג, Greek Μαγωγ, [ ma'gog ], is the second of
the seven sons of Japheth mentioned in the Table of Nations in
Genesis 10. It may represent Hebrew for "from Gog", though
this is far from certain.
Magog is often associated with apocalyptic traditions, mainly
in connection with Ezekiel 38 and 39 which mentions "Gog of
the land of Magog, the chief prince of Meshech and Tubal"
(Ezek 38:2 NIV); on the basis of this mention, "Gog and Magog"
over time became associated with each other as a pair.
Josephus identified the offspring of Magog as the Scythians, a
name used in antiquity for peoples north of the Black Sea.
According to him, the Greeks called Scythia Magogia (Ant., bk.
Magog Scripture - Ezekiel 38:2
Son of man, set thy face against Gog, the land of Magog, the
chief prince of Meshech and Tubal, and prophesy against him,
Magog Scripture - Genesis 10:2
The sons of Japheth; Gomer, and Magog, and Madai, and Javan,
and Tubal, and Meshech, and Tiras.
Magog Scripture - Revelation 20:8
And shall go out to deceive the nations which are in the four
quarters of the earth, Gog and Magog, to gather them together
to battle: the number of whom [is] as the sand of the sea.
If you notice a broken link or any error PLEASE report it by clicking HERE
© 1995-2019 Bible History Online