The Kenya National Youth Policy of 2006 defines youth as between 15 to 30 years. The majority of Kenya’s population falls in this gap. A World Bank report states that Kenya’s youth unemployment is estimated to stand at 17.3% compared to 6% for both Uganda and Tanzania by 2016. Nearly one in every five Kenyan youths of working age has no job compared to the East African Nations of Uganda and Tanzania where about one in every 20 young people is jobless. Kenya’s rate of unemployment now stands at three times that of the neighbouring Uganda and Tanzania and is among the highest in the world.
Mass joblessness among the sprightly and innovative youth, is a drag on the economy as it forces unemployed adults to depend on the small working class thus stretches family resources and consumes savings for future investments. Mass unemployment continues to deny Kenya the opportunity to put its growing labour force to productive use, thereby “denying the economy the demographic dividend from majority young population”. Kenya’s ability to create new jobs has lagged behind population growth, resulting in narrow formal opportunities, especially for entry-level workers fresh from college.
The youth unemployment issue is on the rise as Kenya’s colleges produce a great many graduates every year coupled with low labour force absorption, a dilemma the Kenya government currently faces. The unemployment levels are on the ascent as more youth engage in crime and drug abuse.
Talent Development is an approach in which the youth are invigorated to discover, unfurl and build up their capacities, to be required, to learn, to create capabilities and to take an interest through inventive approaches. Talent is viewed as an extraordinary natural capacity to accomplish goals. The concept underlying talent alludes to extraordinary aptitudes that all individuals have that component that we are great, we can develop and can turn into an approach to convey what needs be.
Ability is inalienable and can likewise be produced accordingly of enthusiasm and intrigue, hence drives the economy with a diminishing wrongdoing rate. Training is the establishment of key expertise improvement. Talent drives innovation which leads to sustained livelihoods and economies.
Talent Development fortifies the inborn inspiration of the youth and gives them an enormous feeling of proprietorship. They themselves are ahead of the pack and in charge of their own development, their triumphs as large or little as they may appear.
Africa needs to concentrate developing talents for reasonable economic advancement. Talent does not cut off innovativeness but instead improves it and the young have a considerable measure of vitality that can be put to great utilization. Empowering talent development over employment in order to lead a free social and economic life ought to be enhanced.
CINCO offers a wide range of talent trainings and include:
- Entertainment i.e. music, acting (including peace education and life skills development in all the categories)
Kenya needs to develop a policy on the youth to guide on the institutions that can manage the youth affairs.
CINCO works to build proper structures to identify and nurture talent both in and out of school youth, female and male. Performing arts equipment acquisition to host meaningful competitions as well as to train talent is a priority. The approach to talent development concept is a tool for community work with the young people for livelihoods. Talent identification is done during talent open days and referrals by other institutions for gifted and talented programmes innovative trainings.
Mashujah girls football team