According to research released by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) in 2014, roughly one out of 68 children had Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD). Fortunately, recent research focusing on gut microbiota may have revealed a potential treatment for autism.
Gut microbiota is a collection of microorganisms that live within the human body. Everybody has tens of millions of microbes living within their guts. These gut microbiomes are extremely important to one’s health due to the fact that they assist the digestion process in addition to helping produce some vitamins. Research has previously indicated that microbiome composition can actually influence the development of certain diseases, including everything from irritable bowel syndrome to obesity. It’s only recently that research revealed that gut microbiota could be linked to autism.
ASD Research and Trial
The research focusing on the link between gut microbiota and autism was performed via the collaboration of the University of Minnesota, Ohio State University, and Arizona State University. A clinical trial was conducted in which 18 participants were studied. These participants were all aged between seven and 16 and were all diagnosed with ASD. The study took place over a 10-week period in which participants were provided with antibiotics, bowel cleansing, as well as extended fecal microbiota transplants.
Fecal microbiota transplants are a type of treatment that are used for Clostridium difficile infections. The treatment involves the collection of fecal matter from the stool of a healthy donor, which is then transplanted into the colon of the patient. Researchers used a donor microbiome that consisted of a thousand different species of gut bacteria.
The trial ended with promising results. Participants showed an 80 percent reduction of gastrointestinal symptoms that had been associated with ASD. They also exhibited substantial improvements in their behavioral ASD symptoms.
Researchers are working hard to find an effective treatment for ASD and may have discovered a link between gut microbiota and ASD that could improve current treatments of the disorder. To keep up with all the latest news in regards to health-related matters, visit us at The Benefits Store today.