Austrian Black and Tan Hound is thought to be the true descendant of the original Celtic Hound, although there is no known history of the Austrian Black and Tan Hound until after the middle of the 19th century. This large sized hound was used for tracking wounded game, most commonly hare, in high altitudes.
Austrian Black and Tan Hound or Austrian Shorthaired Bracke, was developed in Austria. In its homeland this breed is known as the Brandlbracke, which is derived from the German word, brand, which translates into fire. This is for the “little marks of fire red” throughout their coat. The Austrian Black and Tan Hound has been a recognized as a breed since 1883.
Austrian Black and Tan Hounds are exclusively kept for hunting hare and fox.
Austrian Black and Tan Hound has a keen sense of smell. Its an elegant runner, used in all sorts of game. It has a lovely voice, and makes an great pet due to its good-natured personality. It is not a dog wanting to be in a city. A suitable home will be in a rural area where the dog will have lots of space to run unrestricted by a leash. It loves to work.
The Austrian Black and Tan Hounds have the same general type and build as many of the German hounds. This breed stands between 18-23 inches, with the males larger than the females, and weigh in at 33-49 pounds. Their ears are medium in length and lie flat with rounded tips, while their tails are long and slightly bent. They have a short, dense coat that is primarily black with tan markings that range from light to dark in shade. Two fawn marks above the eyes are a requirement in the standard for the Austrian Black and Tan Hound, which give the appearance of eyebrows.
Austrian Black and Tan Hounds are scenthounds that are almost exclusively kept for hunting hare and fox. This breed is almost never kept as solely as a pet, their homes are found with hunters who prize them for their silent trailing and ability to work with cold scents. The Austrian Black and Tan Hound is most often used for hunting in the mountains.
Austrian Black and Tan Hound needs daily exercise. The breed will only require a once-a-week brushing and only bathing when necessary. Nails need to be trimmed regularly and ears need to be cleaned every day to avoid ear infections. There are no genetic diseases known to affect the Austrian Black and Tan Hound dog breed, they are fairly healthy, and live up to 12 to 14 years of age.
Austrian Black and Tan Hound ( Brandlbracke ) Videos