Sustainable mobility is the mobility model that enables movement with minimal environmental and territorial impact.
Nowadays there are very different kind of transport vehicles we can choose between to move around the city. We can go to school, to office or wherever we want to go by car, bus, underground, motorcycle, taxi and so on.
All these kinds of vehicles contribute to pollution level’s growth.
The challenges associated with growing traffic, especially in cities, are significant and threaten to become insurmountable. And despite the wide range of ways to get around, there have never been so many people who lack access to transportation or the means to use transportation.
Yet another impact was an increase in sedentary lifestyles, causing and complicating a national epidemic of obesity, and accompanying dramatically increased health care costs.
As the interest and the sensitivity towards pollution problems and sustainability are increasing among society, much are the less polluting solutions that were born (car and bike sharing to mention some).
Sustainable mobility is the purpose which guides Clementina Chiarini and Nicolò Cellina in the project they presented us for The Youth Design Day 2018 edition.
Clementina and Nicolò are 24 and 25 years old and are two Italian Architecture students.
The two young students are very glad for the opportunity that we gave them to bring their project in a country which has always considered the theme of sustainable mobility as something truly necessary for the planet’s need to reduce pollution.
In fact, Japan was one of the first countries to internationally highlight the importance of adopting more eco-sustainable behaviors.
Here what they say about their Sustainable Mobility project:
A […] is what you need to move around the city: no traffic, no pollution and no sedentary people! It is special because it is craft made. It is a prototype based in a digital model that you can customize according to your body and your tastes.
Continue to follow us to discover how Clementina and Nicolò developed their idea of Sustainable Mobility to make it more accessible!