Our teeth are exposed to a wide range of foods and beverages every single day. In addition, if you use tobacco product, this puts further “wear and tear” on your teeth. Over time, the teeth can start to discolour, become yellow, or even develop dark brown and black stains along the gum line, in between teeth, and in back of the teeth.
The reason for this is because the enamel on our teeth is porous, which makes it susceptible to stains from foods and beverages which contains chromogens or pigmented molecules which are attracted to the enamel on our teeth. Beverages, like tea, coffee, and wine, as well as foods which are notorious for staining, such as berries, tomatoes, and several types of sauces, are naturally attracted to the enamel on the exterior of the teeth.
In addition, another type of discolouration and staining that sometimes occurs in some people, is caused from fluorosis, traumatic injuries, and certain medications. This type of staining actually starts inside the tooth structure and slowly advances outward. Regular brushing and flossing will not help remove this type of staining.
How to Keep Your Teeth Clean and White
Today, people are ever more conscientious about their smiles and the colour of their teeth. There are several effective treatments and procedures available to help keep the teeth clean and the desired whiteness level.
- Commercial “Over-the-Counter” Whitening Products
From toothpastes to whitening strips, there is a wide range of commercial products on the market. However, these products are not always effective at whitening the teeth in general, let alone removing difficult stains. Even if you do see some changes, the changes don’t last very long.
Furthermore, if you have artificial tooth restorations, including dentures, dental bridges, veneers, bonded teeth, tooth-coloured fillings, or crowns, they are resistant to the whitening and bleaching agents found in commercial “over-the-counter” whitening products.
- Professional Dental Cleanings and Teeth Whitening
Regular visits to your dentist do help remove some staining and discolourations. Depending upon the extent of staining and discolouration, there is a wide range of options available to help remove stains and restore the desired whiteness level of your teeth.
For more serious staining and discolourations, your dentist offers professional teeth whitening treatments. The treatments available at your dentist, utilize more effective products and methods than over-the-counter commercial products do not. Plus, they are completely safe and will not damage your teeth. In the event of severe pitting, chipped teeth, or badly discoloured teeth that are not able to be effectively whitened, your dentist has other viable solutions to getting the white teeth you desire, like dental veneers. Veneers are tooth-coloured, thin layers of porcelain-made materials applied directly over the tooth surface to hide and cover up any imperfections, while further protecting the tooth from further staining and damage.
Before using any teeth whitening product, it is highly recommended to consult with your dentist to discuss your desired whiteness level and objectives. Your dentist can help you determine the most appropriate methods and treatments to use to give you the vibrant and beautiful smile you deserve.
For more information about teeth whitening treatments and other options, or to schedule a consultation appointment, feel free to contact us, here at Dentistry in Waterloo by calling (519) 885-5880 today.