Last Name 2
Demby, Gene. “The Birth of a new Civil Rights Movement” Current Issues and enduring questions. Boston, New York; Bedford/St. Matins Macmillan Learning, 2017. Pages 488-494
This article talks about how in 2014, the new social justice movement became a force that the political part of the regular majority of people had to figure out/think with. In fact, if you wanted a megaphone for a movement started and led by young people of color, you'd have a hard time to find a better one than Twitter, whose users distort younger and browner than the public, which often has the effect of magnifying that group's broad (things that are the most important) and fascinations. It's not a coincidence that the Twitter verse helped surface and magnify the stories of Trayvon Martin and Eric Garner and Michael Brown. They're trying to take on deeply dug in/established (unfair treatment based on skin color, age, etc.) that is fueled less by showy prejudice than (related to the deep-down, basic way something works), understood biases.
Three, the movement's renewal has exposed a serious generational crack (or argument). It is mostly a bottom-up movement being led by young unknowns who have rejected, sometimes angrily, the thought (made beforehand) of leadership thrust on them by (person with lots of experience/person who served in the military) famous people like Al Sharpton. While both the younger and older (people who use action and strong words to support or oppose something) both trace their family to the (the right to vote, to free speech, to fair and equal treatment, etc.,) movement, they seem to match up/make even themselves with different parts of that family tree. And in (more than two, but not a lot of) ways, these modern tensions are updates of the disagreements that marked the earlier movement.
Board, The Editorial. “Political Lies About Police Brutality.” The New York Times, 27 Oct. 2015, www.nytimes.com/2015/10/27/opinion/political-lies-about-police-brutality.html?partner=bloomberg.
This kind of public close attention is all to the good, given the damage police animal-like violence has done to African-American communities for generations and the (causing slow chemical destruction) effect it has on the wider (community of people/all good people in the world). This movement focuses on the definitely true fact that black people (who lawfully live in a country, state, etc.) are far more likely than whites to die at the hands of the police. The more the country ignores that truth, the greater the (related to the responsibility of being a member of society) disagreement that will flow from it. This, he said, may have added/have given to an increase in crime.
There is no data suggesting such an effect, and certainly, Mr. Comey has none. But his suggestion plays into the right-wing view that holding the police to (agreeing with, or related to, the Constitution) standards...