Secure CheckoutPersonal information is secured with SSL technology.
Free ShippingFree global shipping
No minimum order.
Energy & Resource Development of Continental Margins is a collection of papers that addresses issues in the development of energy technology and exploration of energy sources. The title first covers concerns in geological and geochemical explorations. Next, the selection deals with the issues in utilizing novel methods for energy resource recovery. The text also tackles environmental constraints and pollutant analysis. The last section talks about the social impact and safety of onshore and offshore activities. The book will be of great use to scientists, engineers, and technicians involved in the research, development, and implementation of energy technology.
List of Contributors and Their Affiliations
I. Geological and Geochemical Exploration
1. Exploring for Oil and Gas on the Continental Shelf
2. Seismic Risk and Resource Development in the Coastal Zone
3. Estimated Undiscovered Recoverable Oil and Gas Resources of the Continental Shelf of the United States
4. Offshore Frontier Basins of the Pacific States and Alaska: Some Generalizations about Their Geologic Setting and Petroleum Potential
II. Novel Energy and Resource Recovery Methods
5. Energy and the Oceans: Myths and Realities
6. Novel Methods for Recovery of Marine Kerogen and Bitumen
7. Urban and Fish Processing Wastes in the Marine Environment: A Case of Wasted Energy at Terminal Island, California
8. A Comparison of the Alcan Plan with the Methanol Approach for Prudhoe Bay Natural Gas
III. Environmental Constraints and Pollutant Analysis
9. Variability in Response of Marine Organisms to Petroleum under Different Conditions
10. The Use of GC/MS in the Identification and Analysis of Organic Pollutants in Water
11. Development of a Novel Hydrocarbon-in-Water Monitor
12. Has the Clean Air Act Really Stopped Industrial Growth?
IV. Social Impact and Safety of Onshore and Offshore Activities
13. Crude Oil Transportation and Oil Spills: A Brief Overview of the Implications for Southern California
14. The LNG Decision Problem
15. The Management of Federal Energy Resources in the United States
16. The Regulatory Nightmare: Catch 22!
17. OCS Impact on Recreation — The Southern California View
18. Effects of a Power Plant Effluent on Intertidal Organisms at Humboldt Bay, California
- No. of pages:
- © Pergamon 1980
- 1st January 1980
- eBook ISBN: