This free one year kid’s devotional study thru the Bible is designed to hit the highlights, provide practical application and requires no preparation. If you have a little more time, I encourage you to read the whole section of scripture (Exodus 20) while we focus in on just a few verses in 5 minutes.
Background: God inspired Moses to write the first five books in the Bible. The book of Exodus is all about God’s miraculously assisting His special nation (Israel) to leave their 400 year slavery in Egypt in order to return to their promised land. Along the way God provides His people with a special tent of meeting and specific jobs and ceremonies for them to perform to enable Him to remain with them.
The Israelites had now been freed from slavery in Egypt and were in the wilderness in Sinai. They had no resources except for God to rely upon. As this journey began God provided them with a game plan for their journey, we call it the 10 commandments.
Ask the children…
What reminder did God give to the people before He gave them the 10 commandments and why did He remind them?
“I am the Lord your God, who rescued you from the land of Egypt, the place of your slavery.’” (Exodus 20:2)
The Israelites needed to be reminded who it was who was giving these rules to live by. This was their God who loved them and miraculously saved them from slavery. He had their best interest at heart. These rules were God’s best for them. What was the first commandment?
“You must not have any other god but me.” (Exodus 20:3)
The very first commandment reminds the people that God is their sole provider and the one to whom they owe their complete allegiance. No one else brought them out of Egypt, not a man or another God nor themselves. There is only one God, worship Him only.
Ask your children if they trust God? How do they know? God knew that there would be many times where His people’s faith in Him would be tested. They needed to choose up front that they would trust only Him. Say out loud right now that you will trust God no matter what happens in your lives.
If you like what you read about ways to teach children the Bible, check out the children’s book, Hooked on the Book, on this website. It is great for parents and kids because it provides the Big Story of God’s miraculous plan for His children in all 66 books in the Bible. CHECK OUT A FREE SAMPLE OF CHAPTER ONE BELOW.