La Paz, Bolivia
In January 2010, Bolivia’s President Evo Morales began his second term by appointing a new cabinet in which women are equally represented for the first time. Morales, Bolivia’s first president from the nation’s long-oppressed indigenous majority, is leading a revolutionary process of transformation.
However, despite such progressive reforms, many of Bolivia’s poorest women remain ignorant of and excluded from their country’s laws and policies. Limited access to basic education, health care and human and civil rights awareness continues to damage women’s lives and prevent them from playing a full, active part within their families, their community and their country.
In addition, a powerful combination of tradition and deeply entrenched cultural concepts, particularly that of machismo, restricts social change and hinders women’s ability to fully participate in, and benefit from, their country’s gradual economic and political development. Bolivian men continue to receive more and better, education, health care and higher incomes when employed. Bolivian women, particularly indigenous women, are subject to a patriarchal culture which promotes humiliation and domestic servitude and sees all too many women suffer as victims of widespread domestic violence.
Bolivian women also face significant discrimination and inequality in terms of employment. Of those women who can find work, they generally earn half the income of a man employed in the same position and with the same education.
But with the help of Morales new transformation of the country, the women of Bolivia are proving that women can fight and win for their rights as women and for a radically new type of society based on equality and self-determination by the people.
Camera: Canon G9
We know too much…
A collection of images taken in and around Viti Levu, the largest of the Fijian Islands…
Flares & Train Yards
Find a derelict train yard in London, get some SOS Marine Flares, then swing them about in front of a camera. The following set of photos does
Borneo – Indonesia
Borneo Indonesia Orangutans are a species of great ape found only in South East Asia on the islands of Borneo and Sumatra. The gentle red ape
Land of the Gauchos
Land of the Gauchos The term gaucho comes from the word ‘huacho’ meaning ‘orphan’ or ‘vagabond’. It was coined in the 18th century to refer to
Jawa(Java) Indonesia Java is the most populous island in Indonesia providing many contrasts of scenery, people, religions and cultures. With 120
Vida Na Favela
VidaNaFavela Rio de Janiro, Brazil A ‘fevela’ is the generally accepted term for a shanty town in Brazil. Its approximated that
MujeresBolivianas La Paz, Bolivia In January 2010, Bolivia’s President Evo Morales began his second term by appointing a new cabinet in which
Amazonia Iquitos, Peru Nearly 2,000 miles up-river from the mouth of the Amazon lies the jungle-locked city of Iquitos. Accessible only by boat
FiberglassSalvation Tierra Santa, Buenos Aires Parque Tierra Santa was built in 2000 as the world’s first religiously themed amusement park. Amid