Importance or Role of Business Communication
Business communication occurs between two or more parties to exchange business related information. The success of business depends on the efficacy of business communication. For this, communication is regarded as the life-blood of business. The role / importance of business communication are discussed below:
Exchanging information: Communication is mainly the exchange of information between two or more parties. Through communication, organizations exchange information with internal and external parties. Communication also brings dynamism in organizational activities and helps in attaining goals.
Preparing plans and policies: Communication helps in preparing organizational plans and policies. Realistic plans and policies require adequate and relevant information managers collect required insanitation from reliable sources through communication.
Execution of plans and policies: For timely implementation of plans and policies, managers must disseminate those in the whole organization. In order to disseminate the plans and policies to the internal and external panics, managers rely on communication.
Increasing employees’ efficiency: Communication also helps in increasing the efficiency of employee. With the help of communication, organizational objectives, plans, policies, rules, directives and other complex matters are explained to the employees that broaden their knowledge and thus help them to be efficient.
Achieving goals: Effective communication helps the employees at all levels to be conscious and attentive. It ensures timely accomplishment of jobs and easy achievement of goals.
Solving problems: Through various communication channels, the managers can be informed of various routine and non-time problems of the organization. And accordingly they take necessary actions or steps to solve the problems.
Making decision: Making timely decision requires updated information. Through effective communication, managers can collect information from different corners and can make right decisions.
Improving industrial relation: Industrial relation is the relation between workers and management in work place. Good industrial relation is always desired for business success. Communication plays a vital role in creating and maintaining good industrial relation.
Publicity of goods and services: In modem age, businesses are becoming highly competitive. Almost every competing manufacturer produces products of common consumption. However, all of them cannot sell equally well. The organization that can communicate better, can also sell better.
Removing controversies: Effective communication allows smooth flow of information among various parties involved in negotiation or transaction.