Lisa Harp has developed an at-home system to help enhance the building blocks of learning. Below is a guest post from www.learning-aids.com.
Dealing with a Learning Problem? You May Need a New Approach.
The definition of insanity is doing the same thing over and over again and expecting different results. Einstein coined this phrase, and it holds true now more than ever, especially when referring to academic success and how we help those students who are struggling to learn.
Traditional approaches to solving learning problems will take a student who has been in a classroom all day, a fatigued learner, who is not able to learn with methods being taught, and try to teach that student more of what didn’t work all day. This is insane! For progress to be made, the student needs to be taught in a different way.
Piling on more academics when dealing with a student who is not performing well academically can be a recipe for disaster.
The solution is neuro-sensory educational therapy (NSET). NSET takes students back to the very basic level of learning – gross motor skills. Skills that may not have been formed in development. The NSET program is now available as a program you can do at home with your child. The system is very easy to follow and highly effective at correcting learning problems. You can find the complete system at http://www.learning-aids.com
Babies are not born hard wired for every task. They wire their brains as they develop. Tasks that cross the vertical midline (crawling) are what helps them develop. Developing gross motor skills is the first and most necessary step that needs to take place to build a proper learning foundation for students. This is what may have been missed and without it learning success is nearly impossible.
NSET first develops gross motor skills and once those skills are in place, NSET moves the student into the visual level. 75-90 percent of what we take in is visual, so this is a very important step in the learning success. NSET works students on visual processing skills as well as eye tracking, visual closure, visual discrimination, visual memory, and visual motor integration. These skills are vitally important for students to be able to read, write, spell, and perform basic mathematical operations. Yet, students are rarely taught these skills with traditional approaches. Instead, they are fed another dose of academics.
NSET breaks the academics down into smaller pieces and slowly build up the learning foundation.
Next, NSET takes the student into an auditory level. So many students struggle to hear correctly or fail to filter out extraneous information. It is extremely important for a student to be able to hear sounds correctly to read, write, and spell. Students work on auditory discrimination, auditory closure, auditory memory, auditory processing, and basic following of directions to prepare students academically as well as to sit in a classroom and listen and correctly process a teacher’s lecture.
As an added bonus, focusing skills will come into play naturally once the student’s visual and auditory skills are in place. Many students are misdiagnosed as having ADD, when in fact they are struggling to focus because of distractions in their environment or weak learning systems. It is hard to focus if you can’t tune out background noises or if the letters on your pages are wiggling and not holding still.
While working with the student’s sensory learning systems, it’s important to also incorporate brain retraining activities that help the student strengthen the communication between the left and right hemispheres of the brain as well as build new neural pathways in the brain. This is a specific, step by step process where basic skills such as eye tracking are strengthened and slowly multi-step thinking and processing skills are attained.
Although this approach is not traditional in the sense that it is not a dose of more academics, this method of helping students overcome learning differences has been used successfully for almost 15 years. Students who have failed to learn with other approaches find success, usually within 12 to 18 months with consistent application. And, there is nothing better than watching a student go from failure to success, both academically and in life.
Whether you are concerned about a minor learning difference or you are dealing with something more serious such as needing treatment for dysgraphia (trouble with writing), Dyscalculia Treatment (Like dyslexia for math), or dyslexia treatment NSET might be just what you are looking for. You can find lots more information at http://www.learning-aids.com
Information given and opinions expressed above are from the guest blogger.