if it is your first time to attend a yoga class, you might be surprised to hear some strange words being said during the class. Indeed, there are many terms you will hear during your yoga sessions which are really important and we will learn their meanings below. Yoga can improve many aspects of your life. But to get the better of this spiritual exercise, you need to understand the yoga phrases used in your class.
The yoga phrases you will hear in your class are in Sanskrit which is the language of yoga. 49 letters are used in this language. Learning the words used in your class can lead you to a deeper understanding of yoga which makes you have a stronger practice.
One of the words that you will hear often is asana. When you hear the word asana, think of your posture or the pose that you are doing. These are the poses that you will assume in your yoga class.
Most everyone know what the word namaste means. It means the divine within me honors the divine within you and is used to close a practice.
Another word used in yoga class is om which means to unify you with creation and the divine. It is a symbol. In order to help connect you during meditation practice the word om is mentioned repeatedly. When you meditate, there are many different forms that you can use. You can be using mala beads in your meditation practice. Some include guided practice and quiet, inward solo intention. There are really no wrong ways to meditate. If you add this to your daily practice it can further connect you to your understanding.
Yoga classes are also described in Sanskrit names. In order to know what will go on in the practice, it is good to know what these names mean.
A vinyasa is a class of flowing movement. Asana movements such as sun salutations are used in this class.
Another yoga style that you can practice is the Kundalini. Breathwork, asanas, meditation, and spiritual connection are the focus of this class. It is more than just making poses.
Bikram yoga is something that will make you sweat. It is more of physical workouts done in this type of yoga class that turns up the heat.
The most important element practice is the desire to learn more. Having an open heart and an open mind will lead you to find deeper connections to all the things that you care about.
If you want to learn more about yoga and its practice you can go to this website which is a dedicated website for yoga practitioners.