Population with Any Disability
The American Community Survey (ACS) is a nationwide, continuous survey designed to provide communities with reliable and timely demographic, housing, social, and economic data. The ACS samples nearly 3 million addresses each year, resulting in nearly 2 million final interviews. The ACS replaces the long-form decennial census; however, the number of household surveys reported annually for the ACS is significantly less than the number reported in the long-form decennial census. As a result, the ACS combines detailed population and housing data from multiple years to produce reliable estimates for small counties, neighborhoods, and other local areas. Negotiating between timeliness and accuracy, the ACS annually releases current, one-year estimates for geographic areas with large populations; three-year and five-year estimates are also released each year for additional areas based on minimum population thresholds.
Citation: U.S. Census Bureau: A Compass for Understanding and Using American Community Survey Data (2008).
For more information about this source, including data collection methodology and definitions, refer to the American Community Survey website.
Counts of population subgroups and total area population data are acquired from the U.S. Census Bureau’s American Community Survey (ACS). Data represent estimates for the 5 year period 2011-2015. Mapped data are summarized to 2010 census tract boundaries. Disability status is classified in the ACS according to yes/no responses to questions (17 - 19) about six types of disability concepts. For children under 5 years old, hearing and vision difficulty are used to determine disability status. For children between the ages of 5 and 14, disability status is determined from hearing, vision, cognitive, ambulatory, and self-care difficulties. For people aged 15 years and older, they are considered to have a disability if they have difficulty with any one of the six difficulty types. Indicator statistics are measured as a percentage of the total universe (non-institutionalized) population using the following formula:
Percentage = [Subgroup Population] / [Total Population] * 100
For more information on the data reported in the American Community Survey, please see the complete American Community Survey 2015 Subject Definitions.
Race and Ethnicity
Race and ethnicity (Hispanic origin) are collected as two separate categories in the American Community Survey (ACS) based on methods established by the U.S. Office of Management and Budget (OMB) in 1997. Indicator race and ethnicity statistics are generated from self-identified survey responses. Using the OMB standard, the available race categories in the ACS are: White, Black, American Indian/Alaskan Native, Asian, and Other. An ACS survey respondent may identify as one race alone, or may choose multiple races. Respondents selecting multiple categories are racially identified as “Two or More Races”. The minimum ethnicity categories are: Hispanic or Latino, and Not Hispanic or Latino. Respondents may only choose one ethnicity. All social and economic data are reported in the ACS public use files by race alone, ethnicity alone, and for the white non-Hispanic population.
Beginning in 2006, the population in group quarters (GQ) was included in the ACS. Some types of GQ populations have age and sex distributions that are very different from the household population. The inclusion of the GQ population could therefore have a noticeable impact on demographic distribution. This is particularly true for areas with a substantial GQ population (like areas with military bases, colleges, or jails)..
Courtesy: Community Commons, <www.communitycommons.org>, October 2017