Here are the screening tests and immunizations that most women ages 50 to 64 need. A screening test is done to find possible health problems or diseases in people who don't have any symptoms. The goal is to find a disease early so lifestyle changes can be made and you can be watched more closely to lower the risk of disease, or to find it early enough to treat it most effectively. Screening tests are not diagnostic. But they are used to find out if more testing is needed. Health counseling is vital, too. You and your healthcare provider may decide that a different schedule is best for you. But this plan can guide your discussion.
Who needs it
Type 2 diabetes or prediabetes
All adults starting at age 45 and adults without symptoms at any age who are overweight or obese and have 1 or more additional risk factors for diabetes
At least every 3 years
At routine exams
Yearly checkup if your blood pressure is normal.
Normal blood pressure is less than 120/80 mmHg.1
If your blood pressure reading is higher than normal, follow the advice of your healthcare provider.
Yearly mammogram should be done until age 54. At age 55, switch to mammograms every other year. Or you may choose to continue yearly mammograms.2
All women, except those who have had a hysterectomy with removal of the cervix for reasons not related to cervical cancer and have no history of cervical cancer or serious precancer
Pap test every 3 years or Pap test with human papillomavirus (HPV) test every 5 years
Women at a higher risk for infection
All women of average risk in this age group
According to the American Cancer Society (ACS):
For tests that find polyps and cancer:
Flexible sigmoidoscopy every 5 years, or
Colonoscopy every 10 years, or
CT colonography (virtual colonoscopy) every 5 years
For tests that primarily find cancer:
Yearly fecal occult blood test, or
Yearly fecal immunochemical test every year, or
Stool DNA test, every 3 years
You will need a follow-up colonoscopy if you choose any test other than a colonoscopy and you have an abnormal result. Screening recommendations vary among expert groups. Talk with your doctor about which test is best for you.
Some people should be screened using a different schedule because of their personal or family history. Talk with your doctor about your health history and what colorectal cancer screening schedule is best for you.
All adults in clinical practices that have staff and systems in place to assure accurate diagnosis, effective treatment, and follow-up
Sexually active women at a higher risk for infection
At routine exams if at risk
Adults at a higher risk; 1 time for those born between 1945 and 1965
High cholesterol and triglycerides
All women ages 45 and older at a higher risk for coronary artery disease
At least every 5 years
Adults age 55 to 80 who have smoked
Yearly screening in smokers with 30-pack per year history of smoking or who quits within 15 years
Osteoporosis, postmenopausal women
Women at age 60 who are at a higher risk for fractures caused by osteoporosis
Check with your health care provider
Adults at a higher risk for infection
Check with your healthcare provider.
Check with your healthcare provider for exam frequency.
Aspirin for prevention of cardiovascular problems
Recommended for women ages 55 to 79 years when the potential benefit of reducing strokes outweighs the potential harm of an increase in gastrointestinal bleeding
When risk is identified; talk with your healthcare provider before starting
Breast cancer, chemoprevention
Women at high risk
When risk is identified
BRCA mutation testing for breast and ovarian cancer susceptibility
Women with a higher risk
Diet and exercise
Women who are overweight or obese
Sexually transmitted disease prevention
Tobacco use and tobacco-related disease
Haemophilus influenzae B type
At risk adults
1 to 3 doses
Tetanus/diphtheria/pertussis (Td/Tdap) booster)
One-time Tdap booster, then Td every 10 years
Measles, mumps, rubella (MMR)
Adults in this age group through their late 50s who have no previous infection or documented vaccinations6
1 to 2 doses
Adults ages 50 to 64 who have no previous infection or documented vaccinations6
2 doses; the second dose should be given at least 4 weeks after the first dose.
Flu vaccine (seasonal)
Yearly, when the vaccine becomes available in the community
Hepatitis A vaccine
People at risk7
2 doses given at least 6 months apart
Hepatitis B vaccine
High risk adults
3 doses; second dose should be given 1 month after the first dose; the third dose should be given at least 2 months after the second dose (and at least 4 months after the first dose)
People at risk6
1 or more doses
PCV13: 1 dose ages 19 to 65 (protects against 13 types of pneumococcal bacteria)
PPSV23: 1 to 2 doses through age 64, or 1 dose at 65 or older (protects against 23 types of pneumococcal bacteria)
All women ages 60 and older6
1. American College of Cardiology and the American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines
2. American Cancer Society
3. If the test is positive, a colonoscopy should be done.
4. The multiple stool take-home test should be used. One test done by the healthcare provider in the office is not adequate for testing. A colonoscopy should be done if the test is positive.
5. Recommendation from the American Academy of Ophthalmology
6. Exceptions may exist. Please check with your healthcare provider.
7. For complete list, see the CDC website.
Other guidelines from the USPSTF
Immunization schedule from the CDC