Santorini Magic (One day)
According to legend, Santorini rose up from the depths of the sea and this, in combination with the eruption of the volcano, has led scientists to correlate and compare it to the lost city of Atlantis. The first signs of life were evident as far back as the mid-3rd century B.C. (Early Copper Age). The first name given to the island was Strongyle (“the circular one”) due to its shape. According to Herodotus however, the island was later renamed to Kalliste (“the most beautiful one”) due to its incomparable beauty. Once the island was colonized by Spartans (following the Phoenicians) the island changed its name to Thera, named the after the Spartan leader of the time. Finally, the name Santorini, which is a contraction of the name Santa Irini, was given to the island by the Latin Empire referencing the name of the old cathedral of Saint Irene; the ruins of which were discovered in 1992 at the foot of the mountain in the village of Perissa.
The large volcanic eruptions of circa 1613B.C. (Late Copper Age), and the following collapse of the volcano’s magma chamber/reservoir, lead to the formation of the caldera (a large underwater cauldron-like depression).
The rare natural beauty, the rich history and the unique geomorphology of Santorini have contributed to it becoming one of the world’s top and most sought after destinations. It has become the subject of study for numerous influential scientists as well as an inspiration to famous poets and writers. It is worth noting that the island was even mentioned in Jules Verne’s novel “20,000 Leagues Under the Sea”, as well as Santorini being his main source inspiration in writing his novel “The Mysterious Island”.
Highlights/What you will see!
The wondrous capital of Santorini majestically dominates the west side of the island, built high up on the sharp Cliffside at an altitude of 250 meters above sea level. White-washed houses, scenic alleyways and important museums (Museum of Prehistoric Thera, Archaeological Museum of Thera, Megaro Gizi) make up a Cyclades settlement of outstanding beauty which simultaneously has all the necessary infrastructure (hotels, restaurants, commercial shops) so as to satisfy even the most demanding visitors.
The “Crown of Fira”, as the name suggest, make up a separate settlement on the outskirts of Fira. The walk from Firostefani to Fira constitutes a truly unique experience since it highlights the view of the Caldera and all of its splendor. From all the sights what truly stands out is the blue dome of Aghioi Theodoroi church (Saints Theodore) which has been featured is countless pictures and images worldwide.
At the north section of the island, at a distance of 11 kilometers from Fira, resides the settlement of Oia, which a true architectural gem… with its rock-hewn buildings and imposing so-called “captains’ houses”. Its renowned sunset provides a magical and almost spiritual experience, with people arriving from around the world so as at to gaze at its enchanting grandeur.
The beautiful and gorgeous beaches of Perissa and of Perivolos together comprise an extensive coastline which surpasses 5 kilometers. The fine black sand, the crystal clear water and all the comforts provided by an organized beachfronts creates ideal conditions for all visitors that wish to truly enjoy the sea and taste exquisite local dishes.
THE ANCIENT VINEYARDS
Excavation finding reveal that grapes were grown and cultivated on the island at least since the 17th century BC. The ancient vine varieties, the unique climate and ecosystem of Santorini and the fertile volcanic soil contribute to the production of high quality wine. The rock-hewn wineries constitute quite a wonderful and rustic sightseeing destination for the island.
Approximately 10 hours.
Every Monday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, and Sunday based on the language you prefer.
The time of departure from your hotel is according to its location and its sometime between 06:30 and 07:30a.m
Return Time back to your hotel is according to its location and its sometime between 19:00 and 20:00.
What is Included.
Boat Tickets with High Speed Vessel.
Port pick-up and drop-off.
Transport in air-conditioned vehicle.
The pick-up and drop off from your hotel is included in the price.
What is Excluded.
Excursion to the Volcano(16€)
(Please note that the above fees are NOT included in the price you will pay online - they are payable before entering the boat)
Drinks or beverages during the tour.
Anything that is not specified in the program as included
Excursion Schedule in Detail
08.40 Departure for Santorini
10.25 Arrival in Santorini - Athinios port
Information about Santorini Guided Tours to Oia - Fira - Perissa / Perivolos Beach
17.00 Departure from Santorini
Children up to 4 years old are free. All children up to 18 years old must be accompanied by their legal guardians.
Confirmation will be received within 48 hours of booking, subject to availability.
Make sure you bring with you a good sun protection cream, a hat, swimsuit, a towel, a bottle of water and your good mood!
You will receive an email with your voucher and all details.
During the departure you will have to present either a printed copy of the voucher you will receive by email or just show it on your smartphone.
Please have with you a copy of your passport.
We accept cancellations as long as they are 7 day before departure. In such case the full amount will be refunded. Otherwise please see Terms and Conditions.
We reserve the right to cancel or alter the date or times or the schedule of the excursion at any moment.
If you wish further information about the excursion please do not hesitate to contact us at email@example.com.