Defined memory (section health) as the power of the soul which is retained and recalls the past. The memory Word may mean an act or a faculty. As faculty, is the capacity or virtue of recognizing past own conditions (passes), as own and past. Considered as Act is also called I remember. Keepsake is essentially a knowledge that represents:-directly the conditions experienced in another time, – indirectly by such conditions objects perceived, – implicitly evident also in some way, the relationship of connection between the subject who perceives, the perceived object and the perception of it.
Memory is a very complex act. So are souvenir of a fact from an emotion, it is necessary to be checked there is left a mark, by which it is possible to reproduce it, distinguishing it from other current events that affect us; at the time of reproduction in us and not confusing it with those who preceded him and continued, to form a series, so locating them in time with them. The elements comprising the Act of memory are four: 1) fixation and preservation of the image or concept; (2) flashback; 3) recognition, and 4) location in time. Views of some philosophers: Plato called soteria aistheseos memory. It failed to distinguish between memory as such and the Faculty of retaining in general. For him, learning, it wasn’t more than recall. Aristotle taught that memory is a faculty that spontaneously and naturally puts before the mind the past, (mneme which means memory); and anamnesis (reminiscence), is called when it does that same through research of the reason itself.
Plotinus, said that memory and recollection were modes of fantasy, consisting of some act of reflection by which the mind contemplates the intelligible and sensitive things that have with you. Descartes, supports two memories: one for material objects (consists of processes purely mechanical and material remains), and another for intellectuals (explained by certain tracks produced in the knowledge of a totally unknown mode. Locke believed that memory was part of the faculty who called, consistent retention in power again stimulate the past experiences. Hume, believed that memory and sensation were two phenomena of a same sensitive virtue, which differ not in kind but in the degree of intensity and vividness. Section health; In addition to other topics, you will find how to improve memory in a fast and easy way. All items of proven quality: sports, computing, entertainment, painting, languages, and more.