-ation, -ization (-iz[e] + -ation); -isation (British spelling variation)
(Greek > Latin: a suffix; action, act, process, state, or condition; or result of doing something)
Although there are over 1,450 word entries ending with -ation or -ization listed in this unit, there are certainly many more which exist in the English language. At any rate, this unit provides a significant number of -ation and -ization examples for you to see.
2. The form, as of a figure, determined by the arrangement of its elements: The seating pattern, or configuration, in an airplane may have a two-seat or a four-seat combination with two aisles leading lengthwise.
3. In psychology, gestalt or a set of things; such as, a person's thoughts and experiences considered as a whole and regarded as amounting to more than the sum of its parts: After her divorce, Sandra built up a new configuration of friends, interests and activities in her life.
4. In computer science, the way in which a computer system is set up: The configuration of Tom's computer was changed by resetting the parameters.
The set of constituent components; such as, memory, a hard disk, a monitor, and an operating system, all make up a computer's system of configurations.
Go to this Word A Day Revisited Index
so you can see more of Mickey Bach's cartoons.
2. Something that supports, validates, or verifies something else: "He said it was a confirmation of his worst thoughts."
3. In Christianity, a religious ceremony that marks someone's formal acceptance into a church.
4. In Reform Judaism, a ceremony that marks the completion of someone's religious training and entry into full adult membership of the community.
2. Very intense and uncontrolled blazes: In the summer of 2016, there were many places of conflagrations that were going on in Southern California which could not be contained for many weeks and had burned large sections of land and houses.
3. A large and destructive fire; a general burning: Because a camper forgot to put out his small campfire properly one night, a great conflagration rapidly spread throughout the forests killing many animals and demolishing a lot of fir and redwood trees.
4. A large and violent event; such as, a war involving many people: After the 30-year conflagration of the two countries, they were finally able to resolve their conflicts and make peace with each other.
5. Etymology: from Latin conflagrationem; from conflagrare, "to burn up"; fromcon-, "with, together" + flagare, "to burn".
2. The process or result of fusing items into one entity; such as, fusion, amalgamation.
3. The combination of two variant texts into a new one.
4. Combining or blending of two or more versions of a text; confusion or mixing up.
2. The process of showing that something is false or illogical or showing that someone has a false, invalid, or illogical argument: Point by point, the defense lawyer, Mr. Lawson, made a confutation of the arguments put forth by the prosecutor.
2. A freezing; a congelation; also, a frost.
2. An occurrence combining miscellaneous things into a (more or less) rounded mass.
2. A sum total of many heterogenous things taken together.
3. An occurrence combining miscellaneous things into a (more or less) rounded mass.
2. In grammar, the process of systematically listing the inflected forms of a verb; that is, a form that is different from a basic form; for example, a plural form or tenses.
3. An exchange or transfer of genetic information between two individuals in certain types of unicellular organisms, including bacteria and some protozoa.