A variety of formal and informal assessment methods are used to:
Determine a child’s level of development and, where appropriate, make diagnosis
Identify a child’s strengths and challenges
Set relevant goals for intervention.
Therapy can be delivered either in clinic, at home, in school, preschool or daycare. This is dependent on what the goals are, and the child and families needs.
Service is effective and holistic, and where appropriate, goals are determined through liaison with other relevant health professionals, such as Occupational Therapists, Physiotherapist, Pediatricians, Psychologists, and Educators in schools.
Therapy is intended to be fun in order to maximize the child and families motivation. Parents are provided with skills needed to support their child’s ongoing development at home.
Articulation & Phonology
Articulation is the way individual sounds are produced.Phonology is the substitution or omission of sounds within words and conversation e.g. ‘w’ for ‘r’, and ‘f’ for ‘th’.
Children with articulation or phonological delays can present with unclear speech and have difficulty getting their message across, or just have a few sound errors.
A person has a language difficulty if they have trouble understanding others (receptive language), or sharing thoughts, ideas, and feelings completely (expressive language).
Language skills are essential for, and can impact, learning, behavior, play, social skills, and literacy development.
Stuttering can present as repetition of sounds, words and phrases, blocks and prolongation of sounds. Children who stutter may sound like they are getting ‘stuck’ on their words, or take a long time to get their words out.
Alternative & Augmentative
AAC Systems can be trialed and used with children who are unable to use speech as an effective way of communicating.
Literacy & Phonological
Phonological (or sound) awareness is the knowledge that words are made up of individual sounds and sound patterns. Competency with these skills, application of spelling rules, and language development, is closely related to success with reading and writing.
Pragmatics & Social Skills
Pragmatics is knowing how to use language appropriately in social situations. It involves: Using language for different purposes, such as greetings and farewells; changing language according to the needs of a listener or situation e.g. speaking differently in a classroom than on a playground; and following rules for conversations and storytelling, such as taking turns in conversation.
Play skills are closely related to Speech and Language development. Play also involves joint attention, turn taking, sharing, using toys appropriately, symbolic and pretend play, using appropriate language, being flexible, friendship formation and maintenance.
Swallowing & Feeding
Feeding problems can include difficulty gathering food and getting ready to suck, chew, or swallow. Intervention may involve direct feeding therapy e.g. improving chewing, increasing acceptance of new foods or textures, food temperature and texture changes, postural or positioning changes, behavior management techniques, and referral to other professionals.
Anyone, including family members, can refer to O’Shea Speech Pathology for assessment and therapy, a Dr’s referral is not needed. Referals and enquiries are made by phone or email.
O’Shea Speech Pathology is registered with Medicare and a Hicaps facility is available for payments and claiming.
Above: Speech Generating Device (AAC)
Above: Stimulating Language and Literacy