ABOUT QUAIL EGGS
Quail eggs are considered a delicacy and have been prized as a healing food. While quail eggs are small (10-12 g), they are an abundant source of useful trace elements and vitamins. Their nutritional value is 3-4 times higher than that of chicken eggs. They contain 13% proteins while chicken eggs provide a bit more than 11%. Quail eggs contain more vitamin B1 and twice as much vitamins A and B2 than chicken eggs. Quail eggs provide five times as much iron and potassium as chicken eggs. They also are richer in phosphorus and calcium. Due to their amazing content, quail eggs are considered as a dietary food. They do not contain “bad” cholesterol (LDL) and are very rich in “good” (HDL) cholesterol. Unlike chicken eggs, they do not cause allergies. They can actually help fight allergy symptoms due to the ovomucoid protein that is even used in the production of some anti-allergic drugs.
In 2015 we will be introducing our Rendezvous Farm Cookbook that will have recipes for all the meat and egg products we sell.
Hardboiling and Peeling Quail Eggs
Place quail eggs in cool water with a pinch of salt and bring to a light boil. Turn off heat and let sit for 5 minutes. Stir frequently to prevent yolks from settling to one side. Pour off hot water and cool in cold water. The eggs peel easier when they are about 1 week old before cooking. To peel, roll egg on a hard surface to crack it all over the shell. Pinch a piece of the shell off the fat end and then peel the rest of the fat end. Peel a strip down the side and across the pointy end. Then just unwrap the egg. As an option to peeling, the shell can be dissolved in full strength vinegar for about 12 hours, agitating every several hours. This still leaves the egg enclosed in a skin-like membrane. The skins can then be removed easily by hand, washed in clean water and canned, pickled or refrigerated.
QUAIL EGG RECIPES
Quail eggs can be used as substitutes for chicken eggs in any recipe at the rate of 5 standard size quail eggs or 3 giant size quail eggs to replace 1 large chicken egg. The best method of breaking quail eggs is to carefully cut the shell around the middle with a paring knife rather than breaking them on the edge of pan.
Hardboiled Quail Eggs
Place 2- 5 dozen quail eggs in cool water with a pinch of salt and bring to a light boil. Turn off heat and let set for 5 minutes. Stir frequently to prevent yolks from settling to one side. Pour off hot water and cool in cold water. The eggs peel easier right after cooking and if they are about 1 week old before cooking. As an option to peeling, the shell can be dissolved in full strength vinegar for about 12 hours, agitating every several hours. This still leaves the egg enclosed in a skin-like membrane. The skins can then be removed easily by hand, washed in clean water and canned, pickled or refrigerated.
Hardboiled quail eggs taste just like bite sized chicken eggs. They make delicious appetizers, snacks or can be used to dress up salads. They can be pickled (following standard canning procedures) by adding hot, white vinegar (diluted to taste), salt and pepper, and such things as bacon bits, polish sausage or hot peppers for flavor. Let stand for 24 to 48 hours before serving. Here are a few ideas on how to use them.
1. Peeled: dipped in sea salt and eaten with a drink.
2. Coat eggs with lemon mayonnaise (approx. 6 eggs per person). Serve on a bed of salad.
3. Heat eggs in cheese sauce. Sprinkle with cheese and brown under the grill.
4. Heat eggs in curry sauce and serve with rice.
Miniature Scotch Eggs
Rendezvous Farm quail eggs
Hard boil quail eggs, remove the shells, coat in flour and wrap in sausage meat, then coat in bread crumbs. Deep fry for a few minutes.
Fancy Pickled Quail Eggs
12 hardboiled Rendezvous Farm quail eggs
1 tbsp. pickling spices
1 ½ cups mild vinegar
2 medium sized pieces of root ginger
3 tbsp. tarragon vinegar
½ tsp. salt
Place vinegars, spices and salt together in a pan and simmer all ingredients for 15 minutes. Place shelled eggs in a bowl and completely cover with the pickling solution. When the eggs and mixture have cooled, cover the bowl and place it in a refrigerator for at least 24 hours. Food coloring may be added to the pickling solution as desired.
Rendezvous Farm Appetizers
12 raw Rendezvous Farm quail eggs
12 large mushroom caps
1 or 2 slices bacon
Wash and gently remove stem from large mushroom caps; drain. Slice bacon into matchstick size pieces and brown in sauté pan; drain. Arrange a few pieces of bacon in each mushroom cap. Break a quail egg on top of the bacon in each mushroom cap; salt and pepper to taste. Bake at 375 until whites are cooked and yolks are done to your taste (good runny or hard). The best method of breaking quail eggs is to carefully cut the shell around the middle with a paring knife rather than breaking them on the edge of pan.
Nutritional Information egg, raw, quail (one egg, 9 g)
Total Fat 1 g
Saturated Fat 0.3 g
Polyunsaturated Fat 01. g
Monounsaturated Fat 0.4 g
Cholesterol 76 mg
Sodium 13 mg
Potassium 12 mg
Total Carbohydrate 0 g
Dietary Fiber 0 g
Sugar 0 g
Protein 1.2 g