When Mary Magdalene, Mary the mother of James and John, and Salome arrived at the tomb, the stone had already been rolled back. There was quiet all around. They peered in. It was empty. Again, we go to the Gospel of St. Matthew.
“And the Angel said to the women: `Fear not, for I know that you seek Jesus, Who was crucified. He is not here, for He is risen, as He said. Come and see the place where the Lord was laid. Go quickly, tell all His disciples that He is risen, and behold, He will go before you into Galilee, there you shall see Him.'” (Matt 28:5)
Mary Magdalene and the other two women ran back to the Upper Room, as quickly as they could. They were completely out of breath, when they arrived. Mary Magdalene spoke first to Peter and John. She recounted to them what the Angel had said. The Apostles and disciples didn’t believe any of it. But Peter and John immediately ran to the tomb. It was still very early in the morning. When they arrived, the soldiers were not to be seen anywhere. They went to the tomb, and peered inside. It was as the women had told them, only there was no Angel in attendance. John went inside the tomb. He believed. Peter, on the other hand, went home amazed at what he had seen. (Luke 24:12)
Mary Magdalene returned to the tomb. She looked around, not really knowing what she was trying to find. She saw two Angels sitting inside the tomb. They spoke to her. “Woman, why are you weeping?” She responded, “Because the Lord has been taken away and I do not know where they have put Him.” (John 20:13) She sensed the presence of someone behind her. She turned around and saw Jesus, but she did not recognize Him. He repeated the question, the Angels had asked her. “Woman, why are you weeping? Who is it you are looking for?”
She was in a frenzy. She didn’t want to engage in conversation. She wanted to find Jesus! She pleaded with the Man, trying to control herself, as she was a little out of sorts, “Sir, if you are the one who carried Him off, tell me where you have Laid Him, and I will take Him away.” (John 20:15) It only took one word from Jesus to open the eyes of Mary. He called to her, so tenderly, “Mary”. She immediately recognized that it was He, her Master, her God. She reached for Him, crying out “Rabboni”, which means Teacher. He cautioned her,
“Do not cling to Me, for I have not yet ascended to the Father. Rather, go to My brothers and tell them, `I am ascending to My Father, and your Father, to My God and your God.'” (John 20:15-17)
Now, she didn’t care what anyone said. She had seen the Lord, and that was it. She went back to the disciples, and told them as much. But many of them still could not bring themselves to believe.
For more about the Resurrection and our book on the Rosary go here
Wishing you all a Joyful and Blessed Easter Season!