These days, when the opioid crisis is rampaging through the U.S. it’s important to understand whether drug addiction is a disease or a choice. Most people look at drug addicts as people who prefer this kind of lifestyle, but what’s the reality? Are you looking for ways for overcoming drug addiction? Are you wondering can home doctors help drug addicts? Read at http:/homedoctorsadelaide.com.au/about-us/ to learn more.
Drug addiction is a serious problem and it cannot be simply categorized as either “disease” or “choice”. “Disease” would probably be one of the wrong names to call it because no one wakes up as a drug addict one day. One simply cannot “catch” a drug addiction, like other diseases.
It also cannot be tagged as a “choice”, because no one starts taking drugs understanding, that they will become an addict. Some people take stimulants, such as amphetamines and cocaine, to have fun while they are drinking. These substances are addicting, and some of the users become addicts. A study conducted in the U.S, consisting of more than a thousand people has shown, that only 5-6% of people who have tried cocaine will become addicted to it in a span of two years.
Other substances, like heroin and other opioids, are more addictive. At first, most people have legally prescribed this type of drugs, such as OxyContin and Vicodin, to monitor their pain after surgery or injury. A part of them becomes addicted after the treatment is done. But why only part of the users become addicted?
It all depends on an individual’s environment. An Isolated, depressed, and the marginalized user is more likely to become an addict because such an individual needs a coping mechanism against the world, as they receive no support from their friends or family.
Is drug addiction a disease or a choice? It’s neither. Drug addiction is a complex problem, which requires fundamental solutions. Drug addiction is not a cause for other problems in a person’s life, it’s a symptom. Drug addiction is also not a choice, it’s a cheap tool of escapism when life gets too rough to bear.