What is Cloud Computing? Learn Basics of Cloud Computing
Imagine a situation where you store all your images, videos, files etc. in your smartphone. If you want to transfer, edit, delete or move this data then it can be done through your smartphone only.
All such important data is lost if you lose that smartphone. So now what to do? Either back up your data in external hard drive, pendrive etc. or upload it on Cloud.
In order to have access to data, you must carry your hard drive or pendrive. But what if you don’t need to carry anything and get access to data anywhere in the world? Now, this is where Cloud Computing plays an important role.
The word ‘cloud’ is used as a metaphor for ‘the internet’ that defines cloud computing as Internet-based computing. The information is stored on virtual servers that are managed by different cloud service providing companies.
Basically, cloud computing is a model for delivering information technology services where services are retrieved from the internet through web-based tools and applications.
In simple language, it is a place on the internet from where we can store, manage, process and transfer data. It doesn’t require you to have any physical storage device.
Disadvantages of Traditional Storage System
- The setup cost of servers is high
- Troubleshooting is a time-consuming process
- Servers are idle when traffic is low so not an optimised utilization
There are 2 models
- Service model – IaaS, PaaS, Saas
- Deployment model – Public, Private, Hybrid
1. Public cloud
A public cloud is based on the deployment model, the Service provider makes resources, such as virtual machines (VMs), applications or storage, easily accessible to the general public over the internet.
Eg Google. The customer does not have any physical control over the infrastructure.
Public cloud services offered for free or on a pay-per-usage model.
eg: Amazon Web Services (AWS), Microsoft Azure and Google Cloud Platform
Each provider customises their offerings as per the needs of the customers
Using a Public cloud can:
⦁ Saves costs: one will no longer buy external hard drives or flash drives to store important information. Companies can save up to 43% annually by migrating virtualized operating system instances in the cloud.
⦁ Be Reliable: On public cloud, there is high availability of servers in case any server fails one need not to worry
⦁ Be Flexible: The flexibility ensures that you will always be able to utilize cloud services regardless of what your business is doing.
⦁ Be Location independent: One can access the information/ data from anywhere in the world
2. Private Cloud
Private clouds offer Privacy. You do not have to share your digital information with anyone else. It is operated only within a single organisation however it is managed internally or by the third party.
Using Private cloud you will get :
⦁ Security: A private cloud offers more control over security because everything is done in-house. It gives you protection against hacking, phishing and malware
⦁ You can supervise easily as to who uses your IT devices and applications.
3. Hybrid cloud
Hybrid cloud is a mixture of a private and public cloud. The Combination of public services with private clouds as well as the data centre as a hybrid is the new synonym of corporate computing.
We Pentagon Systems and Services Pvt Ltd consultants provide :
- Improved performance of your company
- Cost-effective solutions
- Reliability etc.
1. IaaS (Infrastructure as a service)
Iaas is fully self-service to access and monitor things like computing, networking, storage, and other services. It allows businesses to purchase resources as needed. The resources include data storage, servers, virtualization and networking. The provider will deliver pre-installed and configured hardware or software through a virtualized interface.
Using IaaS can:
⦁ Eliminate the capital expense and reduce ongoing cost: company no longer has to pay the expense to set up and manage an on-site data centre and hence is economical for startups.
⦁ Improves business continuity and data recovery: IaaS reduces the cost and helps to access data during a disaster with the right service level agreement.
⦁ Better security: provides more security for your data than what you can do in-house.
At Pentagon, we provide services like networking, security, caching, legacy.
2. PaaS (Platform as a service)
PaaS supplies an on-demand environment to develop, test, deliver and manage software applications. It helps developers to create web or mobile apps and not worry about setting up the infrastructure of servers or storage required for it. It restricts the flexibility of a business to create the environment they want. Examples of PaaS are Google app engine, Force.com.
Using PaaS can:
⦁ Cut coding time: it can cut the time required to code apps with pre-coded application components built in the platform
⦁ Develop for multiple platforms including mobile: it gives development options for mobiles, computers and browsers that makes cross-platform apps quicker.
⦁ Manage the application effectively: provides all capabilities needed to support the efficient functioning of a web application like building, testing, deploying, managing and updating in the same environment.
At Pentagon, we build upon application development, streaming, decision support.
3. SaaS (Software as a service)
SaaS is a method to deliver software applications over the internet on demand and subscription basis. The cloud providers host and manage the infrastructure and the software application along with its maintenance like software upgrades. Users can connect with a web browser on their tablet, PC or phone to the application over the internet. Users need not install anything but simply log in and use the provider’s application running on provider’s infrastructure. Examples of SaaS are Gmail, Google Drive, Microsoft Office 360.
Using SaaS can:
⦁ Pay only for what you use: SaaS scales up and down as per your usage.
⦁ Access app data anywhere: SaaS helps data to be stored in cloud and users can access it from any internet connected device and the data is not lost in case user’s device fails.
⦁ Gain access to enterprise applications: SaaS enables users to use enterprise applications like ERP and CRM without purchasing, installing, updating or maintaining any hardware, middleware or software.
It makes these applications affordable for organizations that do not have resources to deploy, buy and manage the necessary infrastructure and software themselves.
At Pentagon, we provide services like email, CRM , ERP, collaborative.