Do your students know how to write a letter?
If you have Apple devices in your classroom, you'll also have access to Pages, Apple's word processing software. Inside this 3-Minute Classroom Problem Solver video, learn how you can use Pages to teach students about letter writing.
Pages is a powerful word processor that lets you create stunning documents. You can even use Apple Pencil on your iPad to add comments and illustrations by hand. And with real-time collaboration, your team can work together, whether they’re on Mac, iPad, or iPhone, or using a PC. – About Pages
Take a look at this quick video to learn how to get started.
Do you think you'll use this idea in your classroom? Tell me what you think in a comment on this article.
Looking for more teacher resources? Take a look at SimpleK12's course catalog for hundreds of professional development videos designed specifically for educators of all kinds.
Here are a couple videos I think you'll find useful:
iOS Tips for Educators. With the most recent updates to the iOS platform, you might not be aware of all the new features available to educators and students. Discover some of the top features and productivity tips for educators and students alike. Learn about annotating and sharing student work, screencasting for formative assessment, AR tools, documenting student work, leveraging accessibility features for students, and more.
Writing Toolkit for Secondary Grades. In order to be college and career ready, secondary students must continue to hone their critical, analytical, and persuasive writing skills. This toolkit contains webinars that discuss techniques, tools, and strategies that teachers can use to help students master these skills. Discover tactics that students can use to get started writing, suggestions for using digital graphic organizers, tips for writing a strong paragraph, and ways to support a clear argument with evidence. Learn how your students can write more, while you spend less time grading! Explore collaborative, digital writing activities that can be used to improve students’ writing and revision skills by publishing their works with Google Docs.
About Our “Letter Writing with Pages” Presenter
Monica Burns is an Education Consultant, EdTech Blogger, and Apple Distinguished Educator. Monica works with teachers to make technology integration exciting and accessible at all grade levels. She has conducted well over 50 unique training sessions for SimpleK12, click here to take a look at more videos from Monica.
About the Author
Kimber Thompson is a Lead Moderator for SimpleK12 webinars and a Contributing Editor for SimpleK12.com. She writes frequently about education topics and is passionate about tools and techniques that inspire young learners. You may reach her with ideas and comments at email@example.com.