Below is a list of trusted websites and organizations that provide more useful information and various HIV/AIDS Resources.
The Complete HIV/AIDS Resource with over 550 topics!
Medscape from WebMD
Medscape offers specialists, primary care physicians, and other health professionals the Web’s most robust and integrated medical information and educational tools.
Centers for Disease Control – Division of HIV-AIDS Prevention
As a part of its overall public health mission, CDC provides national leadership in helping control the HIV epidemic by working with community, state, national, and international partners in surveillance, research, prevention and evaluation activities.
Kentucky Cabinet for Health and Family Services HIV-AIDS Branch
The Kentucky Department for Public Health HIV-AIDS Branch will promote the prevention of HIV transmission.
Indiana State Department of Health – Division of HIV/STD
The Division of HIV/STD works to promote public health and enhance the quality of life for Indiana residents by the prevention, intervention, and treatment of HIV and other sexually transmitted diseases.
AIDS Info – A Service of the US Department of Health and Human Services
Offering information on HIV/AIDS Treatment, Prevention and Research
HRSA HIV/AIDS Bureau
The HIV/AIDS Bureau (HAB) of the Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA)
Food and Drug Administration – HIV/AIDS Information
Sign up to get updates on safety and regulatory issues related to HIV/AIDS products, plus more related topics.
National Prevention Information Network
The CDC National Prevention Information Network (NPIN) is the U.S. reference, referral, and distribution service for information on HIV/AIDS, sexually transmitted diseases (STDs), and tuberculosis (TB).
Vanderburgh County Health Department
The Vanderburgh County Health Department offers information covering a range of health topics that includes STD’s, HIV testing, Tuberculosis, refugee health screening, tattoo/body piercing/permanent makeup establishment inspections, communicable disease conditions, Perinatal Hepititis B program, and educational programs.
The Social Security and Disability Resource Center
The Social Security and Disablity Resource Center is an informational website that provides answers to questions about how to apply for disability, how to appeal a claim in the event of a denial, how to navigate the federal system, and how to avoid certain mistakes that are commonly made by applicants. The site’s author is a former disability examiner for the social security administration.
This page has information specific to HIV/AIDS:
HIV Continuing Education Credit For Professionals
The Continuing Education office at the University of Kentucky is offering a 2 hour KY HIV Certification Course online for a fee of $15. It is available now. Follow the link below to access the course.
CDC Hepatitis Risk Assessment
Take this 5 minute test to see if you are at risk for viral hepatitis.
For information on help with substance abuse, including inpatient rehab centers please visit: https://www.addictioncenter.com/
For a list of nationwide rehab centers please visit: http://www.rehabcenter.net/