Move the divider left/out to view complete photo
What posses as Tinubu Square in the Nigeria of today (formerly Independence Square), is an open space landmark located in Broad Street, Lagos Island, Lagos State, Nigeria. It used to be called Ita Tinubu in memory of Madam Efunroye Tinubu, a slave trader and business magnate, before it was named Independence Square by leaders of the First Republic and subsequently Tinubu Square. Not many Nigerians know or can remember this, but quite a handful of old folks will connect with the memory easily.
Nigerian Ports Authority (NPA) is a federal government agency that governs & operates the ports of Nigeria. However, with the concessioning programme of the federal government, which is aimed at promoting efficiency through, public and private partnership, the Nigerian Ports, has since 2005, being concessioned.
This landlord arrangement as they call it, has fostered better relationship and high turn-out of goods and services in and around the Nigerian Port system either in the Eastern or the ever-busy Western zone. The photo on the left was taken during the days of colonialism. Nigerian Ports are now much busier and effective than they used to be years ago.
Rail transport in Nigeria is operated by the Nigerian Railway Corporation. The rail system consists of 3,505 km of 3 ft 6 in (1,067 mm) gauge lines and 479 km of standard gauge lines. Rail transportation was once one of the most popular, effective and efficient means for transporting passengers and cargoes in Nigeria. Consequently upon ineffectiveness at some quotas, railways are now overcrowded since there are no enough tracks to convey the available numbers of trains. Meanwhile, efforts are underway to rehabilitate the Cape gauge network and construct a new standard gauge network even as decent trains and more contemporary ones are being introduced.
On the left is the Bolekaja kind of vehicle. It was an average sized wood axial lorry that had only one wooden door at the passenger cabin at the back for passengers to embark and disembark. The sitting arrangement in the lorry (which was often over crowded) and the single entrance and exit point often led to fisticuffs between passengers who would tell each other to “come down let’s fight” (bolekaja).
Bolekaja were usually made from Bedford lorry heads and locally made wooden passenger compartments. The government later banned the use of bolekaja for commercial passenger transport services and they are now used to carry foodstuff in rural communities.
A contemporary kind of vehicle that can also carry a large number of passengers within metropolis is the Leyland kind of long buses. Almost every state in Nigeria now has such for metropolitan transportation.
Municipal Transportation of people and goods dates back to the 1920s and beyond. However, road-based bus transportation was pioneered in Lagos by two Nigerians, Mrs Charlotte Olajumoke Obasa (a leading indigenous entrepreneur of that time) and W.A. Dawodu. This was followed by the establishment of J.N. Zarpas, a company owned by Levantine expatriates. Zarpas dominated the Lagos transportation scene until their buses were acquired by the Lagos Town Council in 1958 to form the Lagos Municipal Transport, similar to what you see in the photo on the left.