Attached are the study guide for the math test and the checklist for the Social Studies project.
Reminder: No School on Monday 4/22
Speech Contest on Tuesday 4/23
Sixth Grade Social Studies--Students are working through Module 25 Lesson 3 on Southern Africa. We will be learning about 8 different countries next week. Students will read about the culture and politics of the region, including apartheid. Students have been encouraged to share the discussions we have in class at home. We are working on forming opinions based on information. We have had discussions on vaccines, inclusion, and distribution of wealth. Students are learning how topics found all around the world have can have an impact on their views and opinions.
Sixth Grade Math— Students have concluded their unit on proportions. We will review for the chapter 7 test at the beginning of the week. Students will take their unit test on Thursday and Friday of next week. On Thursday, students will take the non-calculator portion of the test. Some of the skills require computation competency, those skills will the first part of the test. On Friday, students will take the calculator portion of the test. On this part of the test, the important skills are setting problems up correctly and understanding the problems. Students will be allowed their calculator for all computation since I am assessing understanding on this section of the test.
Seventh Grade Math— Students have had plenty of exposure and practice solving equations. Students will review at the beginning of the week for their equations test. They will take the Chapter 11 Section A test on Wednesday of next week. It will cover 2-step, multi-step and variable on both sides equations. Students should practice the procedure for solving equations. This includes what to look for in the equation as a clue to which step in the procedure to begin with. There are many online resources to practice solving equations. I encourage the students to practice and be prepared for the test.
Eighth Grade Math— Eighth graders finished working with functions tables, writing equations and graphing. We will review for their test on Tuesday and the students will take the Chapter 2 test on Wednesday. Students will then move on to Chapter 6, a geometry unit including circles, prisms, cones and cylinders.
Algebra-- Students will work through the first sections of Chapter 11. We will cover simplifying rational expressions, multiplying rational expressions, and dividing rational expressions. These are skills based on a solid understanding of fractions and how they work. If your student is a little rusty with fractions, I encourage them to refresh their memory before next week. The chapter 11 quiz will take place the following week.
Here are two links to help students practice their map of Africa.
Students practicing 10-15 minutes a night should be well prepared.
Sixth Grade Social Studies--Students covered the physical geography of the eastern and southern countries of Africa. They will be moving on to the people, economy and resources of the region this week. This section of Africa added several more countries to our countries and capitals list. Students came up with sentences to help them remember the order of the first letters of the countries on the map. Encourage your student to practice a few each night.
Sixth Grade Math— Students will work with proportions this week. They will test proportionality, solve percent of number problems and percent problems using proportions. The key is understanding and setting up the problems. Students will be allowed a calculator for the computation.
Seventh Grade Math— Seventh grade will continue working on equations. Students have been exposed to many types of equations. Choosing each step in the process, in the correct order, to solve the equation is important. Students sometimes struggle with identifying details in the equation that help determine the steps in the process. The only way to master solving equations is through repetition and practice.
Eighth Grade Math— Eighth graders will be working with functions tables, writing equations and graphing in math over the next week. Students will find patterns in numbers and graph lines using coordinates in the function tables. They will work their way through chapter two practicing the standards they are to master using graphs and functions.
Algebra-- Students will continue working with radicals this week and trigonometric ratios for right tringles. Students will practice simplifying radicals and solving right triangles. Once those concepts are completed students will begin to review for their chapter 10 test.
Sixth Grade Social Studies--Students will begin their study of Libya, Algeria, Morocco and Tunisia. We will also continue practicing capitals and countries. There will be a quiz on the 5 countries of North Africa, their capitals, and facts on Thursday, March 21st.
Sixth Grade Math— This week the students will be practicing all operations with fractions, including solving equations containing fractions. The chapter five test will be on Wednesday, March 20th. It will be on all the sections of chapter five. Students have been given a copy of the notes and a study guide to help them prepare.
Seventh Grade Math—Students will practice the skills from chapter 10. The chapter ten test will be on Wednesday, March 20th. Students will find theoretical probability, experimental probability, probability of compound events, and find possible outcomes. . Students have been given a copy of the notes and a study guide to help them prepare.
Eighth Grade Math— Transformations is the focus at the end of chapter five. Students will practice rotations, reflections, and translations to finish chapter five. Students will then review and prepare for their assessment. The chapter five assessment on geometry will be on Wednesday, March 20th.
Algebra-- Students will begin the week with the chapter nine test. Then students will begin their work with radicals in chapter ten. Students will be given their final exam notecards this week. Some students wanted to start preparing their notecard for the final exam since there are only two full chapters left to learn.
Sixth Grade Social Studies-- Students begin working through the first section of Africa. We will begin with the countries found in North Africa. Students will use technology to create a brochure about one of the countries studied. We will study the geography, people, culture, and economy of the countries. Students will choose the country they found most interesting and one they would want to visit to make the travel brochure.
Sixth Grade Math— The sixth graders will begin their week by reviewing section A of chapter five on fractions. On Wednesday, students will take the test on section A. This includes LCM, adding fractions and mixed number, subtracting fractions and mixed numbers and solving one step addition and subtraction equations containing fractions. Students will begin the second half of the chapter on Thursday.
Seventh Grade Math— Seventh grade will have a mid-chapter test on Tuesday, March fifth. It will be on section A of chapter ten on probability. Students will need to tell the likelihood of an event happening, find the theoretical probability, find the experimental probability and make predictions using proportions. Students will begin working with combinations and permutations at the end of the week. Wednesday, students will have guidance during math.
Eighth Grade Math— Students will have a mid-chapter test on Tuesday. It will be on section A in chapter 5 Geometry. Students will need to identify types of angles, classify triangles, find missing measurements, and use coordinate geometry. The students will begin their work in section B at the end of the week.
Algebra-- There will be a chapter nine quiz on Tuesday. The rest of the week the students will practice using the quadratic equations and identifying graphs that model different types of equations. The chapter nine test will be the following week.
MAP testing will continue this week. Students should be ready to do their best on the test. The math MAP scores help determine future placement in math class and intervention times. Students should do their best and show us what they know.
Sixth Grade Social Studies-- Students will continue their study of Canada. They will continue map practice to help learn the provinces, territories and capitals of Canada. Students will also begin studying the history and culture of the region. Students should review their notes daily to keep new information fresh in their minds.
Sixth Grade Math— Students will continue to work with the coordinate plane. Students will plot ordered pairs to form figures. Then students will identify the figure and find its perimeter. Students will also begin to identify transformations of figures. This unit has a significant amount of vocabulary. It will be important for students to use the mathematical terms properly throughout the unit. Flashcards or creating a set of vocabulary cards on Quizlet may be a study strategy to consider.
Seventh Grade Math— The class will be continuing their work with consumer math. Students are trying to gain an understanding of the math involved in finances. We have talked about salary, commission and hourly jobs. We discussed loans, taxes and interest rates. These concepts are new to the class. Discussing these topics with you student will help them relate the topics in class to the outside world. Students will need a calculator for this section. The calculator needs to be a scientific calculator. Entering information for this unit on a traditional calculator will be more challenging and time consuming. Please check with your student to make sure they have a working calculator they can find.
Eighth Grade Math— The class will continue working through the concepts of chapter seven. The chapter revisits solving equations. This is an essential skills needed in Algebra. Since the eighth graders will be heading off to the high school soon, students will be focused on the skills that will help them be successful in Algebra.
Algebra-- The students will be continuing their work in chapter eight. The class will be working with polynomials in this chapter. Students will simplify polynomials and factor them in the next sections. Students who are fluent in their math facts and understand how numbers are composed will be very successful in this chapter.
Here are some helpful links for learning about Canada.
MAP testing will be taking place this week. Students should be ready to do their best on the test. The math MAP scores help determine future placement in math class and intervention times. Students should do their best and show us what they know.
Sixth Grade Social Studies-- Students are moving on to their next unit of study for the start of third quarter. Students will be learning about our neighbors to the north, Canada. Canada is Module 7 in their textbook. Students will begin with identifying provinces, territories, and capitals. They will also begin recognizing geographical landmarks, understanding the climate, and identifying resources of the area.
Sixth Grade Math— Students will be learning about integers in chapter nine. Students will classify numbers, interpret integers, order integers, and use them to graph points on the coordinate plane. Students will use accurate vocabulary to explain situations. This unit allows students to demonstrate their writing skills in mathematical explanations.
Seventh Grade Math— Students will continue their work with percent in the second half of chapter six. Students will calculate percent change and understand when percent change is found outside of the classroom. Students will also learn how tax and discounts work. Students will need a calculator for this section. The calculator needs to be a scientific calculator. Entering information for this unit on a traditional calculator will be more challenging and time consuming. Please check with your student to make sure they have a working calculator they can find.
Eighth Grade Math— Eighth graders will be moving away from graphing and back to solving equations. Students will work with all forms of equations in chapter seven. They will also learn to set up and solve systems of equations. In chapter seven, students will be shown procedures to solve equations with efficiency. Students may choose to solve the equations in another manner if the think about things differently.
Algebra-- Algebra will be moving on to chapter eight. The majority of the concepts in chapter eight will be new to the students. Students need to have patience with themselves as they are learning new material. Chapter eight begins with working with polynomials. Students will be adding, subtracting, multiplying, and factoring polynomials.
Here is the link for the review game from class.
Here is the link to other South America jeopardy games
South America Countries practice song
South American Capitals song
Ms. Bozio will be attending the regional math meet in Whitewater on January 15.
The end of the third quarter is on Thursday. Please encourage your student to check their binders and folders for any assignments or work they may have forgotten to turn in. All work must be turned in by the end of the quarter.
Sixth Grade Social Studies-- Students will finish the semester with an assessment on South America. Students will review for the assessment next week with review activities. Students will need to understand important places, important people and the cultural of the region. Students will take their assessment on Thursday, January 17 in the morning.
Sixth Grade Math— Students will have an assessment on chapter eight to end the semester. The assessment will cover section 1 through section 6. Surface area will not be on the assessment. The assessment will cover measurement systems, area and volume. Students will not be given a chart on the test, they should be practicing conversion units and formulas. The assessment will be on Wednesday, January 16 in the afternoon.
Seventh Grade Math— Students have been working through chapter seven. Students need to be proficient at fraction, decimal and percent conversions. They should have the benchmarks memorized and be able to use them to find multiples. Students also need to be able to write two step equations from word problems, manipulate them and solve them. These skills are found in the first half of chapter seven. Students will have a test on this material on Wednesday, January 16.
Eighth Grade Math--Students have been working on equations and graphing in chapter eight. The class will finish chapter eight next week with systems of equations. On Tuesday and Wednesday, students will review the material from chapter eight to prepare for their final test of the quarter. The test will be on Thursday, January 17 and will cover all the sections in chapter eight.
Algebra-- Students will spend the week reviewing material that will be on their exam. The exam will cover concepts from chapters one through seven. Students have been given a paper review and have access to many practice tests and quizzes online. None of the reviews are required, however I highly recommend practicing for the exam. I have spoken with the students about breaking up the material into chunks and doing a couple of chunks each night. Students will also need to use test taking strategies. There is a time restraint on the exam. Students need to utilize their time and be efficient to complete the exam in the allotted time. If students have questions they should see me prior to next week Thursday, the day of the exam.