Orthotropic/Orthodontic treatment remains an elective procedure. It, like other treatments of the body, has some inherent risks and limitations. These seldom prevent treatment, but should be considered in making the decision to undergo treatment.
About Early Orthodontics
By age 7, enough permanent teeth have come in and enough jaw growth has occurred that we can identify current problems, anticipate any future problems and alleviate parents' concerns if all seems normal.
Signs or Habits of Concern
Benefits of Early Treatment
Guide the growth of the jaw
Guide incoming permanent teeth into desirable positions
Lower risk of trauma
Correct harmful oral habits such as thumb or finger sucking
Reduce or eliminate abnormal swallowing or speech problems
Preserve or gain space for permanent teeth that are coming in
Early or late loss of baby teeth
Difficulty in chewing or biting
Jaw that make sounds
Biting cheek or roof of mouth
Predictable factors that can affect
the outcome of orthodontic/orthotropic treatment:
In the vast majority of orthotropic cases, significant improvement can be achieved with patient cooperation. You must wear your appliance as often as you have been instructed, otherwise the outcome of your treatment will be very hard to predict and will be delayed.
Routine dental wellness visits are essential for hygiene and caries prevention and are recommended at every 3 month during the orthodontic/orthotropic treatment.
**Missed appointments create many scheduling problems and lengthen your treatment time.
Caring for teeth and appliances
Make sure to brush thoroughly to prevent any cavities from forming and be sure to wash your appliance thoroughly to prevent decay.
Eliminate any sugar intake, including fruit (berries are ok in moderate amounts) and fruity drinks (vegetable juices are ok), soda and any other carbonated water.
Avoid all sticky, crunchy, hard, chewy and gummy foods.
Muscle Habits: Mouth breathing, thumb, finger or lip sucking, tongue thrusting, abnormal swallowing and other habits can prevent teeth from moving to their corrected positions or cause relapse after the treatment.
Facial Growth Patterns: Unusual skeletal patterns and insufficient or undesirable growth can compromise treatment results, affect a facial change and cause shifting of teeth during retention.
** Other treatments may be recommended during these situations.
Tempromandibular/TMJ Problems: Possible TMJ or joint pain problems may develop before, during, or after the treatment. Usually it happen in cases when prior trauma and/or pre-existing TMJ injury.
Root Resorption: Shortening of the root ends can occur when the teeth are moved during orthodontic treatments. Under healthy conditions it usually doesn’t happen. Trauma, including occlusal (biting), impaction, endocrine disorders, or idiomatic reasons may cause this problem.
Restoration Loss/ Mouth Sores: Improper removal/placement of the orthodontic appliances may cause your fillings or crowns come off, at which point they 'd need to be replaced. Improper wear of the appliances may also cause mouth sores.
Patients who need Upper/ Lower appliances to expand the arches first, need to accommodate the space for new teeth. Their also may be a need for new appliances in the course of treatment, if adult teeth erupt out of the arch location or baby teeth become loose prematurely.
Dr Aver requires every 3-4 weeks visit for the length of 10-12 months (estimated).
Cost for the treatment is $350 per appliance and $75 per visit, not including regular cleanings and checkups.