Hottyn History, Family Crest & Coats of Arms
- Origins Available:
The history of the Hottyn family name begins after the Norman Conquest of 1066. They lived in Haughton, Cheshire. The name of this place derives from the Old English word halh, which means nook or recess, and tun, which means village or settlement. There are numerous places son named in England and an individual case of the name may derive from any of those locations.
Early Origins of the Hottyn family
The surname Hottyn was first found in Cheshire at Haughton (or Haughton Moss), a village and civil parish. This village is by far the largest of the listings of the place name in England. Looking back further, there are at least three listings of the place name Haughton in the Domesday Book in its earliest forms: Hoctum in Nottinghamshire; Haustone in Shropshire; and Halstone or Haltone in Staffordshire.  Today Haughton Castle is a privately owned country mansion near the village of Humshaugh, Northumberland and dates back to the 13th century when it was a tower house. It was enlarged and fortified in the 14th century. By the 16th century, the castle had fallen into ruin but by the early 19th century the ruins were converted into the mansion it is today. Houghton Hall is a country house in Norfolk, England built for British Prime Minister, Sir Robert Walpole. Another early branch of the family was found at Hooton, again in Cheshire. "This place, in the Domesday Book, is included in the possessions of Richard de Vernon, the Norman Baron of Shipbrook, under whom it was held by a family named Hotone, which became extinct in the male line in the reign of Richard I. It then passed by marriage to Randle Walensis or Welshman, after which alliance, his family occasionally assumed the name of Hotone." 
Important Dates for the Hottyn family
This web page shows only a small excerpt of our Hottyn research. Another 172 words (12 lines of text) covering the years 1114, 1130, 1605, 1691, 1720 and 1720 are included under the topic Early Hottyn History in all our PDF Extended History products and printed products wherever possible.
Hottyn Spelling Variations
Before the advent of the printing press and the first dictionaries, the English language was not standardized. Sound was what guided spelling in the Middle Ages, so one person's name was often recorded under several variations during a single lifetime. Spelling variations were common, even among the names of the most literate people. Known variations of the Hottyn family name include Haughton, Houghton, Hoctor, Hector and others.
Early Notables of the Hottyn family (pre 1700)
Another 33 words (2 lines of text) are included under the topic Early Hottyn Notables in all our PDF Extended History products and printed products wherever possible.
Migration of the Hottyn family to Ireland
Some of the Hottyn family moved to Ireland, but this topic is not covered in this excerpt.
Another 105 words (8 lines of text) about their life in Ireland is included in all our PDF Extended History products and printed products wherever possible.
Migration of the Hottyn family
To escape the political and religious chaos of this era, thousands of English families began to migrate to the New World in search of land and freedom from religious and political persecution. The passage was expensive and the ships were dark, crowded, and unsafe; however, those who made the voyage safely were encountered opportunities that were not available to them in their homeland. Many of the families that reached the New World at this time went on to make important contributions to the emerging nations of the United States and Canada. Research into various historical records has revealed some of first members of the Hottyn family to immigrate North America: Gerard Haughton settled in Barbados in 1639; Thomas Haughton settled in Virginia in 1635; as well as Robert Haughton in the same year.
- ^ Williams, Dr Ann. And G.H. Martin, Eds., Domesday Book A Complete Translation. London: Penguin, 1992. Print. (ISBN 0-141-00523-8)
- ^ Lewis, Samuel, A Topographical Dictionary of England. Institute of Historical Research, 1848, Print.