Turner hoped that stability would replace mobility as a defining factor in the development of American society and that communities would become stronger as a result. This is the great, the nation-wide frontier of insecurity, of human want and fear.
What would now provide that "opportunity Turners frontier thesis sparknotes a competency" that had kept Americans from having many poor people?
It has also been applied to other societies in other times—and even to American society more recently. Moreover, these revisionist scholars argue, for many places the West has not been the land of freedom and opportunity that both Turnerian history and popular mythology would have us believe.
But even within Western and frontier history, a growing body of historians has contested Turner's approach. It was on this forboding note that he closed his address: Other historians, who wanted to focus scholarship on minorities, especially Native Americans and Hispanics, started in the s to criticize the frontier thesis because it did not attempt to explain the evolution of those groups.
He believed there was such a thing as an American character, and that that character was individualistic, practical, militarily-skilled, and formed by economic opportunity and social mobility.
Turner's essay reached triumphalist heights in his belief that the promotion of individualistic democracy was the most important effect of the frontier.
In broad terms, the further west, the more American the community. They emphasized the values of individualism, empiricism, simplicity, equality, courage, discovery, independence, and naturalism in the service of democratic access, human rights, ecological balance, and the resolution of social, economic, and political issues.
Many such critics have sought to replace the idea of a moving frontier with the idea of the West as a distinctive region, much like the American South. Turner saw this as inevitable and part of the upward moving thrust of American society created by the dynamic frontier.
Every generation moved further west and became more American, more democratic, and more intolerant of hierarchy. His deep, melodious voice commanded attention whether he was addressing a teachers group, an audience of alumni, or a branch of the Chautauqua movement.
Some have long disputed the very idea of a frontier of "free land. Here is Turner, photographed next to his books. Here, Turner draws several vivid sketches of the succession of In these writings Turner promoted new methods in historical research, including the techniques of the newly founded social sciences, and urged his colleagues to study new topics such as immigration, urbanization, economic development, and social and cultural history.Frederick Jackson Turner produced the "Turner Thesis" in shortly after the Census had determined that the American frontier had closed.
The Turner’s Frontier is also called “Frontier Thesis” or “Turner Thesis. This is an argument advanced by the historian Frederick Jackson Turner in that the origin of the distinctive egalitarian, democratic, aggressive, and innovative features of the American character has been the American Frontier.
Wisconsin Historical Society Frederick Jackson Turner ___Frederick Jackson Turner___ The Significance of the Frontier in American History View Essay - Turner's Frontier Thesis Paper from HISTORY United Sta at Dwight-englewood School. Turners Thesis Summary and Analysis The Frontier Thesis, also known as the Turners Thesis, is an86%(7).
FRONTIER THESIS, TURNER'SFRONTIER THESIS, TURNER'S. Frederick Jackson Turner's "The Significance of the Frontier in American History" is arguably one of the most influential interpretations of the American past ever espoused. Source for information on Frontier Thesis, Turner's: Dictionary of American History dictionary.
Frederick Jackson Turner: Frederick Jackson Turner, American historian best known for the “frontier thesis.” The single most influential interpretation of the American past, it proposed that the distinctiveness of the United States was attributable to its long history of .Download