Hearing loss is about pitch as much as volume. It’s conceivable you have some degree of high-frequency hearing loss if you can understand what the men in the room are saying but you can’t hear women and children. You’re not alone…this is the most prevalent form of hearing loss.
Warning Signs of High-Frequency Hearing Loss
With high-frequency hearing loss, consonant sounds that make conversations understandable, get muddled even though you may still be able to register the volume of a woman or a child’s voice. Normally the most difficult to differentiate are consonant sounds such as ch, th, t, soft s, c, sh, k, f, and h. So, it might sound like a woman or child is mumbling, even though they aren’t. Losing the ability to differentiate these sounds makes it very hard to understand a child’s joke or your sister’s question about dinner plans. This can lead to frustration, despair and social isolation from your circle of family and friends.
Other sounds within the high-frequency hearing loss range (2000 Hz) are missed by people who have this problem. This includes high musical notes, birds chirping, and squeaks or sirens. Low-frequency sounds like bass musical notes, the rumble of thunder or a man’s voice may still be relatively easy to detect, even if the volume isn’t very loud.
Reasons For High-Frequency Hearing Loss
Frequently imperceptible in the beginning, high-frequency hearing loss, the most widespread type of hearing loss, can sneak up on you as you grow older. Apart from aging, too much noise exposure, particular medications and a variety of medical issues like cardiovascular disease can lead to high-frequency hearing loss.
These scenarios all cause damage to the tiny, hair-like sensory cells within the cochlea. Sound input is picked up by these tiny cells and sent to the brain for processing. The high-frequency sensory cells are more sensitive to damage than the low-frequency sensory cells, which is why the higher-pitched sounds are commonly the first to become difficult to comprehend.
How to Prevent High-Frequency Hearing Loss
Although you can’t stop your ears from getting older, there are many steps you can take to stop or at least slow down the progress of high-frequency hearing loss. Some of these include:
- If you use any medication, ask your doctor if it has any impact on hearing. At least 200 different types of medications can cause or worsen high-frequency hearing loss. Your hearing can even be injured by too much aspirin. consult your doctor to find out if there are possibilities less likely to injure your hearing. Stay in close contact with your hearing health care provider if you can’t abstain from taking a certain medication. Treating hearing loss early can help prevent further loss.
- Never using a swab (or other small objects) to get rid of ear wax. This can push old ear wax into your ear canal and blunt your ability to hear. A hot shower is normally enough o drain exes earwax but if this doesn’t work ask your hearing professional for other methods of irrigating your ears.
- Caring for your overall health. Your hearing can be damaged by smoking. Your hearing can also be damaged from poor health caused by poor nutrition. Try to take good care of your health in all aspects and this will protect your hearing also.
- Quieter things are better. Find the quietest product by examining the noise rating of the appliances. If it’s hard to hear your friends at dinner, don’t be afraid to ask the manager to turn the music down.
- In noisy spaces, use hearing protection.A sure sign that your ears could be getting injured is if you have to shout to be heard in a noisy environment. Heavy traffic, engines revving, power tool sounds, the loud sound systems at movies or live music concerts are all examples of times when putting in the ear-protection is a good idea. Noise canceling headphone may not fit inside your pocket, but they are the best choice in some circumstances.
high-frequency Hearing Loss Treatment
At this time, the most reliable method for managing high-frequency hearing loss is hearing aids. And since this is the most widespread kind of hearing loss, there are various different models a person can choose from. So that they are clearer to the user, hearing aids can augment high pitched sounds. Many models can be configured and your hearing care expert can help fine-tune them to increase your ability to hear those sounds at the correct level, directly addressing the level and degree of the hearing loss. Some hearing aids can be manipulated by your phone and come with directional microphones for fine-tuning in circumstances such as business meetings, restaurant dinners, talking on the phone or listening to children.
If you suspect that you may be dealing with high-frequency hearing loss, make an appointment for a hearing exam. If you would like to better your capacity to hear your grandchild’s precious one-liner, odds are there are individually designed answers for you.