World Oceans Day was first
declared as 8th June at the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro in 1992.
Events will occur all around the world on and around this day.
8 June 2012
The theme of World Oceans Day, “Our oceans, our responsibility”, emphasizes our individual and collective duty to protect the marine environment and carefully manage its resources. Safe, healthy and productive seas and oceans are integral to human well-being, economic security and sustainable development.
In 2008, the United Nations General Assembly decided that, as from 2009, 8 June would be designated by the United Nations as “World Oceans Day” (resolution 63/111, paragraph 171). Many countries have celebrated World Oceans Day following the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, (known as the Earth Summit) which was held in Rio de Janeiro in 1992.
The oceans are essential to food security and the health and survival of all life, power our climate and are a critical part of the biosphere. The official designation of World Oceans Day is an opportunity to raise global awareness of the current challenges faced by the international community in connection with the oceans.
Nations World Oceans Day page
World Oceans Day – The Ocean Project
was the Canadian government, at the 1992 Earth Summit in Rio that first
mooted the idea of World Oceans Day. In 1998, UNESCO’s
Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission lent its support to this
international Day of celebration.
Since 2003 World Oceans Day has been co-ordinated jointly by the World Ocean Network and the American association, The Ocean Project.
World Oceans Day – World Ocean Network
9 June 2012
Festival & Adur World Oceans Day 2012
Understanding and celebrating our marine environment
The twelfth Adur Environment Festival and Adur World Oceans Day 2012 will take place in the marquee on Coronation Green, by Shoreham Footbridge at the High Street end on the second Saturday of the Adur Festival. Len Nevell of the British Marine Life Study Society will be there with the usual exhibition of lobsters and crabs.
are still welcome but they will need to book their place as soon as possible.
Click on the image above for contact details and more information.
World Oceans Day offers the opportunity for people in many parts of Britain and around the world to increase their understanding of the marine environment and wildlife of the oceans.
References to the Biodiversity Earth Summit (1992):
an agenda for conservation in the UK
ISBN 0 903138 80 8
Biodiversity: the UK Action Plan
MARINE WILDLIFE of the NE ATLANTIC OCEAN
Marine Life Study Society Index
|FIVE KINGDOMS TAXONOMIC
INDEX TO BRITISH MARINE WILDLIFE
Use these links if your are familiar with the scientific classifications of marine life