Snoring is one of the main warning signs of sleep apnea. Most people who have this life-threatening condition don’t know they have it, which is why we need every warning sign available to us. People who resolve snoring but not sleep apnea may still be at risk for serious health effects, including heart problems and metabolic dangers.
Snoring and sleep apnea are related. So how is it that an anti-snoring device might resolve the one but not the other?
Snoring Can Come from Multiple Sites
One of the biggest dangers comes when a person experiences snoring related to several different locations in the airway, such as the nostrils, the upper airway, mouth, and throat. An anti-snoring device may resolve the obstruction in one part of the airway, such as the nostrils, but not resolve obstruction elsewhere in the airway, which is where the apnea is occurring.
Many people focus on the nose as the source of snoring sound, and this is true, but the nose is not related to sleep apnea in most cases. Resolving snoring in the nose will likely do little for sleep apnea.
Resolving Narrowing Does Not Resolve Collapse
Although snoring and sleep apnea are closely related, they are actually caused by two different mechanisms. Snoring occurs when the airway narrows and stays narrowed, creating a turbulent airflow. But sleep apnea occurs when the support for the airway isn’t sufficient to hold the airway open, leading to collapse. Most often, this occurs because the muscles relax during sleep.
A narrow airway may be more prone to collapse, but even wide airways can collapse if the supports weaken enough.
Low Standards for Reduced Snoring
Many people seek out snoring treatment because their spouse or other cosleeper has complained. This normally happens when the snoring volume is really loud, too loud to sleep through. In order to be successful, then, a snoring remedy only has to reduce snoring volume, not eliminate snoring.
A person might get a snoring device that partially reduces snoring just enough to go unnoticed. A person may still snore, just not loud enough to wake their partner. Meanwhile, they may continue to have apneas, which means that the negative health consequences of apnea continue.
Get Tested for Sleep Apnea before Trying Home Remedies
One way to avoid this risk is to make sure that you get tested for sleep apnea before you try home remedies for snoring. This will help you understand whether you have sleep apnea or just simple snoring.
If you have sleep apnea, we can help you get a remedy that will more completely resolve snoring and sleep apnea to improve your health.
And if you try a home remedy for snoring, be vigilant. If sleep apnea symptoms persist, such as daytime sleepiness, morning headaches, and a lack of energy or focus, you should get a sleep test.
If you are looking for snoring treatment in Omaha that can also resolve your sleep apnea, please call (402) 493-4175 today for an appointment with Omaha sleep dentist Dr. Roger Roubal at the Advanced Dental Sleep Treatment Center.