Wild Barramundi inhabit a number of habitats throughout the globe such as rivers, creeks, mangrove estuaries and turbid water. The Wild Barramundi are however most common in creeks and rivers which have large catchments and slow but continuous flowing waters with temperatures above 20 degrees Celsius. They also show a preference for rock ledges, submerged logs among other water structures. The Wild Barramundi are part of the Catadromous species of fish. This means that they grow to maturity only in freshwater streams and rivers. When the fish reaches adult maturity, it then moves downstream, especially when there are floods, to settle in coastal waters or estuaries for spawning.
The Wild Barramundi is known all over the world to be among the finest fish for eating. Here in Australia, the fish is highly regarded and very popular. Some retaurants in Australia have trialled swapping out this fish with a cheaper replacement, but have faced a lot criticism. This criticism was received as Barramundi really is a delicious eating fish, with firm, fine grained white meat. The taste however can vary depending on where the fish spends time before it is caught. For instance, if the fish has spent a considerable number of years in the turbid and muddy water it can greatly affect its taste.
The Wild Barramundi, apart from just being an edible fish, also produces products of uniqueness. The skin of the fish can be used to make products such as wallets. The scales of the Barramundi are usually clearly visible, helping to distinguish the product from plain leather. The fish’s skin also has a unique imprint and the barramundi leather is very durable and at the same time offers you a beautiful, stylish, practical and fun product. Wild Barramundi products are generally made from skins that have been gotten from small families operating Barramundi fishing business in Australia. It is important to note that the fishers practice sustainable and environmental friendly fishing practices.
Wild Barramundi usually start their life as males. They take approximately 3 to 4 years to mature and come of age. Once they have completed this process, hey later change and become females at the age of 5. The small Barramundi fish are exclusively male. However with time the percentage of females increases and surpasses that of males.
The female reproduce in large numbers of small pelagic eggs that are non-adhesive and ranging between 0.6 and 0.9 mm in diameter. Adult females can weigh up to 22 Kilograms and are capable of laying over 15 million eggs. The eggs are pinkish in colour when they stay in water for a while. The eggs usually hatch within a day and at that time the larvae measures around 1.5 mm.
At 2.5 mm the yolk sac is greatly reduced and pectoral fins are beginning to form. When the larva is above 2.5mm in size, it begins to exhibit coloration of the species. It develops brown mottled markings that are matched with white stripes that run lengthwise. At this stage, the fins and the teeth begin to appear. By day five, the fins of the barramundi are already fully developed. The growth rate of the fish can however vary depending on a lot of factors, such as weather or the waters it lives in.
The Wild Barramundi is carnivorous in nature. It feeds on crustaceans as well as smaller fish that are present in its habitat. Aquatic insects also make up a large part of their diet.
The Barramundi are a popular and exciting target for anglers is northern Australia. This is because the Wild Barramundi responds well the lures that are either rolled or cast. Minnow pattern lures can be used when fishing around mangrove rocky outcrops, snags and submerged cover. Other popular lures include bright metallic in bronze or gold. The fish are easily attracted to such lures and are known for their spectacular leaps, especially during fights. They are not the easiest fish to catch for this reason. The Wild Barramundi are popular on heavier gear and they can be easily caught by using live bait such as prawns, mullet and macro brachium which is a freshwater shrimp. It is usually recommended that live bait be used when fishing for Barramundi.
Preparing and Cooking Wild Barramundi
The Wild Barramundi can be prepared in a number of ways, depending on personal preferences. There are a number of recipes out there that provide an exciting range of barramundi meals that can be served for lunch, dinner or even breakfast. The fish can be cooked whole or as fillet. For whole and fillet recipes, frying is often the most preferred method of cooking. The fish can however be baked, steamed or stewed. Barramundi can also be served raw as sushi.
You can therefore prepare Wild barramundi in any preferred way. The most suitable and easy way of preparing the fish is cooking the fish as fish fillets. Like any other fish fillet recipe, you can use lemon juice and dry white wine for garnishing in preferred quantities. A little olive oil is also necessary and some pepper and salt. Well-cooked barramundi fillet goes well with sauces such as garlic butter.
When cooking half a kilogram of Barramundi fillets, half a cup of salted butter and two cloves of garlic will be adequate. One of the tastiest ways of preparing the Barramundi fillet is by first marinating the fillet in a mixture of lemon juice, olive oil, white wine and pepper together for a few minutes. This way the fillet will be full of flavour when fried. It will only take a few minutes to cook on each side, so make sure you are ready to serve it straight away.
It is also important to note that the Wild Barramundi fillet can be thicker than other varieties of fish, so the cooking process can take a bit longer than you are used. However, it really is worth the extra time as the fillets are delicious and among the best fish to serve to fish lovers.