It’s no secret that chronic pain can affect your overall quality of life. In addition to having pain, chronic conditions can also impact your ability to do the things you enjoy such as play a sport, exercise regularly, or spend time with family and friends. It can also affect your ability to perform well at your job. As if that is not enough, research now suggests that chronic pain can affect the brain, including our emotional and mental health. Studies have shown that those with chronic pain have a reduced volume of brain tissue that can result in loss of brain function. Head, neck, back, shoulders, wrist, hip, foot, or any other type of chronic pain can be harmful to your health. The longer you suffer from chronic pain, the more permanent results you may experience. Studies have shown that chronic back pain can shrink the brain by as much as 11%. With neurologically-based chiropractic care from a Charlotte chiropractor, you can not only reduce chronic pain but also prevent the rapid loss of brain cells. Hold on to what you have for as long as possible and improve brain function as well as the symptoms of chronic pain with regular visits to local Charlotte chiropractor Dr. Grant Lisetor.
Why Does Chronic Pain Affect More Than Just the Body?
Chronic pain can affect many parts of the body, most commonly the back and neck. So why does it seem to impact the brain as well? The answer can lie within the nerves. Researchers believe that when you are in a constant state of pain, the nerve cells work in overdrive. Overworked nerves ultimately lead to a change in brain function. Therefore, the saying becomes “chronic pain means different brain.” What occurs is that over time, the gray matter of the brain will begin to shrink. This part of the brain is what is responsible for information and memory processing. Studies have shown that those with chronic back pain, the most common pain responsible for frequent doctors’ visits, along with those suffering from sciatica pain, experienced the largest decrease in gray matter. So what can be done to prevent gray matter shrinkage?
Get to the Root of the Matter
Chronic pain can be treated with medication, but it never truly alleviates the pain or fixes the problem. Rather it only masks the discomfort for the time being, meaning the nerve problems are still present. Because the central nervous system is composed of the spinal cord and brain and controls nerve function, it is logical that neurologically-based chiropractic care from Dr. Lisetor of Greater Life Chiropractic can provide lasting relief from chronic pain and its aftermath by getting to the root of the issue through natural and safe chiropractic care. Spinal misalignments can disrupt nerve function that can lead to chronic pain. Gentle adjustments remove these misalignments so the nerves and body can function well once again. Once chronic pain symptoms are managed, the nerves won’t have to work overtime, saving brain cells and decreasing gray matter loss. Thankfully, studies have also shown that the effects of chronic pain in the brain are reversible as normal brain function can be restored through regular chiropractic care.
If you suffer from chronic pain, get it under control with chiropractic care. Dr. Lisetor can help! Call today to set up a consultation.
Cofano, G.P., Anderson, B.C., Stumpff, E.R. “Chiropractic Care of Acute Low Back Pain and Incidental Spina Bifida Occulta: A Case Report.” Journal of Chiropractic Medicine, 2014 Jun; 13(4): 273-277. http://www.journalchiromed.com/article/S1556-3707(14)00096-0/fulltext
Chung, J., Brown, J., Busa, J. “Resolution of Hypertension Following Reduction of Upper Cervical Vertebral Subluxation: A Case Study.” Journal of Upper Cervical Chiropractic Research, 2014 Jan: 1-6. https://getgreaterlifechiropractic.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/Resolution-of-Hypertension-Following-Reduction-of-Upper-Cervical-VS-2.pdf.