3 Key Ways Children Benefit From Having Pets Growing up:
Animals not only offer companionship and unconditional love, but they also help nurture the body and mind. Having pets of any kind can have tremendous mental, physical, and emotional benefits for both you and your children.
By Abigail Brown
1. Physical health
Whether it be in stressful or stress-free situations, pet owners showed significantly lower blood pressure levels than those who do not own pets. If you’ve got an energetic pup who is a runner, you and your kiddos will be endlessly active!
2. Emotional Health
Pets are developmentally beneficial for your children. Helping them nurture their sense of responsibility through caring for them, and thus strengthening their self-esteem. A job well done, makes anyone feel all warm and fuzzy! Not to mention how helpful having a pet is to ease a child’s anxiety, the action of simply playing with an animal can dramatically raise your dopamine and serotonin levels– these chemicals helping you to be more calm, relaxed, and happy. Click me for additional resources.
3. Social Skills
If your kiddo has any trouble connecting to those around them, having a pet in their life can help them to get out of their shell. Research has shown that kids with pets in their homes tend to have more advanced social skills, be more communicative, and better at handling new or unplanned situations. Every child is very different, so it may not be a dog or cat that they click with. Have a conversation with your kiddo about what they would possibly like, and visit your local pet shelter or pet store. The more time your child has to get to know the animal before bringing them home, the better. Click me to read about 10 life lessons having a pet can teach your child.
Click The Link Below For Helpful Information About Picking the Perfect Pet For You And Your Family:
If you would like to capture the bond you and your pet share in a way you can cherish forever— Click the button below to look into our artwork options.