Kool Smiles has free oral health lesson plans for teachers across the country to teach in their classrooms. Our fun lesson plans give teachers the tools to teach their students the importance of things like proper daily toothbrushing, flossing, and dental health tips. Each lesson plan includes fun activities and crafts that kids will love.
We have nothing but the greatest appreciation for teachers. Teachers help kids develop life skills for healthy minds and bodies. These life skills include dental care, which is why we provide downloadable oral health lesson plans for teachers to print out and teach in the classroom.
Our lesson plans engage children while teaching them. We believe that through fun activities like crafts and demonstrations, we can teach kids proper dental health. For example, the 2nd- and 3rd-grade lesson plan focuses on the importance of regular trips to the dentist.
Teachers can lead these lessons by asking kids about their own trips to the dentist and discussing why regular visits (twice a year) are important.
Additionally, kids will learn definitions for words such as plaque, tartar, cavities, and floss, and enjoy an interactive exercise using paint to see how plaque hardens on a tooth.
The American Dental Association (ADA) promotes good oral hygiene by celebrating National Children’s Dental Health Month in February. The ADA website has all kinds of giveaways that work great in the classroom, including calendars, certificates, posters and activity sheets in English and Spanish.
At Kool Smiles, our mission is to help all children get access to good oral health care. We make dental care affordable for all kids and accept most major insurance plans, like Medicaid and TRICARE.
Our offices have fun oversized waiting rooms filled with toys and games, and most of our locations even have full-sized playgrounds for younger children.
To learn more about dental care or to make an appointment for your child, call us at (855) 854-3621 or search online to find a Kool Smiles location near you.
Healthy Mouth: http://www.mouthhealthykids.org/en/watch-videos/sesame-street
American Dental Association: http://www.ada.org/en/public-programs/national-childrens-dental-health-month/#sheets
How do you find a children's dentist who accepts Medicaid? While you can get dentist recommendations from the Internet or friends, Kool Smiles allows you to find a location by just…Read Full Article
If you are looking for a dentist that takes Medicaid, Kool Smiles should be your go-to choice. We proudly accept Medicaid, TRICARE, and other forms of payment. Understanding how Medicaid works is…Read Full Article
If you're looking for a dentistry for children, look to Kool Smiles. With more than 120 locations across the United States, you'll likely find a Kool Smiles office near you.…Read Full Article
Kool Smiles is a network of general and specialty dentists with over 120 locations across the U.S. We accept Medicaid, TRICARE, and Child Health Insurance Programs (CHIPs) at every location. Children enrolled in these…Read Full Article
Are you trying to find a dentist office that can provide care for your children? At Kool Smiles, we offer affordable, quality care at our 120 locations across the US.…Read Full Article
Medicaid helps millions of Americans afford proper dental care every year. Kool Smiles, a network of general dentists with a focus on children, accepts Medicaid at all of our locations. You can…Read Full Article
Dental offices can be difficult to find in some areas. Kool Smiles' mission is to do something about that. We have more than 120 locations in 15 states across the…Read Full Article
At Kool Smiles, our dentists focus on making dental care more affordable by accepting a wide range of insurance and payment options at each location. We have over 120 locations in the United…Read Full Article
For many Americans, finding a good dentist in their area can be hard enough. Finding a children's dentist that accepts Medicaid can feel impossible. But your search can begin —…Read Full Article
Searching for a dentist by name is a great way to find the dentist you are looking for. Whether it's because of the services they offer, the insurance plans they…Read Full Article
When looking at the Medicaid coverage map, it's clear that many areas—especially in the Southeast—have a low Medicaid acceptance rate. However, the dentists at Kool Smiles accept Medicaid at all…Read Full Article