They look a lot like sushi rice, but don’t eat ’em – these are Low Temperature Thermoplastic Beads! Also known as “Friendly Plastic”, “Instamorph”, “Polymorph” and many other names.
These 100g bags are full of ivory-colored polymorph plastic beads with a low melting point of about 60°C (140°F). Heat up some water with a kettle or microwave, then dump the beads in. They’ll turn clear and start sticking together into a wax-like blob. You can then knead, mold and shaped the blob by hand and left to harden. Once hardened, it has the feel and durability of polyethelene and a translucent white color. Don’t like the shape? Simply place it back into hot water, it will soften and you can re-shape it as many times as you like!
This is the ultimate plastic in versatility! Kind of lying somewhere between 3D Filament and Sugru. Make custom repair parts, tools, handles, prototypes, props or crafts, and much more. We’re selling them in 100 gram bags which is just enough for most robotics, electronics or craft projects.
This plastic is non-toxic, lead free, biodegradable, and best of all reusable by just heating it back up again!
Stop breadboarding and soldering – start making immediately! Adafruit’s Circuit Playground is jam-packed with LEDs, sensors, buttons, alligator clip pads and more. Build projects with Circuit Playground in a few minutes with the drag-and-drop MakeCode programming site, learn computer science using the CS Discoveries class on code.org, jump into CircuitPython to learn Python and hardware together, TinyGO, or even use the Arduino IDE. Circuit Playground Express is the newest and best Circuit Playground board, with support for CircuitPython, MakeCode, and Arduino. It has a powerful processor, 10 NeoPixels, mini speaker, InfraRed receive and transmit, two buttons, a switch, 14 alligator clip pads, and lots of sensors: capacitive touch, IR proximity, temperature, light, motion and sound. A whole wide world of electronics and coding is waiting for you, and it fits in the palm of your hand.