Once upon a time, there was a shy and quiet sea turtle. He nearly always went about on his own because, although he wanted to have lots of friends, he was too self-conscious. 

One day, the sea turtle was trying to catch a very slippery piece of seaweed. Before he knew it, he was tangled up in a massive fishing net and he couldn’t move. He tried with all his strength to wiggle free, but it was no good, in fact, he only got more tangled.  In the end, with great embarrassment, he had no choice but to ask for help from the passing school of fish. Many passed him by, ignoring him, but finally, one small and kind fish offered to help untangle him from the net. 

The sea turtle felt so relieved when he was finally set free, but he was also shy that he didn’t dare talk to the small kind fish and try to be friends with him. He uttered a simple thank you and quickly swam away. Later on that night, the sea turtle kept thinking about how he wasted a great opportunity to finally make a friend. 

A couple of days later while the sea turtle was resting on the rocks, he noticed everyone swimming by in a hurry. He looked off into the distance and saw the largest fish he had ever seen coming to feed. The sea turtle quickly hid, while peeking out from his hiding place he saw the enormous fish chasing the small kind fish.  He knew that the small kind fish needed his help, and even though the enormous fish was dangerous-looking he felt he had to do whatever it took to help the small kind fish and return the favor. 

Without thinking, the sea turtle shot away from his hiding place. He put himself right in front of the path of the enormous fish, and before the fish could even react, he hit the hard shell of the sea fish and was stunned. Taking advantage of the enormous fish's stunned reaction the sea turtle grabbed the little kind fish and swam back to his hiding place. Everything happened so fast that the enormous fish had no time to react. Once he recovered, the enormous fish swam above the sea turtles hiding place in search of them both, with plans to gobble them up!

Soon, though, he began feeling a terrible pain in his nose, that quickly spread to his head. The hit to the massive sea turtle's shell had caused the enormous fish to get a headache. The enormous fish began to swim away giving up his search. 

As soon as the enormous fish was gone, all the other fish came out of their hiding places and thanked the sea turtle for being so courageous and brave. The little kind fish told them all how he had helped the sea turtle a few days ago and how he was grateful the sea turtle returned the favor. Once the other fish had heard the story, they discovered how shy the sea turtle was and everyone was so proud to be the new friend of such a brave sea turtle.
