Ofsted is the Office for Standards in Education, Children's Services and Skills. They report directly to Parliament and are independent and impartial. They inspect services which care for children and young people, and those providing education and skills for all ages. They provide an independent assessment of the quality and standards of education in schools and produce a report.
Ofsted inspect schools regularly and a school will usually have one main inspection every few years. The report from an inspection will tell the reader all about the school, for example it could help parents/carers decide if they want to send their child to the school.
An Ofsted report features the Inspectors findings and overall judgement grades for how good a school is in particular aspects.
Grade 1: Outstanding
An outstanding is highly effective in delivering outcomes that provide exceptionally well for all its pupils needs. This ensures that pupils are very well equipped for their next stage of education eg from primary to secondary, training or employment.
Grade 2: Good
A good school is effective in delivering outcomes that provide well for all its pupils needs. Pupils are well prepared for the next stage of their education, training or employment.
Grade 3: Requires Improvement
A school that requires improvement is not yet a good school, but is not inadequate. The school will receive a full inspection within 24 months of the last inspection date.
Grade 4: Inadequate
A school that has serious weaknesses is inadequate overall and requires significant improvement but leadership and management are judged to be grade 3 or better. The school will receive regular monitoring by Ofsted inspectors.
Christ Church Inspection Reports
To see a copy of the schools latest Ofsted report, please click the link below:
A SIAMS report identifies the principal objective of the Inspection, which is to evaluate the distinctiveness and effectiveness of the school as a church school. Four key questions are set out which address the impact that a church school has on all the learners.
To see a copy of the school's latest SIAMS (Statutory Inspection of Anglican and Methodist Schools) report, please click the link below: