What is AMH?Anti-mullerian hormone, or AMH, holds important information about a woman’s fertility
At Fertility Answers, we are committed to helping patients unlock their pregnancy potential. To help our patients achieve pregnancy success, our South Louisiana fertility centers perform anti-mullerian hormone, or AMH, testing to gain information about a woman’s ovarian reserve, or egg supply.
AMH levels provide insight into a woman’s ovarian reserve
AMH is produced in the very immature egg follicles found in a woman’s ovaries. The levels of AMH in the blood indicate the approximate number of follicles in a woman’s ovaries.
- If a woman has high levels of AMH, she likely has a healthy egg supply.
- However, if she has low levels of AMH, she has a diminished ovarian reserve.
- AMH may even be able to predict when she will experience menopause.
The physicians at our South Louisiana fertility centers want to stress that it is not impossible to conceive if you have low AMH levels. Low levels simply indicate that it may be more difficult for you to get pregnant. As a result, your physician will likely recommend that you begin to consider fertility treatment or fertility preserving measures such as egg freezing.
Our fertility specialists can assess a woman’s AMH levels with a blood test
When you visit our South Louisiana fertility centers, your physician will arrange for you to have a blood test. AMH testing is a unique form of ovarian reserve testing because it can be performed at any time during your menstrual cycle. This is because AMH levels do not fluctuate throughout the month.
In addition to AMH testing, your physician will also monitor follicular growth and recommend a blood test to assess your levels of follicle-stimulating hormone, or FSH. Unlike AMH, FSH is produced in your pituitary gland and levels do fluctuate throughout the month. FSH can also provide useful information about your ovarian reserve. High levels of FSH indicate a diminished ovarian reserve, while lower levels indicate a healthy egg supply.
When performed with FSH testing and antral follicle count testing, AMH testing can provide important information about your ovarian reserve and how you will likely respond to fertility treatment.
If you have more questions about AMH or AMH testing, please contact Fertility Answers today.