- Unit 1- Making sense of other people. Written paper (1 hour 30 mins), 80 marks- 50%.
- Unit 2- Understanding other people. Written paper (1 hour 30 mins), 80 marks- 50%.
GCSE pupils are assessed across three areas:
- AO1- Recall, select and communicate their knowledge and understanding of psychology and how psychology works.
- AO2- Apply skills, knowledge and understanding of psychology and how psychology works.
- AO3- Interpret, evaluate and analyse psychological data and practice.
What type of student succeeds at Psychology?
Studying Psychology requires pupils to think independently about concepts and theories that represent the complexity of people in the modern world. Therefore, students need to be motivated to understand and evaluate significant research that aims to explain the behaviours of people from all cultures in modern world.
Subject requirements at GCSE
A minimum of a Grade B at Science and English at key stage 3 is required in order to study Psychology at GCSE. The course requires an independent work ethic from the outset.
Psychology works well with a wide variety of subjects, but most specifically Science, History and Maths.
Students receive homework once a week. Psychology homework aims to develop pupil skills sets whilst completing in-depth investigation into key research and theoretical standpoints delivered by prestigious psychologists.
Which A Level courses can be taken having studied Psychology?
Psychology GCSE is favourable for any A Level which requires scientific and independent thought. In particular, Biology, Maths, Humanities and Sports Science courses.
Which university courses require Psychology A Level?
Psychology, Criminology, Applied Sport Psychology, Forensic Psychology and Criminal Justice, Policing Studies and Forensic Psychology, Psychology with Child Development, Psychology with Neuroscience.
Which careers could A Level Psychology lead to?
Psychotherapist, Clinical Psychologist, Occupational Psychologist, Social Worker, Counsellor, Educational Psychologist, Psychology Teacher.