Could Some Infections Protect Against Rheumatoid Arthritis?Infections of the gastrointestinal and urogenital tracts appear to reduce RA risk, but prostate and respiratory infections do not.
Recent infections of the gastrointestinal and urogenital tracts may decrease a person's risk of developing rheumatoid arthritis (RA), potentially by altering the microbiome — the collective makeup of microorganisms living in the human body — in beneficial ways, according to a new study published in the journal Annals of the Rheumatic Diseases.
Scientists analyzed the impact of various types of infections on the RA risk of 6,401 people residing in south and central Sweden, about 44 percent of whom were newly diagnosed with RA when they joined the study.
They found that having a gut, urinary tract, or genital infection within the preceding two years decreased participants' risk of RA by 29 percent, 22 percent, and 20 percent, respectively. Additionally, having all three infections lowered RA risk by 50 percent.
By comparison, having recent respiratory or prostate infections conferred no such benefits, the study found.
"This is a hypothesis-generating paper, which could potentially contribute to new findings," says study lead author Maria Sandberg, PhD, an epidemiologist at the Karolinska Institute in Sweden. "We hope that it will inspire more research in this field, both epidemiological and in the lab."
However, the research has no clear implications for consumers or healthcare at this point, Dr. Sandberg notes.
A Surprising Discovery
Rheumatoid arthritis is a chronic autoimmune disorder, in which inflammation causes the joints and surrounding tissue to become swollen, painful, and stiff.
Though it's unknown what exactly causes RA, scientists have long suspected that certain bacterial infections like gum disease may sometimes trigger the disease.
Recent research has also suggested that changes to the composition of the microbiome in the gut and other areas may impact the stability and harmony of the immune system, potentially causing inflammatory disorders.
So Sandberg and her colleagues set out to determine if recent infections could affect RA risk, fully expecting that infections would increase RA risk or trigger the clinical onset of RA.
As part of Sweden's EIRA (Epidemiological Investigation of Rheumatoid Arthritis) study, a large, ongoing project seeking to illuminate the genetic and environmental factors associated with RA, participants who joined the study between 1996 and 2009 were asked if they experienced any of the following diseases within the two years prior:
- Stomach infection with diarrhea
- Urinary tract infection, including cystitis and pyelonephritis
- Genital infection
- Prostatitis, or prostate inflammation
- Sinusitis treated with antibiotics
- Tonsillitis or other throat infection treated with antibiotics
The questionnaire included antibiotic use to "increase the specificity of the answers" and to "be more certain that the tonsillitis and sinusitis was just that, and not a common cold," Sandberg explains.
After adjusting for various factors, including age, sex, smoking, and economic background, the researchers found, to their surprise, that people were significantly less likely to have had RA at the onset of the study if they recently had infections of the gastrointestinal and urogenital tracts.
Infections and RA Risk
The researchers stress that no causal relationship can be drawn between recent infections and RA development, but they have some ideas about what may be going on.
In particular, these infections may alter the composition of the microbiome, potentially influencing RA susceptibility.
What's more, the team notes that the gastrointestinal and urogenital tracts are primarily infected with a class of microbes called gram-negative bacteria, and antibiotics that can kill these bacteria have previously been shown to be effective treatments for RA.
On the other hand, the other infection sites investigated are primarily infected with gram-positive bacteria.
"There is also a somewhat closer link between the gut microbiome and the infections that conferred a decreased risk, compared to the infections that did not confer a decreased risk," Sandberg says.
After delving into the scientific literature, Sandberg and her colleagues only found a single study, from 2005, that also reported decreased recent infection rates for people newly diagnosed with RA, but that research didn't specify the location or timing of the infections.
Interestingly, a more recent study, published in 2013 in the journal eLife, implicated Prevotella copri, a gram-negative gut bacteria, in the development of RA. The research "is yet another indication that the gut microbiome is an important player in RA [and probably many other diseases]," Sandberg says.
More Research Is Necessary
Doug Roberts, MD, a rheumatologist with the University of California Davis Medical School, who wasn't involved in the study, found the research intriguing. "But I'd be careful of drawing any conclusions from it," he says.
Gastrointestinal and urogenital tract infections are sometimes treated with antibiotics, Dr. Roberts says, but the study didn't inquire whether participants received treatment for these infections. Such antibiotics could also alter the microbiome, affecting RA risk — in this case, it could be the antibiotics, and not the infections themselves, that reduce RA risk.
"To me, the big hole in the study was they didn't account for the treatment of the gastrointestinal and urogenital tract infections," Roberts says.
But if the study's results are confirmed with more research, it could have important implications, particularly if scientists determine what, exactly, allows the infections to reduce RA risk.
"If it was a molecule or protein that the bacteria produce [that protects against RA], you could synthesize the protein to vaccinate people against RA," Roberts says. "Autoimmune disease is the loss of self-tolerance, so if you reintroduce tolerance, you solve the problem. That's the golden ticket."