There once was a tiny island in the middle of the Aegean Sea, separated equidistantly from any surrounding lands. On the island was a group of citizens who were once members of large cities and countries, but came here to practice solitude from the increasing craziness of the outside world. Here, on this little island, the population of 100 souls could live out their lives in relative peace.

Self-sufficiency is always the main concern in a closed-off society. Considering this society was also an island that was both physically and intentionally cut off from civilization, the people of this community needed to become (if they were not already) proficient in live-savings skills: first-aid, food hunting and gathering, and making shelters and clothing. The members of the island came here as a group almost 30 years ago with just the proverbial shirts on their backs, but those items of clothing were long gone to the elements. Now, they wore a mixture of leaf-based and animal hide tunics and trousers, and footwear made from the rubber of nearby trees.

An article published in Time Magazine caused a lot of controversy in the town; specifically, outsiders began flocking to the remote island to become members of this small society. As for the community members, they saw nothing but trouble and hassle and began feeling society's grasp wrapping around them again. They escaped the problems of the outside world, but the outside world decided to follow them to the remotest parts of it.

In retaliation, the community members began closing up their businesses, removing signage and retreating into their hand-built shelters. They would not welcome these newcomers, opting instead for an icy reception. The unofficial mayor of the community, Sal Hardwick, greeted visitors with the following phrase designed to make them rethink their choice: "Leave now. No one will come to your aid, and nothing here belongs to you." While some individuals heeded the warning, others were made to understand via the village bouncers physically removing them by force, usually into the ocean, where some remain to this day for lack of swimming skills.
