Related Resources Young writers need to experience sustained and successful writing.
In a letter to the editor or opinion piece, you can bring up information not addressed in a news article, and can create the impression of widespread support or opposition to an issue.
When you write a letter to the editor, be sure to do the following. Adhere to word count requirements. This information can usually be found, online and in print, on the same page as the letters that are published.
Generally, as few as words are the maximum. Open with a strong statement, and be sure to place the most important information at the beginning.
Often, letters and pieces are edited to fit the space available in that issue of the newspaper -- most often they are cut from the bottom up, so placing the important information anywhere but at the top could result in its being omitted.
Use a personal story or illustration to make your point in plain language. If at all possible, tie your letter to a recent piece of news, editorial, or a prior letter to the editor, and, if you do so, reference the title and date of the article in your letter.
If you are referring to a newspaper article, send your letter as soon as possible after an article has been published in the paper. Use email to submit your letter. Editors like email because they will not have to re-key your letter for print.
Send your letter or opinion piece to weekly and community newspapers as well.
In your signature line include your name, daytime and evening telephone numbers, email address, and mailing address so the paper can verify that you wrote the letter.
Some editors may write or call to confirm your information. Only your name and city will be published. If your letter or opinion piece does run in the newspaper, please send us a link to the letter: Document and Site Resources.Here is a more detailed break down of my week: Monday- I try to teach a short minilesson in math.
This my be something with the calendar or the hundreds board.
I still teach a whole group writing lesson, but then meet with a small writing group during independent writing to help those students work on our skill for the day. After writing that is the group that gets to share their writing with the class.
Welcome to My Place for Teachers. On this website you will find rich educational material to support primary and lower-secondary teachers using the My Place TV series in the classroom. Explore background information, aligned with the My Place stories, on events and people significant to Australia's history.
Download clips and stills from the TV series, as well as teaching activities and. My “Literacy Centers That Work” model is structured around work centers that students visit while the teacher meets with guided reading or other literacy small groups.
Reading, writing, speaking, and listening are the foundations of the centers activities in this framework. Dry erase boards are one of the easiest ways to keep kids engaged in every lesson. In Dry Erase Boards: Part I, I shared where to obtain enough boards for all your students and how to use them for whole group instruction..
In this blog post, I’ll share guided practice strategies for using dry erase boards. Guided writing lessons are temporary, small-group lessons teaching those strategies that a group of students most need to practice with immediate guidance from you.
Guided writing lessons can be taught after a whole-class lesson once other students are actively engaged in independent writing.