Most people today have been educated in the health field to understand that anti-oxidants are good and the more you have the healthier you will be and the longer you might live, right? No, not all the time. Researchers at McGill University have found that free radicals actually increase longevity.
What did the researcher find that is the key to aging more slowly and living longer? Well the winner was not antioxidants. What was found was how free radicals promote longevity. It was found that free radicals or oxidants let the cell know to self destruct.This programmed cell death, or apoptosis which is the scientific term, is a process by that causes damaged cells to kill themselves. Why would a cell want to kill itself? Well it would do this to avoid becoming cancer cell, or to avoid turning on auto-immune disease, or to kill a virus infected cell. The researchers found that apoptosis could be triggered by free radicals, and properly timed apoptosis can increase lifespan.
The lead researcher stated that it is thought that free radicals are damaging and cause aging, but this is incorrect. This new research has shown that free radical production increases during aging because free radicals actually counter instead of cause aging. Their research showed that as the free radicals increased it equaled a significant increased lifespan.
Dr. Keith & Laurie Nemec’s comments on “Antioxidants are Good and Free Radicals are Bad? Think Again”:
It is so interesting when paradym shifts occur in the world. This is when something we always thought was true turns out to be the opposite of what we thought. This latest research was yet another “shift” in our thinking on health, life and aging. What does this mean to you? Well it means that God designed the body to know whats best and it will always try to produce health inspite of what we do to it. Does this mean taking antioxidants is bad? No, still take them but do not take them thinking they will prolong your life and do not take them thinking you will not have to eat living and raw vegetables, seeds, nuts, fruit (avocado), sea vegetables and sprouts. This is where the most powerful nutrients that really work in your body on a cellular level are found.
What we have found at Total Health Institute in the 30 years that we have been seeing patients is that physical steps toward improving or hurting your health count as one fold positive or one fold negative whereas mental and emotional changes count as tenfold positive or tenfold negative so in the big picture of your total health is it more important to focus on your stress and how to live more fully in the moment as God created you to instead of worrying about the future or the past? Yes absolutely yes. But does that mean that it does matter if you eat well or get to sleep by between 8-9PM, or if you get some exercise or drink enough water each day? No absolutely not. All it means is that things that affect the mind are ten times more influential in effecting either a positive or negative change in your total health. So what is the answer? Work on your whole being. Eat well, get to sleep early, drink enough water, exercise daily and keep your eye fixed on HIM who created you and sustains you instead of the things of the world.
We cover this in these three teachings:
A powerful word from is:
But seek first his kingdom and his righteousness, and all these things will be given to you as well. NIV
And what should you be thinking about? Should you be thinking about how to heal a disease, about how to get a job, about how to fix a relationship? No, you should be thinking about HIM and HIS kingdom within you which is in your heart:
… whatever is true, whatever is noble, whatever is right, whatever is pure, whatever is lovely, whatever is admirable — if anything is excellent or praiseworthy — think about such things. NIV
To Your Total Health Always,
Dr. Keith & Laurie Nemec