Medial Epicondylitis – “Golfer’s Elbow”
Medial Epicondylitis, commonly known as Golfer’s Elbow, is a common injury that occurs to the inside (medial) aspect of the elbow. As a result of overuse or improper lifting of objects, microscopic tears can occur in the tendon where the forearm flexor muscles attached to the bone (medial epicondyle). These tears can bleed and scarring can develop, causing the elbow to become inflamed and creating a source of significant pain.
The pain associated with Medial Epicondylitis is often described as an intense burning sensation over the bony prominence of the inside elbow. This pain may or may not radiate down into the forearm and hand. This pain is generally worse with activity, especially during activities when lifting and carrying objects with the elbow extended and palm up. Resistive gripping and pinching activities can also increase the pain. If left untreated, the pain from Golfer’s Elbow can become extremely debilitating.
Although resting the elbow may enable the condition to improve in milder cases, medical treatment is usually required in more serious cases. Your physician may prescribe anti-inflammatory medications or a cortisone injection to relieve the pain. However, a comprehensive rehabilitation program that includes focused stretching, strengthening, and conditioning is usually prescribed to treat the root causes of Tennis Elbow.
Therapy can be used to provide pain relief and restore range of motion, strength, and function to the elbow region. A variety of modalities can be utilized to minimize pain and increase blood flow to the inflamed area, which promotes the growth of healthy muscle tissue. A comprehensive program should provide pain relief and enable the individual to return to normal activities.
Medical Illustration Copyright © 2008 Nucleus Medical Art, All rights reserved
MEDICAL DISCLAIMER: The information contained in this website is intended for informational and educational purposes only. You should always with your physician for the diagnosis and treatment of any injury or condition. The content on this web site is general in nature and not complete, and it should never be used for diagnostic or treatment purposes.