How to Build This Evil Toothbrush Machine #WearableWednesday #Wearabletech @SimoneGiertz
If you don’t follow @SimoneGiertz you really should. Her insane robotic inventions will keep you laughing and also invigorate the maker in you. I remember when her Toothbrush Machine went viral and now she has created a tutorial on Hackster.io, so anyone can build one. Here’s her list of parts:
You can see the two main assemblies are the Arduino and shield, as well as the robot arm, servos and toothbrush. It’s not the cheapest project around, but it certainly is entertaining. It’s also ideal for STEM classes, especially for getting kids interested in robotics, health or dentistry. My fave part of the tutorial is when Simone talks about tweaking:
Might need some calibration to work with your face. Because we’re all unique, yada yada yada.
There’s no better way to inspire kids to learn Arduino than to show them something clunky and silly. Way to go, Simone! I think the last time I saw something this funny was when a team at Open Hardware Summit demoed a desktop fitness tracker holder to insure step count is met while being a sloth at work. It moved like a pendulum and had the whole audience losing it. So, don’t be afraid to go humorous for the sake of education. In fact, if you are looking for another crazy STEM project, check out our Animatronic Tail. You have the power to bring a child’s fantasy to life with our Trinket Microcontroller and micro servo. Don’t be surprised if your friends want one, too.
Stop breadboarding and soldering – start making immediately! Adafruit’s Circuit Playground is jam-packed with LEDs, sensors, buttons, alligator clip pads and more. Build projects with Circuit Playground in a few minutes with the drag-and-drop MakeCode programming site, learn computer science using the CS Discoveries class on code.org, jump into CircuitPython to learn Python and hardware together, TinyGO, or even use the Arduino IDE. Circuit Playground Express is the newest and best Circuit Playground board, with support for CircuitPython, MakeCode, and Arduino. It has a powerful processor, 10 NeoPixels, mini speaker, InfraRed receive and transmit, two buttons, a switch, 14 alligator clip pads, and lots of sensors: capacitive touch, IR proximity, temperature, light, motion and sound. A whole wide world of electronics and coding is waiting for you, and it fits in the palm of your hand.