Ensuring that all lab-grown meat products are safe and accurately labeled remains one of CLA’s top priorities. Under the terms of an agreement between U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) and Food and Drug Administration (FDA), USDA will be responsible for inspecting all facilities that harvest, process, package, or label cell-cultured products derived from livestock or poultry.
A similar dilemma has existed for years in the dairy industry with the mislabeling of plant-based beverages as “milk.” The FDA already has a clear definition of what constitutes milk: “Food products made exclusively or principally from the lacteal secretion obtained from one or more healthy milk-producing animals.” Plant-based beverages don’t meet that standard.
Better with Beef Campaign
The Colorado Livestock Association and the Colorado Cattlemen’s Association kicked off the ‘Better with Beef’ campaign, a consumer and citizen-facing educational initiative telling the story of why Colorado is ‘Better with Beef.’ Misleading labels and marketing schemes continue to confuse the public and we believe it is necessary to set the record straight when it comes to the environmental sustainability of beef production in Colorado.
Colorado’s agriculture industry is an integral and vibrant part of the state’s economy. As a multi-species organization, we understand the value of diversity in agriculture and believe wholeheartedly that more options for consumers are always better. We understand that consumers want a variety of healthy food options that are produced with minimal environmental impact.
The ‘Better with Beef’ campaign will provide Colorado’s consumers with facts about beef production backed by peer-reviewed research. Follow the story of “Better With Beef” online at BetterWithBeef.org and on social media with #BetterWithBeef.
THE CLA POLICY BOOK
The CLA Policy Book is written and updated by CLA members. The policies within the book dictate the position that CLA takes on numerous issues throughout the state and within the regulatory arena.