Use listing coloring pages then one of these crayon approaches for the next classroom art lesson.
Trace over the photocopied picture outline with crayon.
Thick lines perform best.
Brush over the whole page with thin paint. Only use one color.
The waxed lines will resist the paint as well as the picture will glow through.
Color most of the picture with crayon. Leave some areas white.
Brush on the whole page with thin paint. Only use one color.
Draw within the lines with crayon.
Paint the photo with a variety of colors.
The crayon lines can make the image better to paint.
They will minimize edges bleeding into each other.
This is not a resist but it’s a fantastic extension in the previous activities.
Paint the picture with watercolors.
When the paint is dry, use crayons to include detail and depth of color.
Rip off a tiny small note that is in regards to the height and width of a matchbox.
Use a crayon to scribble thickly to the paper.
Turn the paper over and utilizing your thumb rub the crayon on to the picture.
This generates a very soft smooth effect.
Color a location of the photo using a textured object placed underneath.
Sandpaper, string, crumpled paper, bricks, bark, leaves, signs and rocks can cause interesting patterns. Experiment having a part of blank paper first.
Use grated pieces or shavings of crayon to produce a swirling effect.
Sprinkle the crayon on to the photo then rub them your thumb.
This is successful if you utilize different colors together.
It makes effective animal fur, storm clouds or grass.
Go on the outline of the picture with black crayon.
Color the remainder of the photo thickly with crayon.
If possible use a small piece of cotton wool or cloth to polish the photo.
Heat from the friction of rubbing melts the crayon and creates a smooth shiny effect.
Apply a little amount of vegetable oil to your cotton wool ball.
Gently rub the oil over the back of the picture.
The oil will make the photo almost transparent.
Students could be because of the oil soaked balls inside a paint tray.
Encourage these to go over and on the picture to spread the oil.
Hang the image inside a classroom window to produce a stained glass effect.