105TH CONGRESS - 1ST SESSION - S. RES. 145
Designating the month of November as "National American Indian Heritage Month".
IN THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES
Mr. Campbell (for himself, Mr. Inouye, Mr. Abraham, Mr. Allard, Mr. Baucus, Mr.
Bennett, Mr. Bingaman, Mrs. Boxer, Mr. Breaux, Mr. Brownback, Mr. Bryan, Mr.
Chafee, Mr. Cochran, Ms. Collins, Mr. Conrad, Mr. D'Amato, Mr. Dashle, Mr. Dodd,
Mr. Domenici, Mr. Dorgan, Mr. Durbin, Mr. Enzi, Mr. Faircloth, Mr. Faircloth,
Mr. Feingold, Mrs. Feinstein, Mr. Ford, Mr. First, Mr. Gorton, Mr. Graham, Mr.
Hatch, Mr. Inhofe, Mr. Jeffords, Mr. Johnson, Mr. Kennedy, Ms. Landrieu, Mr.
Lautenberg, Mr. Levin, Mr. Lieberman, Mr. Lott, Mr. McCain, Ms. Mikulski, Ms.
Moseley-Braun, Mrs. Murray, Mr. Reid, Mr. Rockefeller, Mr. Smith of Oregon, Mr.
Thomas, Mr. Thurmond, Mr. Warner, Mr. Wellstone, Mr. Wyden, Mr. Murkowski and
Mr. Stevens) submitted the following resolution; which was referred to the
Committee on the Judiciary November 9, 1997 Committee discharged; considered and
RESOLUTION Designating the month of November 1997 as "National American Indian
Whereas American Indians and Alaska Natives were the original inhabitants of the
land that now constitutes the United States;
Whereas American Indian tribal governments developed the fundamental principles
of freedom of speech and separation of powers that form the foundation of the
United States Government;
Whereas American Indians and Alaska Natives have traditionally exhibited a
respect for the finiteness of natural resources through a reverence for the
Whereas American Indians and Alaska Natives have served with valor in all of
America's wars beginning with the Revolutionary War through the conflict in the
Persian Gulf, and often the percentage of American Indians who served exceeded
significantly the percentage of American Indians in the population of the United
States as a whole;
Whereas American Indians and Alaska Natives have made distinct and important
contributions to the United States and the rest of the world in many fields,
including agriculture, medicine, music, language, and art;
Whereas American Indians and Alaska Natives deserve to be recognized for their
individual contributions to the United States as local and national leaders,
artists, athletes, and scholars;
Whereas this recognition will encourage self-esteem, pride, and self-awareness
in American Indians and Alaska Natives of all ages; and
Whereas November is a time when many Americans commemorate a special time in the
history of the United States when American Indians and English settlers
celebrated the bounty of their harvest and the promise of new kinships: Now,
therefore, be it
1 Resolved, That the Senate designates November
2 as "National American Indian Heritage Month" and re-
3 quests that the President issue a proclamation calling on
4 the Federal Government and State and local governments,
5 interested groups and organizations, and the people of the
6 United States to observe the month with programs appropriate ceremonies, and
Mike L. Graham
Founder United Native America