With so many people amazed by how fast we are advancing with the aid of technology, it’s no wonder that so many are interested in how it all works. If you are one of the curious users of the World Wide Web, read on to find out about the top seven technology trends of 2019-2020.
Augmented Reality & Virtual Reality
Virtual Reality or VR has been considered the main achievement from the most recent years, but Augmented Reality or AR is expected to overcome it very soon. There is also the Mixed Reality or MR to watch out as it seems to be no less promising as the other two technologies.
Summarized together as R+, these technologies continue to develop and bring new, surprising applications for all kinds of industries. Even though R+ was first present primarily in the gaming industry, it is now quickly spreading into manufacturing, space exploration, healthcare, engineering design, and more.
Both VR and AR are changing the way people work and collaborate with each other from across the world. AR is predicted to become common for mobile devices as, unlike VR, it doesn’t require additional inventory and is far more robust.
Artificial Intelligence & Machine Learning
Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning have been changing the world no less – and maybe even more – than AR and VR. Also known as AI, Artificial Intelligence continues contributing to the scientific breakthroughs that we couldn’t even dream about.
In the coming years, AI and Machine Learning will become more common in the business sphere enabling smart business operations that will change the way we see business management. China is said to become the leader in Artificial Intelligence matters.
Machine Learning will also contribute to the advancements in AI. Robotics, as well as autonomous vehicles, will be the ones seeing most positive changes in the near future. AI will become more accurate thanks to the huge amounts of data that can now be collected easily.
Internet of Things
In the past few years, we have seen hackers using the Internet of Things or IoT devices to create a botnet they used to drive enough traffic to take down Dyn, the DNS provider. It’s not the first time something like this happened and it seems that nobody learned anything from it.
However, companies that produce IoT devices are now taking steps to improve their security and make these devices less vulnerable. After all, the Internet of Things has a lot of potential and provides numerous opportunities for business from all industries.
IoT is still developing. In the near future, it is predicted that the interest will shift to automating and augmenting the way people experience the connected world. Companies are already using such adjectives as “intelligent” and “smart” to characterize their technologies and solutions.
Also known as Supercomputing, Quantum Computing is still an emerging technology that has already attracted the attention of millions. Building the first fully functional quantum computer is not easy, but the brightest minds of our age are working on it.
Quantum computers will probably be a cloud-based service rather than an on-premise machine. Actually, IBM is already offering cloud-based quantum computing services, but there’s still a lot to be desired. There is an almost unknown race that is centered around building the first quantum computer. And once someone does succeed, this achievement will most likely remain a secret.
Blockchain is continuing to grow its fan base. It is confidently moving towards becoming the next big thing in all senses. This time, it won’t be just a buzzword – it will be a reality that everyone is used to and perceives as a standard.
Blockchain will help bring the first enterprise applications into active use. Many leading companies are already implementing or planning to implement it to improve collaboration as well as many other aspects of their business.
In collaboration with cryptocurrency, Blockchain is said to become an integral part of every business as it provides transactional transparency so needed nowadays. In fact, Blockchain will surpass itself and become the key component of business innovation.
Hybrid Cloud Solutions
Connected clouds will become hybrid cloud solutions thanks to so many companies relying on cloud computing. The consumption of cloud services will only continue growing in the years to come and will become a market worth hundreds of billions of dollars.
Cloud services are becoming more adaptable in different areas of activity which will make hybrid cloud solutions the most popular among various companies. At the same time, they will be a challenge for some businesses nonetheless.
Cloud solutions were first regarded as a way to reduce costs by avoiding building vast IT infrastructures from scratch. These solutions will continue bringing flexibility and efficiency to the table when the rapidly changing market conditions are in question.
The next few years will see an emergence of hybrid and multi-cloud solutions for businesses as they will be developed by various industries. They provide opportunities that on-premise machines can’t.
Automation is nothing new as it has been around in different industries for a while now. It has a good reputation and takes the first places in many questions. There is no doubt that it will only progress in development in the years to come.
Drones, robots, autonomous vehicles, you name it – all of them are the product of automation combined with Artificial Intelligence. The attention will probably shift from standalone things to focus on more complex systems of intelligent autonomous things.
Moreover, robotic process automation or RPA has now become a more serious technology than it used to be. The number of robots working alongside humans will soon start growing rapidly as RPA spreads into the public sector too.
All in all, it doesn’t matter whether you are more interested in AI and machine learning or AR and VR, there is definitely something you will be happy to discover in the coming years. Keeping an eye on the advancements of these technologies and always be on-topic.