India, the world’s second largest producer of cotton and silk is also the second largest textile manufacturer. This is a story that is waiting to be told on the world forum and is sure to turn into the biggest success the country has even seen after IT, especially with the ‘Make in India’ campaign giving it the much needed fillip.
In fact, textile is what connects the modern society to ancient traditions. And there’s no better example than our own country where diversity in terms of weaves, fibers, colours and material of clothing is concerned. A variety of weaving techniques were employed in ancient India, many of which survive to the present day. Silk and cotton were woven into various designs and motifs, each region developing its distinct style and technique. Famous among these weaving styles were the Jamdani, Kasika vastra of Varanasi, butidar and the Ilkal saree. Brocades of silk were woven with gold and silver threads and were deeply influenced by Persian designs. The Mughals played a vital role in the enhancement of the art, and the paisley and Latifa Buti are fine examples of Mughal influence. Fashion designing today borrows heavily from our yester years.
Over the past decade, rapid urbanization, higher disposable incomes and increasing fashion consciousness has transformed the women’s wear segment into a lucrative market that is evolving at an unbelievable pace in India. This domestic fashion market is mushrooming rapidly. A remarkable change in occasion wear is evident and witnessed clearly in wearing and buying habits of consumers. India is a country where tradition watches over all creative expressions making sure that it never stays away from norms set by its glorious past. Understanding the fantastic quality of craft and textile explorations the world has started looking to India as an extension of creativity in fashion. We believe that traditional wear is back in a new avatar with fashion designers using the fabric and the weave just a bit differently to suit the palate today.