How to Create an HTML Template for MS Accessby Deborah Lee Soltesz
Microsoft Access can be used for managing all kinds of data, such as staff lists, sports statistics, store inventories and music catalogs. You can use Access to turn your tables, reports, queries and forms into web pages by exporting your data as HTML. Create your own HTML templates for Access to dress up your exported web pages, add your logo, include text and pictures, and include your site navigation. Elements from your Access database are added using special HTML comment tags called "tokens."
Open your text editor and create a new file. Save the empty file with an .html file extension, for example, mytemplate.html.
Add the start and end HTML tags and .
Create a page header area by adding the start and end head tags between the HTML tags:
Set the title for your web page using the title tags and the Access title token by adding
Add the content area of the document using the start and end body tags after the end head tag:.
Create navigation for the exported reports in the content area using the Access navigation tokens for the first, next, previous and last pages as the link references. For example: ">First | ">Previous | ">Next | ">Last You can use images instead of text as navigation buttons, use a table or list to organize the links, and use CSS to add style.
Add the Access body token, , below the page navigation where you'd like the content (table, report, etc.) to be inserted.
Use the Access page number token to display the current page number on the page. For example:
Continue editing the HTML to add your logo, site navigation, information, links, decorative elements, external CSS, and other elements to your page.
- Because Access HTML template tokens look like HTML comments, most graphical web page editors, such as Dreamweaver, will preserve the comments. If you use a graphical web page editor, try using it to finish editing and styling your Access template. Test your editor first by working on a copy of your template, and checking the saved HTML code to ensure the Access template tokens were not changed.