How the Immune System Works PDF provides a concise and engaging insight into the human immune system. With no complicated terminologies, the book conveys its message while keeping the reader engaged.
Table of Contents
Lecture 1 An Overview, 1
Here we view the action from the grandstands to get a wide-angle picture of what the immune system is all about.
Lecture 2 The Innate Immune System, 13
The innate immune system is a “hard-wired” defense that has evolved over millions of years to recognize pathogens that commonly infect humans.
Lecture 3 B Cells and Antibodies, 27
B cells and the antibodies they produce are part of the adaptive immune system.
Lecture 4 The Magic of Antigen Presentation, 42
T cells, another weapon of the adaptive immune system, only recognize invaders which are “properly presented” by specialized antigen presenting cells.
Lecture 5 T Cell Activation, 55
Before they can spring into action, T cells must be activated. This requirement helps insure that only useful weapons will be mobilized.
Lecture 6 T Cells at Work, 63
Once they have been activated, helper T cells orchestrate the immune response, and killer T cells destroy infected cells.
Lecture 7 Secondary Lymphoid Organs and Lymphocyte Trafficking, 72
B and T lymphocytes travel through secondary lymphoid organs looking for the intruders they can defend against.
Lecture 8 Restraining the Immune System, 84
The powerful weapons of the immune system must be restrained lest they become overexuberant.
Lecture 9 Self Tolerance and MHC Restriction, 88
T cells must be trained to focus on appropriately presented invaders, and B and T lymphocytes must learn not to attack our own bodies.
Lecture 10 Immunological Memory, 98
Memory B and T lymphocytes respond more quickly and effectively to a subsequent attack by the same invader.
Lecture 11 The Intestinal Immune System, 103
The human intestines are home to trillions of bacteria, viruses, fungi, and parasites.
Lecture 12 Vaccines, 110
Vaccines safely mimic the attack of an invader so that our immune system will be primed and ready for a future challenge by the same invader.
Lecture 13 The Immune System Gone Wrong, 116
The immune system generally does a good job of defending us without causing a lot of “collateral damage.” Sometimes, however, mistakes are made.
Lecture 14 Immunodeficiency, 126
Serious disease may result when our immune system does not operate at full strength. Humans who are infected with the AIDS virus have profoundly impaired immune systems.
Lecture 15 Cancer and the Immune System, 131
The human immune system is not very good at defending us against cancer. Indeed, there is a built-in conflict between the need to minimize the chance that its weapons will attack our own bodies, and the need to destroy wannabe cancer cells.
You May also interested in it
- Harriet line handbook 21st edition PDF
- The patient’s history on an evidence-based approach to differential diagnosis PDF
- Practical radiology a symptom-based approach PDF
- Current Diagnosis & Treatment Obstetrics & Gynecology Eleventh Edition PDF
- Pediatric primary care 6th edition PDF
- Katzung Pharmacology 13th Edition PDF
- Katzung Pharmacology 14th Edition PDF
- Basic and clinical pharmacology PDF
- Advanced practice nursing procedures 1st edition PDF
- The Sanford guide to antimicrobial therapy 2018 PDF
- Infectious diseases a clinical short course 3e PDF
- Up to date and concise text covers the basic features of Immunology.
- Easy to use PDF edition relieves the hassle of carrying a book.
For anyone who is just interested to learn about immunity, we highly recommend How the Immune System Works PDF. Order it now at Amazon.com. You may also share this guide with your colleagues so their work becomes easier too.
Did the book help you build solid concepts? Or were there concepts that the book did not cover efficiently? Your feedback makes us grow so please let us know if you enjoyed using the book, by commenting below. We always look forward to hearing from you.