FC: Gatsby Group Project | Moses Lee, Jon Hsieh, Tim Lewis
1: It is better to live the "Good Life" than to not live at all. | Thesis
2: Wealth, whether you had it or made it, was the key to the Good life in the 1920s. In the book, "The Great Gatsby", there were two kinds of wealthy, the old and new. The old "money" were Tom, Daisy, and Nick. The "new money" was Gatsby. | The Good life
3: 1920s | 1920s was an era of prosperity and innovation New ideas, inventions, arts, and music Jazz Age, Ford Model T, Radio, and vitamins. Everyone was making decent money and many were making enormous profits. A time of corruption, depravity, and greediness
4: The Great Gatsby | 1920s Setting - Achieving and having wealth is key. | Corruption was found in the wealthy and the poor | The rich were given freedom. They had the ability to do anything they wanted to do. They did as they pleased. | The poor were not given freedom. Their money restricted them from doing anything. Someone took immoral ways to get rich.
5: Tom and Daisy were and will always be living the good life, hiding behind their money. Introduced as rich, arrogant people that have always lived the "good life". Even after the murder they just end up where they started. Tom cheated on Daisy and has an affair with Myrtle Wilson who was rather poor. Daisy was very carefree, she lived in the comfort of her money. She also had an affair and that was with Gatsby. In the end, Gatsby and Myrtle suffered, not Tom and Daisy. Myrtle died because of the accident with Daisy, and Gatsby got killed by George Wilson. Despite these deaths, Tom and Daisy just moved on with their life and continued to live the "Good Life". | The Old Money
6: Old Money | Nick was also part of the "old money". He came from a wealthy family and also has a decent education from Yale. Nick was rather innocent at first, but he experienced the corruption of the 1920s by Tom, Daisy, and Gatsby. However in the end, after Gatsby's death, he went back to his home in the west where ,just like Tom and Daisy, he took comfort in his wealth.
7: Gatsby was considered the "new money". He made his money through illegal transactions, an illicit business called bootlegging. He gained extreme wealth, and he displayed it through his material possessions: his clothes, cars, mansion, servants, and parties everyday. He even got Daisy. In historical context, Gatsby represented the organized crime and bootlegging during the 1920s. | New Money
8: No Money | George and Myrtle Wilson were the lower classes of the society. They did not have a lot of money.They started unhappy and ended unhappy. George was a hard working honest man, but he did not achieve anything. In the book, George constantly asked Tom when he's going to give him the car. Again, this showed that the poor had no freedom, George was relying on Tom. Myrtle wanted to be rich,to have the good life by leaving with Tom, but in the end, she died. This was her only option as a woman, to marry rich with someone else. Both had a hard life, and died trying to get the good life.
10: The poor of the 1920s were working really hard, but still could not rise in status...the rich get richer and the poor get poorer All the poor in The Great Gatsby die and the rich get away with everything and stay rich.
11: Throughout the Great Gatsby, The rich thrived and the poor did not This is quite similar to how life went in the factual 1920's. After industrialization, many people made success stories for themselves through the stock market and various opportunities.
12: This concept was also displayed in The Great Gatsby. Gatsby, Tom and Daisy all stayed rich. Characters that were never rich such as Myrtle and George stayed poor and even ended up dead. More importantly the poor were often times just picking the rich peoples scraps.
13: This is evident when George is attempting to buy Tom's old car. It is almost a trickle down effects where the money is replaced by ragged hand me downs. Another left over was Myrtle. She was cheating on George with the richer Tom. This just reinforces the concept of how the rich stayed on top and kept the poor down.
14: Despite the Countless success stories during the 1920's, a countless number of people were still left behind. Many families needed both women and children to be working to keep afloat. The women and children were paid less than the men, and the factory work was brutal.
16: How to Apply This? | Today's Good Life Happiness Love Basic necessities, with luxuries here and there
17: 1920s Good Life | Wealth Fame Notoriety | Even getting to the this good life was different. | Boot-legging vs.Work | But everyone's idea of the good life is different.
18: In today's bad economy, it is hard to live and rise in status when you are poor and in a lower class. | Being able to live this good life will be much easier to handle in this economy since you are able to live a carefree life which is helpful in this stressful society.