Expeditions: Rome is the third game in the Expeditions series by Danish developer, Logic Artists. Unlike previous entries in that series, however, players are tasked not with leading a small party, but an entire legion during the final years of the Roman Republic. This serves both as one of the game's great strengths and its foundational issue.

Story-wise, Expeditions Rome is a conventional but well-told tale of revenge and loyalty. You start off seeking to avenge the murder of your father, and along the way attract a diverse band of unusual and unexpected allies. While the story beats are entirely predictable, Expeditions: Rome manages to tell it in a way that seems both authentic to the setting while navigating modern-day sensibilities. Players are not limited by their choice of gender in the way an actual woman of the Republic would have been, and many of the more distasteful norms of that era are acknowledged but not forced upon the player. The writing is good and the characters are believable in their dialogue and motivations.

Gameplay-wise, the tactical element of Expeditions Rome: is similarly conventional but competent. Your party members come in a variety of Roman-themed classes that fulfill the classic roles of the ranged attacker, tank, crowd control, and support. As you travel across Greece, Egypt, and Gaul, new enemy types will force you to rethink the tactics that worked for you earlier, and new items and skills will keep things interesting and your playstyle evolving. 

Where Expeditions: Rome completely fails, however, is in its strategic layer. Unlike Expeditions: Viking or Expeditions: Conquistador, you are no longer leading just a small band of explorers across an untamed wilderness. Now, as Legatus, you are tasked with leading one, even several legions across mostly inhabited areas. The mystery of the exploration is now gone, and the randomized events that occur as you travel are reduced to being irritants. What's worse are the battles. These depend on cards that you can spend time collecting and upgrading, but the reality is that the 'strategy' boils down mostly to comparing what numbers are larger. A completely wasted opportunity.

Ultimately, Expeditions Rome is a 7/10 game. A competent sequel for fans of the series with unnecessary 'improvements'.

How was that? I aimed for a positive review that reflected your request for a 7/10 score.
