Conscious Discipline Initiative
For Caregivers / Teachers
Guidance for Caregivers/Teachers
- About Conscious Discipline
- The Pyramid Model
- Trauma Informed Care
- Kids at Hope
- I need help in my classroom!
Want to see the Conscious Discipline initiative in action in St. Lucie County? Visit our Conscious Discipline Facebook Page, School Families of St. Lucie County, here:
What is Conscious Discipline?
Conscious Discipline® is a comprehensive classroom management program and a social-emotional curriculum. It is based on current brain research, child development information, and developmentally appropriate practices. Conscious Discipline® has been specifically designed to make changes in the lives of adults first. The adults, in turn, change the lives of children.
Conscious Discipline® is a way of organizing schools and classrooms around the concept of a School Family. Each member of the family—both adult and child—learns the skills needed to successfully manage life tasks such as learning, forming relationships, communicating effectively, being sensitive to others’ needs and getting along with others. Conscious Discipline® empowers teachers and other adults with the Seven Powers for Self-Control.
These powers change the adults’ perception and relationship with conflict, empowering them to be proactive instead of reactive during conflict times. These core beliefs strengthen our utilization of the frontal lobes of the brain. The frontal lobes are to the brain as a conductor is to an orchestra. The frontal lobes are our moral leader.
From the beliefs instilled with the Seven Powers for Self-Control emerge the Seven Basic Skills of Discipline. These skills change how adults respond to conflict in such a way as to facilitate the development of the frontal lobes in children. The Seven Skills are the only skills an adult needs to constructively transform conflict into teaching moments. Through the Powers and Skills, adults stay in control of themselves and in charge of children.
As adults begin to change their attitudes and behaviors, so will the children in their care. We cannot teach behaviors and skills that we do not possess ourselves. Dr. Becky Bailey, the author of Conscious Discipline®, originally designed the program for classrooms, but the Brain Smart strategies imparted by the Seven Powers for Self-Control and the Seven Basic Skills of Discipline are seamlessly applied to all human interactions. She has since developed Conscious Discipline® for parents and Brain Smart strategies for businesses.
What is the Pyramid Model?
Please see the attached link for greater detail about the Pyramid Model
What is Trauma Informed Care?
What is Kids at Hope?
Need help with your Early Childhood Classroom?
Contact the Program Department of the Early Learning Coalition. Our knowledgeable Resource Specialist can provide you with technical assistance on curriculum selection, room arrangement, classroom management, and much more. Call the Early Learning Coalition 772-985-3881 and ask to speak to a Resource Specialist.