For the last several years a “miracle” vaccine has been promoted and mandated for young girls based on the idea that it protects against cervical cancer. In 2007, Texas Governor Rick Perry received public backlash after mandating this vaccine (Gardasil) by executive order. He later rescinded his mandate; meanwhile, California passed a law in 2012 which allows 12 year olds to receive the vaccine without their parent’s knowledge or consent.
The US Centers for Disease Control (CDC), Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and Gardasil’s manufacturer Merck all claim the vaccine for HPV- human papilloma (PAP-uh-LO-muh) virus- is safe for children as young as nine, but is it really?
These claims are at significant variance with the available evidence, as the vaccine has been associated with some serious adverse reactions. Gardasil was fast-tracked, approved and rushed to market with questionable safety testing and no studies have been done to see if the vaccine itself causes cancer.
What is HPV?
HPV stands for human papillomavirus and is a common virus that most women are exposed to at some point in their lives. According to the American Cancer Society, the virus types that cause infection to the cervix are found on the body’s mucous membranes and are a result of sexual intercourse. There are over thirty strains of HPV that can cause genital infections and the vaccine purports to protect against four strains; only two of which are cancer-causing.
Problems from the virus are rare. In fact, Dr. Diane Harper, who was involved in phases II and III of the manufacture’s testing of the vaccine, reports there are normally no symptoms and 90% of infections are resolved by the body in as little as two years. Only half of the remaining infections have a rare chance of developing precancerous cells that could lead to cervical cancer.
Dr. Sherri Tenpenny, a physician and advocate for vaccine safety states there are other risk factors associated with these rare unresolved HPV infections such as genetic susceptibility, smoking, parity, number of sexual partners, co-infections and long-term contraceptive use that play a role in whether or not a person gets cervical cancer.
Facts About Cervical Cancer
Cervical cancer is relatively rare; most women with HPV will not develop it. There are approximately 4,000 deaths per year from the disease. To put that in perspective, over 71,000 women die of lung cancer and 41,000 die of breast cancer annually. Since cervical cancer is slow growing, we won’t know for up to thirty years whether mass vaccination reduces death rates. Millions of children are being injected with a vaccine associated with major side effects to maybe prevent 4,000 deaths twenty or thirty years from now; with no evidence that it does.
Even the FDA acknowledges the long-term benefits of vaccinations rest on assumptions and not solid research data. The death rate from cervical cancer in the U.S. according to World Health Organization (WHO) is (1.7 per 100,000), which is considerably lower than the rate of serious adverse reactions from the Gardasil vaccine.
Laden With Side-Effects
According to the Vaccine Adverse Reporting System (VAERS), as of March 2012, there were 25,548 adverse events and over 100 deaths reported due to the HPV vaccine. How many more have there been in the last 3 years and how many more will there be in the future?
In the chart below, notice the increase in abnormal pap smears, cervical dysplasia and cervical cancer AFTER injection with the Gardasil vaccine.
Increased Cancer Risk
What’s even more concerning is that girls who have already been exposed to HPV, have a 44.6% increased risk for precancerous lesions developing post Gardasil. Still, medical professionals have no plans to screen anyone prior to vaccination.
A normal phenomenon in virology, called “replacement,” is when virus strains which have been removed are replaced by new ones. Dr. Charlotte Haug, an immunologist and chief editor of The Journal of Norwegian Medicine writes about concerns of increased cancer post vaccine:
Results from clinical trials are not encouraging. Vaccinated women show an increased number of precancerous lesions caused by strains of HPV other than HPV-16 and HPV-18. The results are not statistically significant, but if the trend is real –and further clinical trials should tell us in a few years – there is reason for serious concern.
It has recently been discovered that genetically modified HPV DNA, which was firmly attached to the aluminum adjuvant, was found in a thirteen year old girl who developed acute juvenile rheumatoid arthritis following her third Gardasil injection. The consequences of the presence of recombinant HPV DNA (a biohazard) could prove to be catastrophic.
Is the HPV Cervical Cancer Vaccine Worth the Risk?
According to FDA’s guidelines, the tolerance for serious adverse reactions should be narrow when injecting a healthy person with a vaccine with uncertain benefits. And yet, Gardasil is marketed widely to 9-12 year old girls. With such a low death rate from cervical cancer the risk to those vaccinated should be minimal.
- Gardasil purports to protect against 4 strains of the virus; only 2 of those can cause cervical cancer.
- If a person has already been exposed to HPV, there is absolutely no benefit from vaccination.
- Most commonly, women do not develop cervical cancer until 35-45 years of age. By this time, most women are receiving annual pap tests which identify early stages of cancer.
- The package insert states the vaccine has not been tested to see if it can cause cancer.
As the testing period for the vaccine was too short to evaluate any long-term benefits, manufactures of HPV vaccines have still failed to present significant data that their product can prevent cervical cancer. Invasive cervical cancer takes 20-40 years to develop from the time of HPV infection, so is it really worth all the young lives lost?
In this case it appears the public has been duped. The health of our youth has been sacrificed for profits while thousands of girls (and their parents) were lured into getting a vaccine they didn’t need, for a disease they were probably never going to get- paid a price.
Visit the website “The Truth About Gardasil” for more stories from young women who had their lives ripped from them for nothing more than a hoax. If you’re concerned about cervical cancer or HPV, eat a well-balanced organic diet and get regular pap tests.
Remember, problems from HPV are rare and even more rarely lead to cancer. Know the facts. So far, the HPV vaccine has been nothing more than a lottery where the only winners have been the pharmaceutical companies.
So, is the HPV vaccine cervical cancer prevention or have we all been duped?
Until next time,