Welcome to Underground Atlanta The Underground Atlanta is arguably the most unique space in downtown. Located underneath Alabama Street, this historic landmark blends its interior and exterior environment. As seen in the picture below, the view from the street level shows… Continue Reading
The following flyer is another example of the information provided on the history of the Underground. This document gives visitors an outline of its history from the site’s origins to the city’s current plans. The timeline shows Underground Atlanta’s high… Continue Reading
When visitors want to explore the Underground, the information desk provides pamphlets and flyers of information. Specifically, the pamphlet pictured below invites people to take a “Walking History Tour” and guides visitors through their own historical tour. Starting with the… Continue Reading
People Watching: Homeless people lounging (seemingly trying to soak up the sun); people sitting along the fountain outside (eating, talking); shoppers browsing, workers rushing back from their lunch break, GSU students eating in the food court and shopping, tourists (few) reading historic plaques… Continue Reading
The rich history of the Underground dates back to the early 1900s. Since then, it has undergone several transformations and seen many eras. However, there is one aspect of the Underground that is even older and has outlived its original… Continue Reading
The streets of Underground Atlanta are lined with stores, vendors, Atlanta merchandise, and plaques with historic information. The “streets” are actually red brick walkways and sidewalks that mimic the look of regular streets. It is complete with street signs, storefronts… Continue Reading
The Underground Atlanta is an interesting exterior space in downtown Atlanta that also contains an interior space. It was built in the early 1900s as a separate, elevated street system to alleviate traffic and has evolved into a historic shopping and… Continue Reading
In the early 1970’s, Underground Atlanta was extremely popular. The photographer has taken this photo of Josephine Tussaud’s Underground Wax Museum that used to be located underground.