Automate your eating by planning your meals ahead of time. That way you’re less likely to make an unhealthy last-minute food choice.
Skipping meals can cause your body to go into a fat-storing starvation mode, making it harder to burn calories.
Got nuts with nuts. Eating a handful of nuts will help you stay full. Try soaking them in water for a different texture.
Use meditation to help you cope with chronic stress, which can lead you to crave feel-good carbs.
Do your grocery shopping with a list and a time limit; that way, you’re less likely to stray into the processed foods section.
Don’t confuse thirst with hunger. Drink a glass of water when you feel hungry to see if that’s what you’re really craving.
When out at a restaurant, ask the server to hold the bread that might come before the meal. If you’re hungry, you’ll be tempted.
Create emergency packs filled with healthy foods such as nuts or sliced vegetables to help you avoid unhealthy temptations.
Odds are you’re eating too fast. Try holding a conversation while having a meal so you’re not gulping down more than you need to feel full.
Take a brisk walk before lunch or dinner. Not only will you get in some exercise, you’re less likely to choose something unhealthy after a little movement.
Are your dishes too big? A healthy dinner should fit on a 9-inch plate. You may find that kid-sized plates are more appropriately sized to feed an adult!
Boost your metabolism with some green tea or chili peppers.
Get your Zzzzzs. Sleep deprivation alters levels of hormones in the body that regulate hunger, causing an increase in appetite.
Muscle burns at least four times as many calories as fat does, so try twenty minutes of strength straining two to three times a week.
A pedometer can help keep track of your steps. If you’re not getting 10,000 steps a day, you’re not moving enough.
Take every opportunity to move around, even in small ways. Studies show fidgety people tend to be skinnier.
Identify the emotional triggers that lead you to seek unhealthy comfort food. Picture your goal weight the next time a trigger strikes to help you resist temptation.
Distracted dining will get you in trouble. Avoid eating in front of a television or in a movie theater, as you’re bound to consume more calories.
Beware of “fat-free” or “zero trans fats” foods as you could be trading fats for huge amounts of sugar or sodium.
If you’re having trouble getting started, make a small move such as starting an eating log or buying walking shoes. You’re three times more likely to follow through if you start with small gestures such as these.
Save the kitchen and the dining room table for cooking and eating. Try not to use it as a place to do work or other activities, or you may be tempted to eat more.
If food was your only source of pleasure, make sure to reconnect with other things you enjoy — music, sports, volunteer work or movies, for example.
Think ahead to how you’ll eat and exercise on the weekends. It’s easy to get too relaxed on Saturdays and Sundays, but healthy living is a 7-day-a-week endeavor.
Dump the junk food. If you want to avoid temptation, make sure you clean out the fridge and the pantry
People who eat breakfast have a better shot at losing and maintaining weight loss.
Replace your scale with a tape measure for your waist. Aim for 80cm or less for women and 94cm or less for men. Measure approx. around your belly button, not under your ribs.
You don’t have to make a number on the scales your weight loss goal. Aim for a certain dress size or waist measurement.
Make your wardrobe match your goals. As you lose weight donate the clothes that no longer fit you as an incentive to stay on track.
Pick up a 5- or 10- kilo weight at the gym and visualize that weight coming off. Holding the weight in your hands helps bring home just how heavy even 5 kilos of extra fat can be.
Do your best to ensure you’re not eating after 7 o’clock at night. You’re more likely to make unhealthy choices and less likely to sleep as well after a late meal.
Make it a point to use the steps whenever possible. Use the bathroom on a different floor at work, take the stairs at the bus station, the airport or the mall.
Keeping good posture will not only strengthen your core, but will also add a small extra-calorie burn, because you’re working slightly harder to maintain the position.
Share your weight loss goals with your friends and family. Make it a positive life change and ask for their encouragement.
Resistance bands are a comfortable and affordable at-home exercise option for strength straining.
Wrap up any extra food you’ve cooked before you sit down to a meal so you’re not tempted to get seconds.
Take a 30-second break in the middle of your meal. Evaluate just how hungry you still are before getting back to your food.