Earlier in December 2009, I explained in a cause and effect style why the two magnetic poles are moving eastward causing the collapse of the magnetic field over the western and southern hemispheres. The distance between the two magnetic poles has increased by 800 km when measured across the western hemisphere over the last hundred years. In October 2014, I wrote to Berkley, asking them to correct their study since the collapse of the magnetic field is “not global” and that while the western and southern hemisphere are getting weaker magnetic field, the eastern hemisphere is getting a stronger one. On top, the emergence of a region of south magnetic polarity in Antarctica; also known as Plasmoids, has emerged only 10,000 years ago. According to my research, such Plasmoids are attributed to the Outer Core induced magnetic field force. The increase of Earth spin speed from 32 days to 96 days in a solar year lead the electrons to flow in spiral paths inside the Outer Core while moving from Inner Core to Inner Mantle. When taking the Coriolis Effect and the electromagnetism right-hand-rule into consideration, one finds out that such a field induction is of south magnetic polarity at both the Arctic and Antarctic regions.
The weakening of the magnetic field force over the western and southere hemispheres has allowed more charged particles, such as Protons to penetrate the Thermosphere layer which extends from 100 km to 800 km above sea level and reach to Earth surface. Protons bombard the ocean at high kinetic energy, which leads to warming up of the oceans temperature. In December 2015, I wrote that the warming of oceans would lead to freeing Methane Hydrates that have been captured for thousands of years below sea level. The Methane molecules (CH4) will devour Oxygen (O2); producing Carbon Dioxide (CO2) and Vapour (H2O).
CH4 + 2O2 = CO2 + 2H2O.
The amount of stockpiled Methane Hydrates at the continental shelves between surface and 500 meters below sea level is estimated to be 1,000 fold the amount of total energy consumption on Earth per annum. Released Methane will devour Oxygen in the sea spot that is warming up. This could lead to slow death of coral as is currently occurring at the Great Barrier Reef in Australia for instance or sudden death of schools of fish and small body marine life. The exit of free Methane molecules from sea to Earth atmosphere continues to devour its Oxygen.
Oxygen can be produced from a number of materials, using several different methods.
- The most common natural method is photo-synthesis, in which plants use sunlight convert carbon dioxide in the air into oxygen. The excess of Carbon Dioxide in the atmosphere should lead to production of more Oxygen and expansion of the plant life.
- Hydrogen and Oxygen can be generated by passing an electric current through water and collecting the two gases as they bubble off. This method is called electrolysis and produces very pure hydrogen and oxygen. It uses a large amount of electrical energy, and is not economical for large-volume production. However, the arrival of charged particles for free into the ocean brings the effect of electrolysis on in micro scale but at vast areas thus causing Oxygen to increase in the ocean and atmosphere.
Instead of increasing the Oxygen level in the Atmosphere by natural means as indicated above, it is found out that the Oxygen intensity is getting weaker. The decline of Oxygen level in the Atmosphere comes as a consequence of its bonding with Methane that is released from warm waters. So, while Carbon Dioxide and Vapour are green house gases, causing more and more of global warming, which is good news for the green life on the surface of Earth, the rate of drop in Oxygen level supersedes the rate of Oxygen replenishment from plant life.
Scientists are not sure why Carbon Dioxide level is on the rise. Most acclaim it to human activities. Given above, I tend to disagree. Scientists are not sure why Oxygen level is on the decline. I hope they find in the above explanation an answer to help reflecting on the right strategies to combat; in case not avoidable, then at least be manageable!