Note: This article is in development. I will be writing and editing it over the course of several weeks, perhaps longer. Ryan
The “pelvic clock” refers to a device developed and used by Moshe Feldenkrais in his sessions over the course of many decades. The first use of the clock that I could find is in the Alexander Yanai session #19: “Preparation for a clock.” Though there a quite a few others such as Alexander Yanai #77: “A clock”. The Alexander Yanai are Feldenkrais sessions that Moshe taught in Israel for several decades. In some of these sessions, a clock is imagined under the pelvis and a person uses the image of the clock to guide movements of the pelvis. However, Feldenkrais did not use the clock image only with the pelvis. At various times he used a clock to guide movements of the face, shoulder, legs, arms and other areas.
A written version of the Pelvic Clock can be found in Chapter 6 of Awareness Through Movement: Easy-to-Do Health Exercises to Improve Your Posture, Vision, Imagination, and Personal Awareness That chapter is called, “Differentiation of Pelvic Movements by Means of an Imaginary Clock.”
The movement of the pelvis is important for a variety of reasons not the least of which is that many strong and thick muscles necessary for movement are connected through the pelvis. There are many, many examples of Dr. Feldenkrais speaking of the pelvis. Here is one from Chapter 13 of The Potent Self: A Study of Spontaneity and Compulsion
All correct action starts with the movement of the pelvic bone, which displaces itself so as to carry the spine and the head through to the new position while allowing the head complete freedom of movement. The control of the head and of the pelvic bone are, therefore, absolutely essential to all correct action. One is not more important than the other. Both must be controlled correctly to obtain correct action. In some acts the position of the head is more telling and easier to notice, but it cannot be obtained without proper control of the pelvis.”
To purchase and download Feldenkrais Excercises see my store: Feldenkrais Exercise Store.