The main aim of a thesis is to produce research on a particular topic that is clearly defined and original. It is the most substantial piece of work that a student can complete. Visit our dissertation writing service to get professional help. If anyone knows how to write a dissertation it’s going to be someone with a PhD. The majority of people who have studied for a doctorate also have a master’s degree. So they have written three dissertations in their academic careers. One at undergraduate, and two at postgraduate. Here are 6 dissertation writing tips highly recommended by all PhD holders.
Organizing your time effectively is singlehandedly the most important aspect of writing a good dissertation. It is a huge task and it can be very overwhelming. Leaving it to the last minute will only stress you out and stress is a recipe for disaster. Managing your time will enable you to systematically work your way through your studies. It will allow you to break up larger tasks into smaller manageable sub-tasks. You should also note that time management is not only about managing the quantity of your time spent studying. Effective time management also involves monitoring how you feel about what you are studying and your energy levels. In other words, it means that you are aware of your own personal limitations, knowing when you should study and when to stop. It is more to do with the quality of your time then about the quantity of the time required to study.
Dissertations and academic papers are to be written with an active voice and in the first person. For example, you would say “I conducted an experiment to test……..” Before you start writing, ask your supervisor what writing style you should use. Make sure that the person and the voice are consistent throughout the paper. Use short, simple words and phrases as much as you can. Short sentences are better because they are easier to follow. Any sentence containing more than three lines should be cut down or divided into two. There are several phrases that you should avoid such as “In addition to,” instead use “Also” or “Additionally.” Don’t use “Whether or not” instead use “Whether.”
Spend some time building a rapport with them, they are paid to assist you but if they like you they are more likely to help you more than if they don’t. Get as much input from them as possible and don’t wait until the last minute to start your thesis.
If your college has provided a template or a format for your dissertation, make sure that you use it. Type your work within the template from the onset so that you are not rushing trying to cut and paste it 15 minutes before the deadline.
This is something that you will be doing a lot of. Proof read after every chapter and do so again a few times once you have completed the project. A good idea is to get a friend who is also writing a dissertation to read over it and you can swap dissertations and read over each others.
Plagiarism is a big deal in the world of academia and especially at degree level. If it is found that you have copied someone else’s work there is a high possibility that all of your hard work over the years will have gone to waste and you will fail. Make sure that you cite every reference that you use to avoid being accused of plagiarism.