Difference between accept and except
accept vs except:
The words accept and except can be quite confusing in terms of pronunciation as there is a fairly large chance of the two words being misheard and mispronounced because of the similarity of the phonology of the two words. Therefore, the distinguishing of the difference between the two words is of great importance.
What is accept?
The word came in to use in the English language through Middle English from the Latin word acceptare, which is considered as a form of the verb accipere (ad + capere), which denotes the meaning “to receive.” The word accept has several meanings. It can mean holding something as true or to validate something. It is the opposite of ‘reject’ and can be used both as a transitive verb and an intransitive verb. For example one can say
I accept that you are tired, but I do not accept laxity.
The honorable judge accepted the defence lawyer’s argument as true.
It can also denote receiving something willingly. For example,
Sarah accepted the offer with great joy
My parents accepted her as their daughter in law quite happily.
Accept can also denote answering in the affirmative to a certain invitation or a gesture. For example,
The principal accepted our invitation graciously.
What is except?
The word except too came in to being through Middle English from the Latin word exceptus, which is a form of the verb excipere (ex + capere), which denotes “to exclude.” The word except is commonly used as a preposition while it also can be used as a transitive and intransitive verb as well as a conjunction. While the transitive meaning of except is stated as to exclude, the intransitive meaning of the word is stated as to object which is not so much in use.
Except generally means to exclude. For example,
My father brought gifts for everybody except for my sister who has been very naughty.
It can also denote the meaning “other than”. For example
Except the fact that I am tired, I am quite happy.
Except can also be used as a verb in the sense of “to leave out or to exclude”. For example,
Children are excepted from this rule.
What is the difference between except and accept?
The words accept and except are not hard to differentiate in terms of meaning if not for their similar sounding pronunciation due to which it is prone to be misheard and therefore misunderstood. While the word accept bears the meaning of ‘to receive willingly’, the word except has the meaning ‘to exclude’
Both can be used as transitive and intransitive verbs and both words are derived from Latin words. And yet, they bear very different meanings. For example one can say,
I accept the fact that I was angry, but I am willing to go ahead with the plans except the one that you introduced right now.
Excepting the previous accusations that my honorable colleague has presented to this court, I accept that the defendant is guilty of stealing from the lady.