Few things are as dreadful as those first moments when you feel a migraine coming on. Migraines are severe, throbbing headaches that are generally one-sided and may be accompanied by nausea, blurred vision, and sensitivity to light or sound. They can affect anyone, but women are more frequently affected than men.
The symptoms associated with a migraine are caused by blood vessel dilation in the brain. This dilation creates increased pressure and pain that leads to the severe throbbing sensation that accompanies most migraine headaches. There are numerous theories on what actually triggers this blood vessel dilation. Some research suggests that they may be related to changing hormone levels. Others believe the mechanism of migraines may be related to specific triggers such as chocolate, aged cheese, and increased stress.
If you suffer from migraines, consider some of the following therapies:
Avoid triggers: Many foods can trigger or worsen migraines. Specifically, foods such as chocolate, alcohol, aged or fermented cheeses, nuts, and citrus fruits. Additionally, additives like monosodium glutamate (MSG) and nitrites (found in cured meats and canned foods) are also known to trigger migraines.
Magnesium: Individuals who suffer from migraines are often found to have low magnesium levels. Consider supplementation with 400mg per day. It is important to know, however, that magnesium can interact with many blood pressure and cardiac medications, along with antibiotics and other prescription drugs. Speak with your personal physician before starting daily magnesium.
Vitamin B2: This vitamin is best known as a preventative treatment for migraines. Approximately 400mg of Vitamin B2 can be effective in reducing migraine frequency. This medication should be dosed under the guidance of a physician.
Massage: Persistent stress and muscle tightness are also frequent triggers of migraines. Cranio-sacral massage focuses specifically on the muscles and bones of the scalp and skull. Often this can alleviate built up pressure and encourage deep relaxation while reducing stress. Trained therapists are able to release tension from specific trigger points in order to reduce pain, muscle tension, and nausea associated with migraines.
Acupuncture: This ancient Eastern medicine practice has long been a method of relief for many migraine sufferers. Many previous randomized trials have shown reduction of symptoms and severity in patients with chronic migraines. Some researchers question the actual effects, however it is clear that several individuals report significant relief in symptoms, making acupuncture a legitimate option.