Summary: Children’s sermon To teach that the Bible is an amazing book that we need to read and know! Chapter 1 of The Lion, The Witch And The Wardrobe
Today the children will learn that the Bible is an amazing book that we need to read and know!
Today’s action point is, "I will read the Bible". Encourage the children to read the Bible. Start up a Bible reading contest or assign scriptures to be read every week in preparation for the next lesson. Be creative and do your best to get your children in the Word of God!
Welcome your children and let them know you are glad that they have come. Some like to start things with high energy and excitement and others prefer a lower key beginning. Whatever your preference, be sure that the children feel welcome.
Acknowledge any new children. Have a visitor packet for visiting children filled with information on your church’s children’s ministry and some fun things as well.
Recognize any children who are having a birthday during the week. Have something special to give them or use them in a special way during the service.
Encourage children to give.
Bible Hide and Seek
Hide some Bibles around your children’s ministry area or cut up the verse below into puzzle pieces and hide the pieces. Choose a few children to look for the Bibles or puzzle pieces. For an extended play time have the children who found the Bibles or Puzzle pieces hide them and have another group of children try to find them.
After the game hold the found Bibles or puzzle pieces and say: "Today you children went on a search for the Word of God. But, did you know that some people never look for their Bible much less open it up and read it. God wants us to know His Word. The Bible is an amazing book with a story we need to know!"
Listen to what the Bible says in Matthew 7:7-8
"Ask and it will be given to you; seek and you will find; knock and the door will be opened to you. 8 For everyone who asks receives; he who seeks finds; and to him who knocks, the door will be opened."
What are we supposed to ask for? What are we supposed to be looking for? Whose door are we supposed to knock on? The Bible gives us the answers to these questions. But when we don’t read the Bible the answers to these questions stay hidden. The Bible is a lot like the wardrobe in the book, "The Lion, The Witch and The Wardrobe", by C.S. Lewis.
Briefly paraphrase the book, "The Lion, The Witch and the Wardrobe".
Using a video or an audio version of "The Lion, The Witch and The Wardrobe", play chapter 1. I used PowerPoint with screen shots from the movie while playing the audio version of the book. End the segment right before Lucy meets Mr. Tumnus. Say: Do you want to know who Lucy met? You have to come back next week to find out!
Hand out some fur pieces and pinecones for kids to touch and rub on their face. Say: The real adventure for Lucy began when she entered the wardrobe and made her way through the fur coats until she was standing in the woods. The real adventure for you begins when you get into the Word of God. The Bible has a story of an amazing discovery made by a boy who became a king when he was eight years old.
Bible Lesson: 2Kings 22:1-13
Objects needed: Scroll, Baby Powder
Preparation: Cut a paper bag and roll it up to resemble a scroll. Sprinkle the scroll with the baby powder so it looks dusty and a cloud of dust will appear as the scroll is opened.
Paraphrase the following scriptures:
2KI 22:1 Josiah was eight years old when he became king, and he reigned in Jerusalem thirty-one years. His mother’s name was Jedidah daughter of Adaiah; she was from Bozkath. 2 He did what was right in the eyes of the LORD and walked in all the ways of his father David, not turning aside to the right or to the left.
2KI 22:3 In the eighteenth year of his reign, King Josiah sent the secretary, Shaphan son of Azaliah, the son of Meshullam, to the temple of the LORD. He said: 4 "Go up to Hilkiah the high priest and have him get ready the money that has been brought into the temple of the LORD, which the doorkeepers have collected from the people. 5 Have them entrust it to the men appointed to supervise the work on the temple. And have these men pay the workers who repair the temple of the LORD-- 6 the carpenters, the builders and the masons. Also have them purchase timber and dressed stone to repair the temple. 7 But they need not account for the money entrusted to them, because they are acting faithfully."