Views by two: Reducing Prejudice in Childhood and AdolescenceCo-organizers:
Melanie Killen, University of Maryland, USA, & Adam Rutland, University of Exeter, UKShort Bio:
Melanie Killen, Ph.D., is Professor of Human Development and Quantitative Methodology, Professor of Psychology (Affiliate), and the Director of the Program in Human Development at the University of Maryland. She received her Ph.D. from the University of California, Berkeley. She was appointed Distinguished Scholar-Teacher by the Provost’s office, University of Maryland. Dr. Killen has received funding from the National Science Foundation (NSF) and the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD) for her research on social exclusion, moral reasoning, origins of prejudice and intergroup attitudes, including a recent award to test the effectiveness of a large-scale intervention program designed to reduce prejudice in childhood using a randomized control trial. Dr. Killen is a Fellow of the Association for Psychological Science, the American Psychological Association, and the Society for the Psychological Study of Social Issues. Dr. Killen’s research areas of expertise include children’s and adolescents’ social cognitive development, morality, experiences and perceptions of social exclusion, prejudice and bias, morality and theory of mind, social inequalities in childhood, origins of fair distribution of resources, and the role of school experiences to reduce prejudice and promote positive social relationships in child development.
Adam Rutland, PhD, is a Professor of Developmental Psychology in the Department of Psychology at the University of Exeter, UK. He is also a Visiting Research Fellow at Goldsmiths, University of London, U.K. Dr. Rutland received his Ph.D. from the University of Stirling, Scotland. He has contributed widely to various books and journals and has authored and co-authored monographs and edited books. Dr. Rutland has received funding from the Economic and Social Research Council (ESRC), Wellcome Trust and British Academy for his research on prejudice development and reduction in childhood, social exclusion and developmental intergroup processes. He conducts intervention research on enhancing STEM participation using a museum based program with peer tutors who are trained explain science to their adolescent peers. He is a Fellow of the Society for the Psychological Study of Social Issues (SPSSI), Division 9 of the American Psychological Association (APA) and an organizational affiliate of the American Psychological Society (APS). Dr. Rutland's research interests are: social-cognitive development, prejudice, intergroup relationships, peer exclusion, rejection, group dynamics and deviance from peer group norms, cross-group friendships, intergroup attitudes, interventions to reduce prejudice, intergroup contact, and children’s acculturation, ethnic and national identification.
Panel Discussion on Journal Publishing, Open Access and OtherwiseShort Bio:
Brett Laursen is Professor of Psychology at Florida Atlantic University, Editor-in-Chief of the International Journal of Behavioral Development, and Editor of Cambridge Elements in Research Methods for Developmental Science. He also serves as a Research Scientist at the TrygFondens Centre for Child Research at the Aarhus University, Denmark. Professor Laursen received his Ph.D. in Child Psychology from the Institute of Child Development at the University of Minnesota and an Honorary Doctorate from Örebro University, Sweden. He is a Fellow of the American Psychological Association (Division 7, Developmental), the Association for Psychological Science, and the International Society for the Study of Behavioural Development.
Professor Laursen’s research concerns parent-child and peer relationships during childhood and adolescence. A related focus is on quantitative developmental methodology. In addition to his own work conducted in various locations in the United States, he participates in longitudinal projects in Canada, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Lithuania, the Netherlands, and Sweden. Professor Laursen is the editor (most recently) of the Handbook of Developmental Research Methods (with Todd D. Little and Noel A. Card) and the Handbook of Peer Interactions, Relationships, and Groups (with Kenneth H. Rubin and William M. Bukowski).
Using BIG DATA for the study of patterns, trends, and associations regarding human behaviour and experienceShort Bio:
Ingrid Schoon is Professor of Human Development and Social Policy at University College London, Institute of Education. She is a Fellow of the British Academy of Social Sciences (FAcSS) and the Social Science Centre (WZB) in Berlin. She is currently President of the Society for Longitudinal and Lifecourse Studies. Her research focuses on the study of risk and resilience, in particular during the transition from dependent childhood to independent adulthood. Her studies are guided by a socio-ecological developmental systems approach, mapping human development over time and in context using longitudinal data. Key publications: a monograph on 'Risk and Resilience' (2006), co-edited books on 'Transitions from School to Work: Globalisation, Individualisation, and Patterns of Diversity (2009) with Rainer K. Silbereisen, ' Gender differences in aspirations and attainment: A longitudinal perspective' (2014) with Jacquelynne Eccles, and ' Young People’s Development and the Great.
From science to policy and practice: Key factors for successful implementation of innovationsCo-organizers:
Christiane Spiel, University of Vienna, Austria, & Chryse Hatzichristou, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, GreeceShort Bio:
Univ.-Prof. Dr. Christiane Spiel is Professor of Bildung-Psychology and Evaluation at the Faculty of Psychology, University of Vienna. She studied Mathematics, History, and Psychology. Her research topics are on lifelong learning; the future of learning; (cyber)bullying and bullying prevention; gender stereotypes in education; evaluation and intervention research; implementing interventions into public policy. Together with her colleagues she is the founder of Bildung-psychology as a discipline. She got several awards as e.g., the Austrian Cross of Honor for Science and Arts first class, the Grand Decoration of Honor in Silver for Services to the Republic of Austria, the Science Award of the Margarete Lupac foundation of the Austrian Parliament for Parliamentarism and Democracy. Christiane Spiel has been Chair and member of various advisory and editorial boards as e.g., president of the European Society for Developmental Psychology, of the Austrian Psychology Association, and member of the board of directors of the Global Implementation Initiative. Currently she is e.g., chair of the scientific advisory board of the Austrian Research Association and president of the scientific advisory board for research in vocational and educational training at the Swiss State Secretary for Education, Research, and Innovation.
Dr. Chryse (Sissy) Hatzichristou is Professor of School Psychology, Chair of the Department of Psychology and Director of the Graduate School Psychology Program in the Department of Psychology, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, as well as Director of the Laboratory of School Psychology. She carried out her graduate studies in human development and school psychology at Harvard University and University of California, Berkeley and she has worked at Max-Planck Institute for Human Development and Education in Berlin. Her primary research interests and work include mental health and resilience promotion in school communities, support of psychosocial adjustment of at-risk and vulnerable groups of students and families, development, implementation and evaluation of evidence-based prevention and intervention programs in schools, school-based consultation, crisis intervention and cross-cultural and transnational issues in school psychology. Dr. Hatzichristou is the President-elect of the International School Psychology Association, member of the Executive Board of Trainers of School Psychologists, USA and the Graduate Education Committee of the National Association of School Psychologists, USA and of several other boards. She has received numerous awards including the ISPA Outstanding International Scholar Award (2010) and the International School Psychology Distinguished Services Award (2019).
Signup for our newsletter and stay informed with latest congress news!