We already know by now that all types of fruits do carry positive side effects in our health. Aside from tasting really good, fruits are actually a type of “glow” foods, which are considered to be pack with different vitamins and nutrients. This is no wonder why many health experts and even doctors do recommend the regular inclusion of fruits in our daily diet. Even though fruits are classified healthy in general, one of particular type of fruit is considered to contain a lot of useful components for our body and that fruit is none other than the cherries. Cherries are usually used in a lot of desserts and cocktail drinks. Because of this, nobody would definitely expect cherries to be as nutritious as the apple, banana or orange. However, cherries are indeed filled with many benefits especially to our health. Below are some of the facts that could basically help us answer our question; what are cherries good for?
Aside from having a sweet and distinct taste from other types of fruits, cherries are also packed with many nutritional benefits. Despite being a small type of fruit, cherries are considered to be effective in helping our bodies prevent and fight the signs of cancer. Cancer is one of the major diseases that is suffered by millions of people all over the world. Most severe cases of cancer are already considered to be untreatable or unmanageable, which is why early detection and prevention is the number one solution to this problem. With a diet rich in antioxidants, we could definitely lower the risks of having or experiencing cancer. This is the reason why cherries are recognized as a good food in fighting this disease since it is filled with many healthy antioxidants. These components basically help in the repair of damaged cells thus preventing the growth of abnormal cells in the body. It likewise contains the component “queritrin” which is a good and potent anti-cancer agent.
Aside from being a fruit against cancer growth, cherries are also considered to have anti inflammatory properties that also helps in relieving pain particularly headaches and body discomforts. Cherries are also known to carry anthocyanin and bioflavonoids, which are effective components in reducing the symptoms of arthritis and gout. Cherries are also very useful in insomniacs since this fruit do improve the body’s Circadian Rhythm. It contains melatonin, which is a natural sleeping aid that helps in regulating the sleeping pattern.
Aside from these facts, cherries are also known to have effective anti-aging benefits. It consists of compounds namely isoqueritrin and queritrin that helps in eliminating the products of oxidative stress, thus aids in slowing down the aging process. It also has vitamin C, which is a great in improving our immune defenses. This is no wonder why a lot of us are fond of eating cherries since they do not only give us satisfaction through taste, but as well as through its different health benefits. These are just some of the reasons why cherries are indeed good for all of us.