Post-traumatic anxiety disorder (PTSD) is an anxiety disorder that may develop in those who have been exposed to psychological or physical injury. Any traumatic event, wherein one is confronted with the fear of dropping their lifetime or losing someone or something extremely precious to him/her, may behave as the triggering factor for PTSD. Injuries, natural calamities, torture, domestic abuse or sexual abuse are a few of the kinds of events which could leave an indelible mark on the mind. Memories of this traumatic event could haunt the victims, which makes it quite hard for them to lead a normal life. Their ideas may center around that specific occasion and they might find themselves reliving that occasion in the kind of nightmares or flashbacks. This may influence one’s sleep routine. In reality, studies have shown that a vast majority of individuals afflicted by post-traumatic anxiety disorder suffer from sleep disorders. In the following guide, we’ll look in the link between sleep apnea and PTSD.
Sleep apnea is a sleep disorder that is characterized by pauses in breathing which can interrupt sleep. Occasionally, an individual may suffer from sleep apnea that is mixed. In the event of central sleep apnea, then the pauses in breathing happen when the mind does not send signals to the breathing tissues. On the flip side, obstructive sleep apnea occurs when there is the obstruction in the airways. Obstructive sleep apnea, as the name implies, happens when fractures in breathing are brought on by the inability of the brain to send signals to the muscles together with obstruction in the airways.
Studies have suggested that individuals afflicted by a post-traumatic anxiety disorder, frequently suffer from sleep apnea or shallow breathing through the night. It’s an established fact that stress could impact one’s breathing mechanisms and such breathing problems during sleep may also trigger sleep deprivation. Actually, episodes of disordered breathing which are caused because of central sleep apnea may be common since the patient relives the traumatic event through the REM sleep. The nightmares can cause rapid breathing and occasionally, an individual may awaken gasping for breath. Such stress sleep disorders can surely affect the sleep, which in turn, could have serious consequences on the health. Since the vast majority of individuals suffering from PTSD are prone to sleep apnea, there’s a fantastic need to assist such a person lead a normal life. Relatives and friends ought to help the affected person inventing out their suppressed feelings. PTSD can affect children in addition to adults. There’s a good need to spot the symptoms and seek medical aid. Even though some individuals are constantly in denial or suppress their feelings, some could become jumpy and react to insignificant stimulation. In case the man or woman that has just confronted any traumatic event appears to be suffering from recurring nightmares and flashbacks or showing signs of PTSD, physicians may prescribe medication to relieve the physical and psychological symptoms. Psychotherapy or behavioral treatment could be required for assisting the affected person. Antianxiety drugs, antidepressants, and anti-inflammatory drugs may help, but it’s psychological support which will help the individual cope much better. While treating PTSD will surely decrease the prevalence of rapid shallow breathing or sleep disturbance in these scenarios, an individual may also gain by using CPAP masks. A CPAP mask is a breathing apparatus that’s fitted over the mouth or nose in order to deliver atmosphere. This assists in preventing the airways from becoming blocked. Particular alternative healing remedies or relaxation techniques can also help in treating sleep apnea and nervousness.
( Read more about Positional Asphyxia in Infants – Know the Causes )
The two PTSD and sleep apnea may be treated, but it’s very important that those requirements are diagnosed at an early period. While sleep apnea may lead to sleep deprivation, and result in significant complications, PTSD could make a critical effect on the ability to lead a normal life. It’s thus crucial the signals of these conditions are known at an early phase and the necessary steps are required to relieve the signs.