Why grow from seed?
Written by John Mauger Date Posted: 28 April 2016
This article details 2 of the biggest advantages of growing your own food from seed; freshness and value! Did you know you could potentially grow 196kg of fresh food for under $7.00! Wow!
Freshness is probably the greatest advantage of growing your own – especially when it comes to vegetables and herbs. Nothing tastes as good as a tomato straight off the vine in your own backyard.
When you grow your own veggies from seed you also know exactly what has gone into them. As the old saying goes – you are what you eat – so it is important to know if chemicals have been used to grow the plant. By growing from seed you can make your vegetables as organic as you like.
Value - you can cut your food bill by growing from seed!
With the cost of fresh food rising, growing your own vegetables from seed can save your family hundreds, or even thousands of dollars.
An example for a family of four (2 adults and 2 children aged between 12-18 years old):
- Should eat at least 492kg of vegetables per year (According to Australian Guide to Healthy Living)
- Let’s assume an average vegetable retail price of $2.50 per kg
- Total vegetable bill would be $1230.00
You could feed your family with just 20 packets of seeds!
It has been demonstrated that with a 5m x 5m vegetable garden, over 500kg of vegetables can be produced, using just 20 packets of seeds. But you don’t even need a large garden, as you can grow vegetables and herbs in the smallest of spaces, containers or balconies.
Look at these examples using our seeds:
- 1 pkt of beetroot seed contains 50 seeds and could yield 15kg = 7c per kg
- 1 pkt carrot seed contains 200 seeds and could yield 15kg = 7c per kg
- 1 pkt cucumber seed contains 30 seeds and could yield 30kg = 3.5c per kg
- 1 pkt radish seed contains 100 seeds and could yield 3kg = 34c per kg
- 1 pkt tomato seed contains 60 seeds and could yield 48kg = 3c per kg
- 1 pkt pumpkin seeds contains 5 seeds and could yield 85kg = 2c per kg
That’s potentially 196 kg of food for under $7.00!
(Yields could be higher or lower depending on soil quality and what size the crop is harvested. Prices, quantities and other specifics used in this article were accurate at the time of publishing but may change in the future)
Written by John Mauger
Recent blog posts:
Author: The Seed Collection Pty Ltd Date Posted: 15 January 2020
Effective use of fertiliser is an essential technique for getting the most out of your garden and its plants. However, there's much more to it than opening a bottle of plant feed and spreading the contents liberally over the soil.
Author: The Seed Collection Pty Ltd Date Posted: 22 December 2019
Scale are common garden pests which can badly stunt a plant's growth, ruin its appearance, or even kill it off altogether. This article explains how to recognise scale, what kinds of damage they do, and how to keep their numbers under control.
Author: The Seed Collection Pty Ltd Date Posted: 17 December 2019
Not every gardener is blessed with a large plot of land to work their creative magic upon. However, a small garden needn’t limit your ambitions – you just need to put a little more thought and planning into your horticultural efforts.
Author: The Seed Collection Pty Ltd Date Posted: 16 December 2019
There's an almost infinite variety of flower shapes, sizes, & colours out there to grow, & distinguishing between them can be confusing. This article outlines terms used to describe flower types, helping you to know what to expect from every seed you sow.
Author: The Seed Collection Pty Ltd Date Posted: 11 December 2019
While flowers may be highly prized for their beauty & scent, their appeal to humans is only a sideshow that gardeners down the ages have taken advantage of. Flowers have a vital biological function and are more complicated than many people think.
View all blog posts