After Friday's climate change protest, it's worth reflecting on what we as individuals can do to help stop climate change.
The war cries at Friday's climate emergency rally varied from the simple but effective "Scomo's a wanker" to the more considered “No coal, no oil, leave the carbon in the soil”. But there was a group of protesters on the steps of Sydney's Town Hall with one simple message: want to save the planet? Then turn vegan.
"Turning vegan is the one thing you can do today to help stop climate change," said a woman in a koala costume through a megaphone.
And the koala had a fair point.
How to go vegan safely
Thinking about going vegan? Maintain your essential nutrients by making these easy swaps
Food production counts for one-quarter to one-third of harmful greenhouse gas emissions, with animal agriculture being the main bulk of that. On top of this, meat production requires a lot more water than its non-meat alternatives - one-kilo of meat uses between 5,000 and 20,000 litres of water, whereas to produce one-kilo of wheat is 500 and 4,000 litres of water.
Plant-based brands such as Beyond Meat and Impossible Foods have used the growing interest in the climate emergency to market their products to the masses, taking vegan food out of niche shops and into the aisles of Coles and Woolies. Hungry Jack's has even got on board with its Rebel Whopper (vegetarian rather then vegan), which they claim is "just like our classic Whopper". And when you consider a plant-based burger from Beyond Meat uses 93% less land and 99% less water and fewer greenhouse gases than a meat burger, this can only be a good thing.
A vegetarian almost all my life, I turned vegan four years ago and there's no doubt more people are becoming vegan curious. But what would happen if everyone in the world turned vegan or vegetarian?
In 2016, Marco Springsmann, a research fellow at the Oxford Martin School’s Future of Food programme, built computer models to predict what would happen if everyone became vegetarian by 2050. They found that that if the world went vegetarian, food-related emissions would drop by about 60%. If the world went vegan, the decline would be around 70%.
“That scenario is not very realistic – but it highlights the importance that food-related emissions will play in the future," Springsmann told the BBC.
Although it sounds like utopia to some, a world of veggos by 2050 would bring its own complications. People who rely on meat-production as their main income would need re-training and the health effects in developing countries that rely on meat as a source of nutrition and don't have alternatives, could be devastating. There's also some parts of the world, such as Sub-Saharan Africa, that don't have the land type that couldn't support crop production.
However, does a developed country like Australia, in the grips of drought and with our vast resources and the means to educate people about how to eat plant-based, have a duty to turn plant-based? The grassroots action group Climate Save Movement thinks so.
"Going vegan is the single most impactful thing you as an individual can do to fight climate chaos and possible extinction of life on the planet...Our land is being stolen by animal agriculture," reads their information leaflet.
Many people who passionate about climate change are already doing their bit to cut down or cut out meat consumption. Last year a poll by Roy Morgan found that 2.5 million people (that's 12.1%) of the population were eating an all or almost all vegetarian diet. That was a rise of 400,000 people from three years previously.
Want to go steady? Sign up to our whimn.com.au newsletter for more stories like this.
For me, being vegan means I feel less guilty about my personal contribution to carbon emissions. However, I have plenty of friends who are passionate about climate change and still tuck into burgers and steaks, and it would be easy to call them hypocrites. But that's the thing about the climate change, it's exposed us all as hypocrites. I might be vegan but I took three return flights last year, including a long-haul trip to the UK. A quick Google tells me that 16.8 tonnes of CO2 each way. When you consider a Big Mac cheeseburger is four kilos of CO2 equivalent gases, then my travel habit is enough to make Greta Thunberg quake in her vegan boots.
While the vitriol on Friday was aimed at PM Scott Morrison, climate change is not just a government issue. Shamefully, Australia has one of the highest per capita emissions of carbon dioxide in the world, with its 0.3% of the world's population releasing 1.3% of the world's greenhouse gases.
So while fires still rage across our beautiful country and we step back and reflect, what's the one thing we can all do to help stop climate change? Well as much as we can. If you eat a lot of meat, especially red meat, then try to eat less or cut it out altogether. If you're vegetarian then consider going vegan. Check the labels on your food and try not to eat imported goods. As for me? Well maybe 2020 is the year I don't need to take that holiday to Bali.