The Internet of Things allows people and things to be connected Anytime, Anyplace, with anything and anyone, ideally using any path/network and any service. Internet of Things (IoT) plays a crucial role in smart agriculture. Smart farming is an emerging concept, because IoT sensors capable of providing information about their agriculture fields. The paper aims making use of evolving technology i.e. IoT and smart agriculture using automation. Monitoring environmental factors is the major factor to improve the yield of the efficient crops. The feature of this paper includes monitoring temperature and humidity in agricultural field through sensors using DHT11 Sensor. IR Sensor is Interfaced With Arduino to detect animals and intimates to the farmers mobile using Wi-Fi IoT Module.
 K.Lakshmisudha, Swathi Hegde, Neha Kale, Shruti Iyer, “ Smart Precision Based Agriculture Using Sensors”, International Journal of Computer Applications (0975- 8887), Volume 146-No.11, July 2011
 Nikesh Gondchawar, Dr. R.S.Kawitkar, “IoT Based Smart Agriculture”, International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer and Communication Engineering (IJARCCE), Vol.5, Issue 6, June 2016.
 M.K.Gayatri, J.Jayasakthi, Dr.G.S.Anandhamala, “Providing Smart Agriculture Solutions to Farmers for Better Yielding Using IoT”, IEEE International Conference on Technological Innovations in ICT for Agriculture and Rural Development (TIAR 2015).
 Chetan Dwarkani M, Ganesh Ram R, Jagannathan S, R. Priyatharshini, “Smart Farming System Using Sensors for Agricultural Task Automation”, IEEE International Conference on Technological Innovations in ICT for Agriculture and Rural Development (TIAR 2015).
 S. R. Nandurkar, V. R. Thool, R. C. Thool, “Design and Development of Precision Agriculture System Using Wireless Sensor Network”, IEEE International Conference on Automation, Control, Energy and Systems (ACES), 2014.
 Joaquín Gutiérrez, Juan Francisco Villa-Medina, Alejandra Nieto-Garibay, and Miguel Ángel PortaGándara, “Automated Irrigation System Using a Wireless Sensor Network and GPRS Module”, IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurements, 0018-9456,2013.
 Dr. V .Vidya Devi,G. Meena Kumari, “Real- Time Automation and Monitoring System for Modernized Agriculture” ,International Journal of Review and Research in Applied Sciences and Engineering (IJRRASE) Vol3 No.1. PP 7-12, 2013.
 Meonghun Lee, Jeonghwan Hwang, Hyun Yoe, “Agricultural Protection System Based on IoT”, IEEE 16th International Conference on Computational Science and Engineering, 2013.
 Monika Jhuria, Ashwani Kumar, Rushikesh Borse, “Image Processing for Smart Farming: Detection of Disease and Fruit Grading”, IEEE Second International Conference on Image Information Processing (ICIIP), 2013.
 Orazio Mirabella and Michele Brischetto, “A Hybrid Wired/Wireless Networking Infrastructure for Greenhouse Management”, IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement, vol. 60, no. 2, pp 398- 407, 2011.
Soil moisture sensor, IOT, Cloud networking, Wi-Fi networking