Kachina Doll (Nathlashe [Clown])
Arts of the Americas
Wood, pigment, wool, cotton
late 19th century
This item is not on view
Museum Expedition 1903, Museum Collection Fund
You may download and use Brooklyn Museum images of this three-dimensional work in accordance with a Creative Commons license
. Fair use, as understood under the United States Copyright Act, may also apply.
Please include caption information from this page and credit the Brooklyn Museum. If you need a high resolution file, please fill out our online application form
For further information about copyright, we recommend resources at the United States Library of Congress
, Cornell University
, Copyright and Cultural Institutions: Guidelines for U.S. Libraries, Archives, and Museums
, and Copyright Watch
For more information about the Museum's rights project, including how rights types are assigned, please see our blog posts on copyright
If you have any information regarding this work and rights to it, please contact firstname.lastname@example.org
She-we-na (Zuni Pueblo). Kachina Doll (Nathlashe [Clown]), late 19th century. Wood, pigment, wool, cotton, 16 1/4 x 6 1/4 in. ( 41.3 x 15.9cm). Brooklyn Museum, Museum Expedition 1903, Museum Collection Fund, 03.325.4601. Creative Commons-BY (Photo: Brooklyn Museum, 03.325.4601_acetate_bw.jpg)
overall, 03.325.4601_acetate_bw.jpg. Brooklyn Museum photograph
"CUR" at the beginning of an image file name means that the image was created by a curatorial staff member. These study images may be digital point-and-shoot photographs, when we don\'t yet have high-quality studio photography, or they may be scans of older negatives, slides, or photographic prints, providing historical documentation of the object.
This is a mudhead clown kachina with no wool neck collar and but does have a wool skirt. It is the far right kachina in the photograph.HAs deeply carved mouth and ears.
Koyemshi Kachina (Mudhead) Clowns
Koyemshi Kachinas, or Mudheads were created when the Zuni first entered the world. One brother and sister had improper relations so their ten children became Mudheads. Each Mudhead exhibits behavior opposite to what their name is. Thus “The Aged One” acts like a child, “The Invisible One,” thinks he is hiding if he only holds up a feather in front of his face, while the all-important “Speaker of the Sun” is really a witless daydreamer and rarely speaks. A troop of ten different Mudhead Kachinas appear in most Zuni ceremonies performing outrageous behaviors and interacting with the audience, making them laugh but also making people realize how wrong such behavior really is as the clowns are eventually chased away.
Not every record you will find here is complete. More information is available for some works than for others, and some entries have been updated more recently. Records are frequently reviewed and revised, and we welcome
any additional information you might have.