Our collection of children's picture books featuring Black and Indigenous people and People of Color (BIPOC) is available to the public. You can use the Search Tool below to find titles. *Inclusion of a title in the collection DOES NOT EQUAL recommendation.* See our related readings page for suggested tools for evaluating books.
You can find titles by typing a keyword into the search bar below (e.g. adoption, birthday, holidays, princess, dinosaur, etc.), or by selecting one or a combo of filters on the left.
First time here? Start here!
154 matching booksShow Filters
When Kibo into the mirror one morning to make a face, he sees a purple dragon behind him, but no matter how far and how fast he runs away, every time he looks back in the mirror, the dragon is bigger and more purple.
Simple text reveals the benefits of planting a single tree, both to those who see it grow and to the world as a whole.
Profiles the lives of twenty-six women who, through their acts and deeds, helped shape and change the world during their lifetime, including pilot Amelia Earhart and anthropologist Zora Neal Hurston.
Falling asleep wondering why he doesn't have a fur coat like the stuffed animals on his bed, Noah dreams that these animals are real and each explains the unique qualities of their fur to him.
A picture book biography of Muhammad Ali, this work traces Ali's boxing career. Showing him in the ring with many of his famous opponents, it also explains how he got interested in boxing.
In this salutation from Earth, the chronicler gives a tour of the planet and introduces those who call it home.
In text and pictures, this book tells us how much better the world would be, if kids were allowed to run the world.
In this beautifully illustrated book of short prayers from major world religions, award-winning author Demi shows children the great value of talking to God. Here they will find many time-honored favorites, including prayers of praise, prayers of petition, prayers of gratitude, and prayers of blessing. Taking readers on a fascinating journey across the globe, Demi's stunning illustrations celebrate the life of prayer shared by all the world's religions.
Earth is home to over seven billion people, and every person is unique.
"Princess Nin is a firefighter, Princess Gilda is a supermarket cashier, Princess Agnes is retired, and Princess Liang is in a wheel chair. This gallery of princesses gives visibility to lot of women who do not fit with the traditional conception of a princess. Maybe it's time to realize that each and every one of us could be a princess"--Amazon.com