Nose bleeds are a condition that is frequent and can occur in everybody, but in the majority of cases, the nose bleeds are not serious and can be treated at home. However, if nose bleeds tend to occur more often than it is normal, the condition is then called constant nose bleeds, or medically epistaxis.
Types of nose bleeds
Nose bleeds can be divided into two categories, depending on the place where they start. Therefore, there are anterior and posterior nose bleeds, anterior starting in the front of the nasal septum, while posterior starts at the extreme back of the nasal cavity. Anterior nose bleeds are more frequent then posterior and they can be easily treated. It is very important to visit a doctor if posterior nose bleed occurs, because it can be very serious. Constant nose bleeds usually occur in children between 2 and 10 years of age and in elderly people between their 50 and 80 years of age. Furthermore, those people who live in dry and cold climates are at greater risk to develop constant nose bleeds.
Causes of constant nose bleeds
One of the most common and most frequent causes for the occurrence of constant nose bleeds are various types of traumas and injuries, such as a sudden blow to the nose. Cold and dry air may also cause nose bleeds and this happens because the lining of the nose cavity is very sensitive and with the onset of a cold weather, it begins to dry and crack. Furthermore, various allergies may also cause the nasal tissue to become dry and to crack.
Those people who consume drugs by inhaling them are at high risk to develop constant nose bleeds, because the nasal tissue is sensitive to the substances such as cocaine, and starts to wear out and eventually bleed. One of the causes for the occurrence of constant nose bleeds is high blood pressure, as well as other cardiovascular disorders. When a person suffers from hypertension, the strong pressure may cause the capillaries and arteries in the nose to bleed. Nasal polyps caused by allergies or nasal infection are specific benign growths in the nose, which may also cause chronic nose bleeds. Bleeding disorders, such as problems with blood platelets and blood clotting, may also lead to the occurrence of this condition. Furthermore, certain medicines known as blood thinners are also considered to be a cause for the constant nose bleeds.