Everyone knows that calcium is good for the body, but there is not such a good understanding of the specific aspects of this nutrient. Calcium is a mineral which is essential to building strong bones. Our bodies actually eliminates low amounts of calcium and it needs to replace it with new ones. Since the body cannot make new nutrients, the body gets them through the food. This is the reason why it is important to get enough calcium in your diet. In order to maintain a healthy lifestyle and to avoid developing osteoporosis, you should consume milk and calcium-rich foods. You can also take supplements such as AlgaeCal Basic just to be sure that you are getting the daily recommended dietary dose. In this article we will explain just how important Calcium is in protecting your bone health.
Calcium builds strong bones
Calcium is necessary for building healthy bones, particularly during teenage years. During this period, the bones absorb more calcium than they normally do in a lifetime. New bone is created whilst old bone is destroyed. The fact is that human bones contain about 99% of the mineral deposits in the body. Yet, most adolescents do not get enough calcium in their diet. While this can be accounted for the fact that milk has been completely replaced with fizzy drinks, it is also a matter of sex and hormone status. This means that the quantity should be consume depends largely on the individual. If you have a teenager that cannot seem to give up soda. You should at least make sure that he is taking supplements.
Calcium helps adults find equilibrium
Even though at young adulthood the body refuses to accept any more intake of calcium, as you age the bones begin to lose density and strength. Taking into account that bones are forever broken down and built up, it is essential to take measures in order to stimulate the production of new bones. For this, it is necessary to increase your calcium intake. You may need to take dietary supplements in order to ensure that the bones have the materials they need.
Calcium prevents Osteoporosis
As you age, your bones get weaker and weaker, reason why you should have calcium in order to ensure that your bone mass is not degrading. Thanks to the right calcium intake, you will not risk developing osteoporosis. Osteoporosis is a serious health condition that can result in broken bones, not to mention chronic pain and disability. A rich diet in Calcium throughout your life will definitely not develop osteoporosis. It is the only solution to turning around your bone health. Your body will not need to borrow calcium from your bones.
Now that you know just how important calcium is for the health of your bones, you should make sure that you are getting the right intake. Calcium critical to the health of your bones, so if you do not want to risk developing fractures in the near future, you should make sure that you are getting the recommend dose of this nutrient.