If your family identifies with a cultural minority group, you may bring vastly different life experiences to your social circles. This sentiment also likely extends to your children and their environment growing up. Among the issues minority families face in raising children is the achievement gap in school or the noted difference in academic performance between white students and minority students.
How soon a child with special needs gets the help they need can be incredibly impactful. For many conditions, the earlier a child is able to get such help, the better off they may end up being in the long run.
Some disabilities leave children facing difficulties when it comes to learning to talk. Being nonverbal can pose significant challenges to a child. This includes at school. So, what aids a nonverbal child has with them when at school can matter a lot.
Like many federal agencies, the Department of Education is reversing course on some Obama Administration priorities. In the DOE's case, that means fewer civil rights investigations into public schools and university, according to an internal memo obtained by ProPublica.
Recently, some parents have leveled allegations claiming that the special education efforts of a school district here in San Diego County are falling short.
What specific special education services they receive is not the only thing that can have big impacts on students with disabilities. Another is the environment in which they receive these services.
One of the big hopes for many parents when it comes to their child’s high school education is that it will well-prepare their child for college and the future. How prepared for college a child actually is upon leaving high school can be influenced by many factors. One such factor is the quality of the high school they attend.
In disciplinary matters involving special needs students, schools could end up taking some very serious and impactful actions. This includes deciding to pursue a suspension against the student in question.
One thing that can have major impacts on a student with a learning disability is whether they get the support necessary to meet their education needs.
In recent years here in California, there have been many efforts by the state and individual school districts to try to lower the use of suspensions at schools and address fairness issues related to this type of disciplinary action. What has happened with suspension levels in the state in the wake of such efforts?