Portrait of school teachers of Officers Instruction School. AWM DAX1102.
The VWMA Schools Program is built in response to the Australian Curriculum: History, particularly the Depth Studies of World War One (Year 9) and World War Two (Year 10). Many teachers who have taught the Program report that students are more engaged and really develop their historical inquiry skills.
Virtual War Memorial Australia staff are happy to support teachers and schools with implementing and running the program, and we run professional development sessions on-site and workshops in accordance with AITSL standards. Please do not hesitate to contact us at firstname.lastname@example.org, or by phone on 0419 620 297 or (08) 8100 7318. We would love to hear from you.
If you would like to be part of our Schools Program, please fill out an Expression of Interest form and return it to us.
The resources on this page can be used as part of the Schools Program or in support of other units. Note also the resources developed especially for student use on our Resources for Students page. If you have any feedback about how these resources can be improved, or what additional resources you would like to see, please email. Our resources are continually being updated.
DIY Museum: In this museum, you are going to be the curator and instead of labels that provide information and answer questions, you are going to design labels that ask questions.
Using and analysing newspapers with Trove: How to critically analyse historical newspapers found in Trove.
Digital Storytelling project: Create a 2-3 minute video with narration about a serviceman or woman.
Strategies for analysing visual images: Practical ways to analyse photographs and images as a historical inquiry skill.
Would you rather...: Which front would you rather have served on in the First World War? Why?
Curriculum Resource Kits
Schools Program Support Resources
Assessment Task Sheets & Rubrics
Primary School Resources
2020 Teachers' Professional Learning Activities
To be advised