Introduction to Material and Energy Balances by G.V. ReklaitisA thorough introduction to balance equation concepts. Geared for the course offered to chemical engineering majors in their sophomore year. Develops a framework for the analysis of flowsheet problem information with extensive use of degree-of-freedom analysis. Presents systematic approaches for manual and computer-aided solution of full scale balance problems. Provides a detailed development of the structure, properties, and interrelationships of species and element balances based on the algebraic view of reaction-stoichiometry and the rate of reaction concept.
Material Energy Balance Without Chemical Reaction Numerical problem Part 1.
ISBN 13: 9789380026046
The chemical process industry faces serious problems in regard to new materials and efficient methods of production due to increasing costs of energy, stringent environmental regulations and global competition. A clear understanding of the process Methods of Expressing compositions of mixtures and solutions; Gas Calculations; Material Balances; Recycle and Bypassing operations; Humidity and Saturation; Fuels and Combustion; Problems in Sulphur and sulphur compounds burning operation; Thermophysics. Du kanske gillar. Inbunden Engelska, Spara som favorit.
Final Exam Materials and Energy Balances. ANSWERS a) Draw a flow diagram and do a degree of freedom analysis for this problem. b) How much.
the most nutrition tree in the world
Single page view for printing. Please refer to the specific study period for contact information. This subject introduces chemical engineering flow sheet calculations, including material balances, energy balances and compositions of mixtures. The concept of conversion of mass is developed as the basis for determining mass flows in chemical processing systems involving chemical reactions and separation systems. Then the concept of conservation of energy is developed as the basis for determining energy flows in and around chemical processing systems, evaluation of enthalpy changes with and without phase change, simplified energy balances for batch, steady-state and adiabatic systems, estimation of heats of reaction, combustion, solution and dilution, energy balances in reacting systems, simultaneous material and energy balances. This subject provides the basis for all the chemical engineering subjects that follow. The calculations introduced in this subject are the most common type of calculations performed by professional chemical engineers working in all sectors of industry.
Mass Balance Calculations are performed to determine the yields of main products, byproducts, consumption of raw material and production losses. Only when the Mass Balance is performed, the Process Engineer can make calculations required for design of production equipment in the process. Energy balance involves the computation of input and outputs of energy in equipments. Energy Balance is performed from Material Balance taking into account the thermal effects Exothermic or Endothermic of reactions and the physical transformations Evaporation, Crystallization occurring in the Process Equipment. This is followed by Energy Balance problems.