Nuclear reactor (Red Alert 2)
Advanced power supply
Causes a nuclear explosion when destroyed
The nuclear reactor is an advanced Soviet power supplying structure in Command & Conquer: Red Alert 2 and Yuri's Revenge. Providing roughly 13 times the power of a Tesla reactor for less than double the cost, it is by far by the most cost-effective power plant in the series. A single nuclear reactor will produce more power than a Soviet player would realistically need in most cases.
Background[edit | edit source]
During the Soviet Union's secret rearming program under Premier Alexander Romanov, nuclear weaponry was under development without the Allies' knowledge, but was also accompanied by the deployment of nuclear reactors in larger bases. They were first encountered during the Soviet attack in the Black Forest, and their clusters were the main source of power for the missile facilities in Cuba and the main Soviet base just outside the Kremlin in Moscow. Yuri built one of these reactors to power up his psychic dominator on Alcatraz.
|The following is based on the Soviet campaign for Yuri's Revenge and contradicts canon sources.|
The reactor design was authorized to be built on the Moon, with some modifications.
The nuclear reactor was replaced by the super reactor due to the erasure of nuclear technology preceding the third iteration of the war, but the design is still more or less the same, which also goes for the nuclear detonation after its destruction.
In-game[edit | edit source]
This large building has the power output of roughly 13 Tesla reactors, supplying the Soviet commander with virtually all of the power he will ever need. The destruction of a nuclear reactor causes a large nuclear explosion, and creates fallout that will kill infantry and lightly-armoured vehicles. They are best destroyed from afar or from the air, or captured with an engineer.
If all Tesla reactors are sold or destroyed, the nuclear reactor acts as a prerequisite for all structures which normally require a Tesla reactor to be built. However, due to an error, in the mission To the Moon, radar towers explicitly require a Tesla reactor.
Gallery[edit | edit source]
Render, at Alcatraz
Cameos[edit | edit source]
Pre-release cameos, in order: alpha, beta variant 1, beta variant 2.
In order: English, French, German, Korean, Chinese.