Boating can be dangerous, no matter how experienced a person is. To help you make sure you are as safe as possible while out on the water, here are some boating safety fundamentals you should consider
Everyone on board should have a life jacket. These flotation devices can save a person’s life from drowning if they go overboard. So, everyone should always wear a life jacket, especially children. Also, make sure that the life jackets fit properly.
Keeping fire extinguishers on board is also important. Each boat needs to have at least on B-1 marine fire extinguisher, as required by the Coast Guard. Bigger boats are require to have at least two. Make sure you know how many you need based on the size of your boat.
Flares and distress signals
These are used in the case of a dangerous or potentially dangerous situation to signal for help. However, to be of any use, it is important you know when to use them. Make sure that you know someone may be in the position to see them, whether they are on a boat or plane, or if it will bevisible from shore.
Everyone knows that you shouldn’t drink and drive. But, drinking and operating a boat is just as dangerous. And, it can lead to the same consequences, from something as trivial as a fine to something as serious as an accident and death. Make sure that no one is operating a boat while intoxicated to avoid these consequences.
While on board, everyone should try to keep balanced to make sure you don’t go overboard. However, in the case that someone does go overboard, you should be prepared. Practice an overboard drill to prepare for this situation.
While out on the water, cell phones can occasionally be used, but they should not be relied on. In the case of an emergency, it is important that all boats have VHF (very high frequency) marine-band radios on board. These are more reliable for communications while out on the water.
If you are boating in weather that is cool and the water is also cold, then everyone should have clothing that will keep them warm. So, everyone should wear lots of layers. Also, wear life jackets.
Hopefully, you will keep these boating safety fundamentals in mind when planning to go out to sea. Remember, it’s always better to be safe than sorry, so be as safe as possible while out boating!
To learn more about boats, boat sales, repairs, services & accessories, please contact Whiticar Boat Works, located at: 3636 SE Old St. Lucie Blvd, Stuart, Florida, 34996. Give us a call at: (772) 287-2883 or email us anytime at: email@example.com