Family and personal responsibilities and work are all parts of a hectic life. Sometimes it may seem like time management is not something that you have control over. However, that’s not how things have to be. With help from others in your position, you find that managing time isn’t quite so difficult.
Get a timer set. If you wish to focus on a task, set a timer for the length of time you wish to spend concentrating on the task at hand. If you would like to work for 60 minutes, set a timer for 15 minute chunks and take a break in between until you’re done.
Make an honest assessment of where your time is best spent. Give each task the time it requires of you. This can help you improve your life and manage your time better. If you unexpectedly have some free time, use it to work on any tasks you are behind on, or just to relax.
When creating a schedule for each day, do not forget to schedule in time for any interruptions that may occur. If you forget to pay attention to things such as traffic or telephone conversation running a bit longer, this can seriously disrupt your entire day. Planning ahead for those interruptions will help you stay on track.
If time management is really tough for you, plan your day out the day before. Write a list that distinguishes what you want to accomplish. Planning a day early will give you an opportunity to think of how you can accomplish your tasks in the least amount of time.
Prioritization is key to your to-do list. Sometimes, meaningless tasks can get in the way of your day. Task prioritization allows you to use your time and energy efficiently on the most important tasks. Create a list of tasks you wish to accomplish and then attend to them in order of priority.
To get a handle on your time you actually have to look at how you currently spend your time. Are you using it wisely? Reading emails and listening to voicemail should only be done when there is time to do so. If you look at them throughout the day, you are going to take up time you’ve allocated for another task.
Learn to say no. Many people are stressed out because they don’t know how to decline offers to do something. Go to your schedule to see what you can do. Perhaps there are tasks that could be given to others to handle? If you can, get assistance from other people close to the tasks.
When you get up in the morning, make a list of things that you plan to accomplish during the day. Make a list and allot your time accordingly. When you keep a schedule everyday, you will use your time more efficiently.
Now you can see that even a busy life can be managed effectively. If your head is in the right place, using great ideas like these can get you back in control of how your time is handled. Just make sure to actually use the great ideas you read here.