8 Obvious Signs You Have A Vitamin D Deficiency
Scientific American recently reported that an estimated three-quarters of American teens and adults have deficient levels of vitamin D. This vital vitamin regulates gene expression, vitamin B regulation, and stimulates many processes in different systems.
Your body can create vitamin D by exposing your skin to sunlight without sunscreen. The suggested level of Vitamin D varies from person the person, depending on genetics, activity level, age, and sex.
Vitamin D is different than other vitamins in that it becomes a hormone after its creation. While the recommended way to get vitamin D is sun exposure, you can take supplements. If you experience these symptoms or suspect you are lacking in this vitamin, see a doctor.
Also known as high blood pressure can arise when there isn't enough vitamin D. Vitamin D is a natural countermeasure that suppresses a peptide that increases blood pressure through arterial restriction and excessive water retention. Without sufficient levels of vitamin D restricting this enzymatic reaction. There is no other natural way to limit the body's production of this peptide.
Marred Immune System
Vitamin D plays an important role in the effectiveness of our immune system. White blood cells have many vitamin D receptors. Proper vitamin D intake increases immune function by a factor of 3 to 5, and stimulates the production of vital antimicrobial peptides. Vitamin D is considered to be more effective than any vaccine you can take because of it improves the immune system in its entirety.
Patients with heart diseases have statistically lower vitamin D levels. Lower concentrations of this vitamin lead to higher concentrations of calcium build up in the arteries. Calcium plaque greatly increases the risk of heart diseases and stroke. In general low vitamin D levels cause other conditions that increase the possibility of stroke and disease like: hypertension, obesity higher cholesterol and type two diabetes.
The connection isn't clearly understood, but the statistical correlation is clear. People with low vitamin D levels sweat more than those with higher levels. The sweating is usually concentrated around the forehead and neck.
Frequent Digestive Issues And Discomfort
People with gastrointestinal conditions are at high risk for vitamin D deficiency. Some of these conditions include celiac, Crohn's, inflammatory bowel disease. These conditions limit the effectiveness of vitamin D absorption. Individuals with high levels of body fat are also suspect to vitamin D deficiency as fat dilutes the vitamin and reduces its effectiveness.
Depression And Persistent Sadness
Vitamin D seems to help with seasonal affective disorder (SAD). D3 in particular was given to patients in a study and experienced enhanced positive effects and reduction of negativity. D3 had a marked effect on the physical and cognitive aspects of the participants. Vitamin D also aids in the production of vitamin B, which in known to improve mood and cognitive function.
Constant Pain, General Discomfort And Pain
Vitamin D's effect on pain and weakness vary greatly from case to case. The joints will ache, there will be stinging/tingling sensations in extremities and unwarranted muscle soreness. The symptoms start of negligible but the longer the body is deprived of vitamin D the symptoms worsen.
When vitamin D is metabolized, it enhances muscle contractions. This strengthens the muscle tissue and bones. Without it, the muscles don't operate effectively, leading to deterioration and weakness.
If you experience insomnia, sleep apnea, light sleeping, restless leg syndrome or frequent waking, it could be related to a vitamin D deficiency. D2 in particular, has a major role in our natural sleep cycles. Lower levels of this vitamin deter melatonin production and affect the consistency of the circadian rhythm. The circadian rhythm is our internal sleep clock.