Look at a construction site, and you are going to find an array of dangerous objects, heavy tools, and machinery that pose threats to life. And as an on-site worker or as a construction company, you must follow proper safety guidelines to ensure utmost security. A slight carelessness can result in human tragedy and nobody loves tragedies.
Let’s look at the various facts of the construction sites and the potential threats that lurk at every step.
- Falls from roofs, scaffolding, and ladders
- Falls and accidents on the grounds due to slipperiness or dust
- Accidents caused by electric tools and power tools
- Heavy lifting accidents.
- Lack of hazard communication
The construction industry witnesses heavy fatality due to falls caused by the faulty scaffolds and ladders. It is mandatory to check the condition of scaffolds regularly. In some cases, the uses of Ariel lifts have decreased the fall rates. Ensure that the surfaces are even and do not pose challenges or create discomfort for the workers working on them.
The use of the safety nets and fall arrest system such as harnesses should be promoted; the employees should be trained to use the tools and equipment properly. The ladders are another vulnerable tool that causes maximum deaths.
While using ladders make sure that the ladder reaches the work area comfortably. The worker should not struggle to work on the ladder. It is imperative to assign a competent person who can carry out inspections to identify faulty ladders.
You should always tag the faulty ladders and keep them away from the work areas; in fact, a lot of accidents happen due to negligence and human error. Hence, ensure that you eliminate any chances of human error that means you have to have a robust inspection process in place.
Ensure that you do not overload the ladder; in fact, the ladder should not hold more than the recommend load it is meant to carry. Always refer to the manufacturer’s manual book to learn about the load capacity of the ladder.
The staircases are one more dangerous area; at most of the sites, the staircases are either wobbling or damaged due to various reasons. It is important that you regularly clean the debris and dust collected on the staircase that makes the surface prone to accidents. The staircases that have more risers must have the handrail for support.
Eliminating accidents on the ground:
Construction sites have enough of dust, nails, and other sharp objects that can cause accidents. For instance, a slippery floor caused by accumulated dust can cause the fatality. In addition, the nails and sharp objects will hurt the workers; hence it is imperative that the workers are provided with slippers and floaters that are slip-resistant. In addition, the workers should be encouraged to use helmet even while working on the ground because you cannot rule out the possibility of things falling from the roof causing serious injuries.
Eradicating the accidents caused by Power tools and electric tools:
At a construction site, you can spot a myriad variety of electrical tools, weigh lift machines and the accidents caused by these devices are also one of the major contributing factors to the fatality rate. Ensure that you inspect the devices perfectly; in case of any wear and tear, make sure to fix or repair the machine before you operate them.
It is advisable that the construction company provides supervisors who educate workers on the proper usage of the tools and devices to avoid accidents caused by inefficiency. The workers must go through the safety precautions provided by the manufacturer.
The portable devices also cause serious injuries; the workers must take care while working with the tools such as grinder or driller. The cables should be well-protected; the tool should be in a functional condition. Never let your workers operate old and outdated tools that do not work properly.
The cranes can wreak havoc when they go out of the control; of course, not like the Transformers, but certainly, things can turn ugly. Therefore, make sure that you check the wires, hooks, and chains properly. The crane should never go beyond its recommended load. Check the brakes and rigging before you lift the load.
The communication between the operator and supervisor must be clear because miscommunication here can result in a fatal accident. Discourage people from standing under the heavy load.
Perfect the hazard safety communication:
The construction sites where chemicals are used must follow clear safety and hazard communication strategy. Because the chemicals cause reparatory diseases and fire on the site, it is imperative to maintain Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) that has all the information about each chemical used at the site.
Make sure that everybody reads the data sheet and the language must be clear and precise so that everyone understands the written communication. Use spill cleanup kit and educate your workers to keep the storage room clean. Finally, you must provide adequate protective gears to each of the employees those who come in contact with substances or deal with them regularly.
The construction companies must carry out safety patrol to find out the potential areas of threat; in addition, they should regularly educate and groom their workers on safety guidelines. The companies should involve employees to assess the workplace risk and take adequate measures to avoid accidents.
The construction sites should be organized; by streamlining the workflow, educating employees and maintaining clear-cut safety protocols, you will reduce the accident rates thereby safeguarding your workers.
You should create a dialogue between you and your employees to eliminate any sort of miscommunication regarding hazard and its effects. Hence, a healthy communication strategy is important.
There should be incentives for following the safety guideline. The rewards are best ways of inspiring workers to follow the safety guidelines. The construction company should also consider hiring consultants who can supervise the site properly. Well, it would be an additional operational cost; however, it makes perfect sense to have such consultants. And it will not be a bad deal because by avoiding accidents, you will save a lot of money.A very good resource to have, especially when involved with a potentially harmful or high risk environment is to be in touch with Personal Injury Attorney Lebanon TN Keith Williams, who in fact is a very capable and knowledgeable attorney.
Mario Rolls is the blog consultant and writer at Dump Trucks. He brings 20 years of experience in various industries including heavy vehicle blogging and dump body manufacturing business. He is working for a company in Mississippi and one of the Nation’s primary manufacturers of dump truck bodies and trailers.