The shelving order of our print items follows a shelfmark classification that has been developed for this library since the 1960s.
Classical RABbinical literature = sources, original and in translation (Mishnah, Talmud, Tosefta, Midrash).
Secondary literature to the sources in RABI.
„MINhag“. Practical halakhah. Ritual, custom, annual and life cycle; liturgical and prayer texts; liturgical music.
History and literature from the Jewish Middle Ages in the Islamic and Christian worlds; philosophy, poetry, and commentary; Genizah literature; inquisition and the expulsion of the Jews from the Iberian peninsula; hekhalot literature and Haside Ashkenaz; the crusades.
Reference Library. Dictionaries, encyclopedias, concordances, bibliographies.
Regional Studies („LAndesKunde“). History and Society of Palestine after the Muslim conquest; Zionism; History and Society of the yishuv and of the State of Israel; geography, travel guides; Modern Middle East.
Language ("SPRache"). Semitic studies (Hebrew, Aramaic); grammars and language textbooks.
Modernity. ("NEUZeit"). Modern history, communities, and societies of the Jewish Diaspora.
"JIDdisch". Literary editions in original and in translation. Yiddish linguistics, dictionaries, literary studies.
LADino. Literary editions in original and in translation. Ladino linguistics, dictionaries, literary studies.
ANTiquity. Ancient history of the people of Israel and the Near East; archaeology.
SCRIpta. Ancient epigraphics, numismatics, papyrology.
Modern Hebrew literature. Original and translated editions. ModernJewish literature in Hebrew (and other languages).
RELigion and PHilosophy. Modern Jewish philosophy; haskalah; mysticism (Zohar und Kabbalah) and Hasidism; modern religious currents (Reform, Orthodoxy...); sects and fringe groups; Jewish identity, external perceptions and stereotypes; gender and sexual orientation in relation to Jewish tradition.
AUStriaca. Intellectual and political history of the Jews of Austria from the Middle Ages to World War II; Austrian Jewish communities after 1945, remigration, restitution (debate); diplomatic and other relationships between Austria and Israel.
AntiSEMitism. Christian anti-Judaism; modern antisemitism and Shoah; history of exile; "new", left-wing, and Muslim Antisemitism, anti-Zionism.
The arts (= „KUnst") and material culture. Jewish arts; Jewish museums; architecture; film; illumination and codicology; music and literature; Jewish artists.
The Hebrew BIBle. Targum and other Jewish translations of the Bible; commentaries; biblical history and narrative.
New Testament. Early christianity in relation to Judaism; church fathers and Judaism; Jewish-Christian dialogue.
Hellenistic-Jewish literature and culture; Flavius Josephus and Philo of Alexandria.
APokrypha and pseudepigrapha of the Hebrew Bible.
Qumran. The Dead Sea Scrolls - source editions, original and in translation, analysis.