Mythology is all the rage right now.
Well, at least at my house.
My kids are really into mythical creatures – the more deadly the better. Although, they rather enjoy the cute illustrations over the gruesome ones.
We’ve been loving the book Miss Turie’s Magic Creatures. I thought it was the perfect theme for a new Roll a Silly Sentence!
The silly sentences have been a hit here. They love throwing the dice and making their own sentences!
And this time I even included some matching writing paper!
Get it now or scroll down to read more!
Don’t miss the book!
I think my favorite tidbit is that the Nessie enjoys playing hide and seek.
The book is cute and clever and perfect for any library.
How to Set Up the Roll a Mythical Creature Sentence
This set comes with two sizes of dice. The first size fits into Education Cubes, which are great for all kinds of dice games.
The second kind you cut, fold, and tape (or glue) yourself.
If you are using the education cube size, simply cut out the individual squares and slide them into the cubes.
For the dice you contruct yourself –
Cut out all of the dice
Fold on the edges
Tape the sides together
for a more thorough explanation, I have a ‘how to make dice‘ tutorial.
If you plan to use this set with multiple kids or want to use it many times, I suggest using cardstock for the dice. The mat can also be laminated to withstand more use.
How to Use the Roll a Silly Mythical Creature Sentence
Roll a Silly Sentence is an activity I loving having out for my kids but not one that I specifically schedule into our day.
They enjoy playing with the dice, throwing them around, and finding what sentence they ended up with.
Sometimes they want to write it down or illustrate it and sometimes they don’t. I hope by letting them just play with the set that they will not get tired.
At the very least it’s reading practice!
We start by throwing all three dice (the higher the better) and then matching the dice color to the mat.
The sentences probably won’t make sense out of order.
Green – A magical creature
Yellow – Something they could be doing
Orange – Where they might be doing it
You might end up with a sentence like ‘A dragon took a bath on a tall peak’.
If you like the sentence, write it down and draw a picture! You can even add on to the story. Why is the dragon taking a bath? Why is he on a tall peak? What is his name?
If you don’t like the sentence, roll again! There are lots of different combinations!
There is writing paper included in this one. Each page features a different magical creature. Just print and draw the scene around them!
Do You Want More Silly Sentences?
I’ve been making these for years and have a bunch of themes up now. So if you enjoy this set, don’t miss the many others!