While reading e-mail or browsing the Internet you should always remember about scammers which want to steal your personal information or money, and, as a rule both of it. Such fraud scheme called "phishing".
Phishing is a kind of computer fraud, the main purpose of it, is to fraudulently force the victim to provide the necessary information to swindler. This computer crime is punishable by law.
Today, phishing is one of the most common forms of cybercrime in the world, used for theft of accounts and banking information.
The main danger of phishing is that it can hit every bait - as a computer novice as well as experienced user with years of experience on the Internet.
Fisher is a connoisseur of different strings of the soul of Internet user. Inventing new ways of fraud, he as an experienced psychologist uses in its criminal purposes, our predictable reaction to a variety of information. Here are some types of lures that are used in this criminal "fishing".
Popular phishing scheme
1. The scammer creates a site like two drops of water similar to the official web resource, such as a bank, mail service, or a social network, and with almost the same location, with the only difference being that the fake site is prepared to attack the visitor (e.g., infected).
2. Then link to this forgery under the guise of an official letter with the offer, for example, to receive a prize or to read an important message sent by e-mail to as many potential victims.
3. Next, using a variety of tricks scammer tries to get the victim visited an infected site, install on your computer any program, open a file, personally issued passwords to the accounts of social networks, bank account numbers, PIN-codes and much more.
4. Go to a malicious website received the letter link unsuspecting victim enters their login information into the system.
5. The input data are sent to the phisher, and trick the user is redirected to this page already organization, not even suspecting something was wrong.
How to recognize a phishing attack?
New fraud schemes appear almost every day. You can independently learn to recognize scams, get to know them by some distinctive features.
Phishing messages can contain:
What to do if you suspect that you are a victim of phishing
If you suspect that you have responded to a phishing message, specified on personal or financial data, follow these steps to minimize possible damage.
In preparation of this article, KZ-CERT used open source information.