(Last Updated on : 16/01/2013)
Damoh District is an administrative district of Madhya Pradesh
is the district headquarters. This district is located at 23 degree 9 minutes north latitude and 79 degree 3 minutes east longitude. Total area occupied by Damoh District is 7,306 sq kilometres. In Damoh District, there are 1229 villages.
History of Damoh District
In Damoh district, the Stone Age tools are found in Singrampur Valley. These are the testimony to the fact that Damoh District was the cradle of human civilization and habitat since millions of years. History also shows that it was part of Gupta Empire
. Damoh District was also a part of Chedi Empire ruled by the kings of Kalachuris from capital Tripuri. The magnificent temple at Nohta is a living example of the glory of Kalachuris in the region. Historical evidences also prove that some regions of the district were under the rulers of Chandella dynasty
of the Jejak -Bhukti. In medieval times (8th to 18th century), the Muslim rulers also invaded the region. Later on, the Sultan of Malwa annexed the region in to his fold. In the last quarter of the 15th century, Sangram Shah of the Gond dynasty annexed the region into its dynamic and mighty empire consisting of 52 forts. It was the era of peace and prosperity for the region. Bundelas also entered into the region for a brief span after which the Maratha Empire
took over the reigns in 1732 ruled up till the British East India Government
annexed the Marathas kingdom after the death of Peshwa in 1888. Further, in the freedom struggle of the country, Damoh District had played a major role.
Demography of Damoh District
According to the population Census in 2011, Damoh District had a population of 1,263,703. Out of which the male and female were 660,478 and 603,225 respectively. The population of Damoh District constituted 1.74 percent of total population of Madhya Pradesh.
Education of Damoh District
The average literacy rate of Damoh was 70.92 percent. The male and female literacy rate was 80.96 and 59.90 respectively. The total literates in Damoh District were 763,448.
Damoh District has proper education facilities. There are around 1424 Government Primary Schools, 520 Government Middle Schools and 44 Government High Schools. There are nearly 32 Government Higher Secondary Schools in Damoh District. Further, there are several, government degree colleges in the region.
Tourism in Damoh District
Damoh District has several offerings for the tourists. Jatashankar Temple, Fort of Singaurgarh, Nohleshwar Temple at Nohta, Nazara, Nidan Kund and Sad-Bhawna Shikhar are some of the popular tourist attractions. All these sites make Damoh District a popular tourist destination. People from distant places come and to explore the beautiful age-old temples in Damoh