There are many kinds of animals that live in the rainforest. The classification of these animals is little tricky because one cannot define the animals that have not seen yet but they do exist. Thousands of new species of insects get produced on each day. Even scientists are confused with the actual number of kinds of animals that live in the rainforest. Animals living into the rainforest can be sorted on the basis of their color, food, living habits, and nature. One can also classify these animals on the basis of their vocal. Thus, there can be indefinite kinds of animals that live in the rainforest. As the time passed, many animals got scarce whereas some animals are still ruling the rainforest by means of their existence.
Rainforests are decreasing day by day because of increase in the metropolitan cities. This could also be the cause behind decreasing population of rainforest animals. Now, let’s take a look on kinds of animals that live in the rainforest and are still surviving in the nature.
Before moving to the kinds of animals that live in the rainforest it is necessary to note that several species live into the rainforest including arachnids, pests, insects, worms, mammals, birds, and many more that are unknown.
Kinds of animals that live in the rainforest are:
1) Amphibious animals like frog, tortoise or turtle etc.
2) Aquatic animals like fishes, crocodiles, water snakes etc.
3) Terrestrial animals like tigers, lions, giraffes, zebras, monkeys etc.
All these animals exhibit different living habits. Some of them live in the group whereas some animals believe on living solitary. The list of the animals could be endless.
Followings are some of the kinds of animals that live in the rainforest that are explained in detail.
a) Amphibious animals:
These animals live into the water as well as on the land. These animals have got special respiratory system that allows them to breathe inside the water as well. These animals can be slow-moving or fast.
Tortoise is one best and well-known example of the amphibious animals.
Frog, water snakes are some additional examples.
b) Aquatic animals:
Rainforest include land as well as waterways inside. Thus, animals living into the oceans produced inside rainforest should also be included into the kinds of animals that live in the rainforest. Aquatic animals are well-known because they live into the water. These animals cannot breathe on the land.
Fishes and their types, crocodiles etc.
c) Terrestrial animals:
Rainforest consists of large numbers of terrestrial animals. Terrestrial animals are regarded as those who live on the land. These animals cannot breathe inside the water. These animals could be carnivores and create danger to the humankind. Apart from carnivores there are some animals that feed only on the tree leafs.
Lion, tiger, giraffe, zebra, monkey etc.
These are some of the kinds of animals that live in the rainforest. Apart from these, there are numerous other kinds that include butterflies and their types, worms, insects, and many others.