War Memorial BackgroundHome / Plumtree History / The War Memorial / War Memorial Background
The War Memorial is made from granite in the form of a Celtic cross surmounting a rhomboid plinth which has a three-stepped base. The West face has a sword in bas relief.
The planning, financing and unveiling of the War Memorial was documented in successive issues of the South Bingham and District Deanery Magazine.
The War Memorial was first dedicated, to the memory of the men who died in the First World War, at a service held on Sunday 9th January 1921.
It was re-dedicated, to the memory of the men who died in the Second World War, at a service on Sunday 29th September 1946.
On Sunday 29th July 2014, Revd Trevor Kirkman re-dedicated the War Memorial, following its refurbishment and the addition of a missing name, George Taylor, during a service to commemorate 100 years since the outbreak of the First World War.
The planning, finance and eventual unveiling and dedication of the Plumtree War Memorial was documented in The South Bingham and District Deanery Magazine. The following extracts from the Magazine trace the progress, sometimes erratic, of the venture.
We hope soon to have a meeting of the whole parish to consider the form that our War Memorial shall take – a memorial to those who have fallen and a welcome to those who will return. We must try and make it worthy of the occasion.
On Tuesday, January 14, a meeting will be held in the School to talk over what sort of memorial we shall have in our parish. It is so easy to forget. Let us then have something that will stand as a lasting memorial of those who have made such sacrifices in the war, and perhaps something to brighten the village life of our people and make Plumtree still dearer to the men who come back.
Unfortunately the day chosen to talk over a War Memorial was very wet, and only about 25 came to the meeting. A Parish Hall was proposed, but the Rector announced that Mrs. Burnside intends building one as soon as things have settled in memory of her husband – a gift that we shall all most thoroughly appreciate. It was then suggested that we should have a Memorial in the Churchyard near the entrance, with the names of the men upon it, and that every effort should be made to make it worthy of the subject. This was generally agreed upon, and a small committee was appointed to obtain designs and probable cost, for a further meeting to be called as soon as the information is to hand. It will be for this later meeting to finally decide whether the Memorial shall take this form or some other.
A meeting to try and arrange for the War Memorial will be held in the School on Friday, May [sic] 30th.
On Armistice Day, Nov. 11th, there will be a meeting of subscribers to the War Memorial. It is high time we were getting on with this or the Anniversary of Peace will find us lacking.
We have now almost completed the collection of money for the War Memorial, and very nearly £250 has been given for the purpose. As soon as the Committee have definite designs ready they will be placed before a meeting of subscribers to the fund.
We wish we could make a better report on the War Memorial Cross. The foundation is ready, but, owing to strikes in the Cornish quarries, the stone has not yet, we believe, been delivered to the stonemasons’ yard. He assures us that there will be no delay when once he receives the stone.
The New Year finds us very busy preparing for the dedication of our War Memorial. We expect the service will take place on Sunday morning, January 9. The Archdeacon of Nottingham is coming to preach and dedicate the Cross, and Major T. P. Barber, D.S.O., will unveil it.
At the Service of Dedication we are arranging for the relatives of the fallen to occupy one side of the centre aisle and the Ex-Service men the other. If any of them have not received a notice, the Rector will be glad to know of it. The portion of the Churchyard near the Cross will be reserved for them. Copies of the Form of Service to be used will be provided for the congregation and we are sure many will like to treasure them away.
On Sunday, January 9, our Memorial Cross was unveiled by Major Barber, and dedicated by Archdeacon Conybeare. A great congregation filled the Church, forms and chairs being used in addition to the usual seating.; Nearly 50 ex-service men were present. A solemn service led up to the singing of the hymn, “The Supreme Sacrifice,” the central point. The Archdeacon preached from Rom. xii, 5 “We being many are one body in Christ, and every one members one of another.”
It was God’s Will that the family should live together in love, but selfishness prevented that. Selfishness must be overcome by self-sacrifice: our men had placed self-sacrifice before all. The blood of our men calls not for vengeance, but to make actual what they died to secure – peace on earth Death seems to cut off one from another, to break the unity of the family. Is the membership passing? Christ’s resurrection has changed such fears. The margin is very slight; we are still one body. The nearness of the departed is not imaginary, since our Lord said, “I am with you all the days.”
On February 4, a large number gathered at the Church to pay their last respects to George Taylor, and to show their sympathy with his relatives. Taylor had been a general favourite in the Parish, very regular and painstaking at his work, a really thoughtful man, and he is sadly missed.
A meeting was held to discuss the position of the War Memorial Fund. The treasurer reported that the receipts amounted to £269, the cost of the Cross and fixing £260, printing special service papers et., £13 10s, leaving a debt of £4 10s. It was generally felt that the scheme as first planned ought to be carried out in its entirety. There remains the parchment record of all those who served. This will cost about £20. It was decided that, subject to Mrs. Burnside’s approval, this record should be placed in the Burnside Hall. We should be very glad to receive subscriptions to clear off the remaining £25.
Donations to the War Memorial Fund to enable us to complete our original proposition and place a list of all the men who served in the Burnside Hall, will be gratefully acknowledged by the Treasurer, Mr. Ogden. Miss Leman has very kindly sent £3. We need about £25
We have arranged to have the Memorial Service for those who fell in the war on the Sunday following All Saints’ Day, November 6. It is only fit and proper that at least one Sunday in the year we should remember them as a Parish. The offertory on that day will be given to the War Memorial Fund.
We are glad to publish the Balance Sheet of the War Memorial Fund. It is a good thing we were able to raise the whole amount without concerts or whist drives, and we are very much obliged to Mrs. Hill’s Baby’s Fund for clearing off the balance.
|Memorial Cross, Engraving, etc.||260||2||0|
|Stone Steps and Foundation||10||10||6|
|Printing Service Papers, etc.||12||14||3|
|Offertory, Unveiling Ceremony||8||12||6|
|Offertory, Armistice Sunday, 1921||8||14||3|
|Plumtree District Baby’s Fund||13||18||9|