The War of 1812 Against the States (Amazing Stories)
Waiting on publisher's reprint.
In 1812 the United States invaded Canada. This exciting account of the stalwart defence of Canada and the ultimate victory over the American foes is told through the stories of six men and women involved in the conflict. The war united the young country and helped create a fierce new Canadian patriotism.
July 23, 1812
York Militia Barracks
Fort York, Upper Canada
It seems ages since the Americans declared war and I had to leave you, even though it's been barely four weeks. I hate the militia. We've had to arm and clothe ourselves, the rations are meagre, and we even have to cook for ourselves! I'm desperate for home, but I have to stay. If we refuse to serve, we can be shot as traitors.
Before I left, you asked why the Americans wanted war. Well, I've got some answers for you now. There's this thing called impressment. Apparently, the British ships are stopping American ships at sea and searching them for deserters from the British army. They impress the British deserters into their navy, and they also impress Americans - thousands of them - to help fight Napoleon. I guess I don't blame them for being mad.
The boys here at the barracks say there's another reason. The Americans aim to drive the British off the continent. Some of the politicians down there believe in something called manifest destiny. They think it's the United States' destiny to control the entire continent, including our little part of it!
Whatever the reasons are, and whoever wins, it won't really make much difference to us. What do we care if we answer to a king or a president? The crops will still be harvested, and, God willing, we'll still get married in the spring.
Anyway, the war won't last long. We are so outnumbered the Americans will beat us in no time. Although, I did hear we might have help from the Natives. One of their leaders swore vengeance against the Americans after a battle in a place called Tippecanoe, and he's persuading the tribes to join the British.
I must go now. Tell my father I'll be back to help him with the harvest whether the war is over or not.
I can't wait to see you again.
All my love,
About the Author
Jennifer Crump is a freelance journalist and author whose work has appeared in numerous North American magazines, including Reader's Digest, Canadian Geographic, and Today's Parent. She is also the author of a guidebook on the city of Toronto. When she's not writing, she is reading. History, particularly Canadian history, is a long-time passion. A former resident of the southern part of Upper Canada, Jennifer now lives with her family in the northern part of the province.
Other Items In The Amazing Stories (AS) Series
Request More Information