Organic Dentistry Friendly Foods
Every parent knows that too much candy can cause cavities. But did you know that there are even seemingly healthy snacks that can cause tooth deterioration as well? Or that there are a number of wholesome, Organic Dentistry friendly foods out there that actually strengthen your child’s teeth as well? Hang in there cause we’re going to go through the good, the bad and the downright best foods to that you should be feeding your child for Organic Dentistry friendly health.
Pediatric Dental Deteriorators
We’re not saying you should NEVER feed your children these foods. In fact, some of these are not only delicious, but good for your child’s growing body as well! What makes them detrimental to your child’s oral health is how they work inside their little mouths. Sticky foods such as caramel, taffy, gum, raisins and honey get lodged and stuck between teeth where bacteria build to cause decay. Other foods such as gummy vitamins, carbonated drink, chips and fruit drinks disrupt the natural pH levels in a child’s mouth, which also causes decay. Again, there’s nothing wrong with handing your child a bag of potato chips to munch on and enjoy – just make sure they brush afterwards.
Foods for Oral Health
Raw celery, green beans, peas, cauliflower and other organic greens
Veggies are good for you! And they’re good for your oral health as well. Veggies in their raw form scrape away plaque and bacteria from your child’s teeth as they chew for a holistic dentist visit in your own kitchen. For those picky eaters out there, try making their snacking experience a delightful one with mealtime food art.
Yes, large amounts of calcium are found in many dark, leafy greens and other foods, but nothing comes close to boosting oral health like that of whole dairy milk, cheeses, and yogurts. Starchy carbs, pastas, and potatoes break down into sugar in your child’s mouth. These sugars feed bacteria to produce cavity-forming acid. Milk and dairy, however, help balance those acids out by raising the pH levels in their mouth. The lower the acid level, the lower the risk of tooth decay.
Oranges, limes, strawberries and peppers
There’s more than one type pf bacteria in your child’s mouth. Some of the more serious ones can cause gingivitis which leads to gum disease. Fruits high in Vitamin C kill these bacteria and promote collagen production in the gums. Think colorful produce such as tomatoes, sweet potatoes, berries, and kiwi. One word of warning: make sure to wait 30 minutes before letting your child brush their teeth. These fruits tend to have citric acid which will temporarily weaken the tooth’s enamel which will cause erosion when brushed.