WHAT IS KRAV MAGA?
Krav Maga (pronounced “Krahv Magah” and means “Contact Combat” in Hebrew) is the official self-defense and fighting system of the Israeli Defense Forces. It is recognized as the most efficient self-defense system for real-life situations, emphasizing practical defenses against real attacks. Krav Maga is a very modern and practical style of self-defense. This system has been continually refined and developed in light of actual modern combat and self-defense experiences.
Krav has been featured on such television shows as Human Weapon on the History Channel, Fight Quest on the Discovery Channel, and Fight Science on the National Geographic Channel.
Krav Maga is not a traditional martial art. It was developed in a hostile environment in which combatants could not devote many hours to hand to hand combat training. Therefore, the Krav Maga system was created to bring students to a high level of proficiency in a relatively short period of time. There are no forms (katas) or rules or set combinations as reactions to attacks. Instead, Krav Maga training focuses on teaching simple self-defense techniques that are specifically tailored to reality-based attack situations.
The “art” of Krav Maga is much more of a survival system dealing with personal safety issues. It is considered to be a modern, highly refined, street fighting system, designed to be used against armed and unarmed attackers. Krav Maga addresses a wide variety of aggressive acts, which include punches, kicks, chokes, bearhugs, headlocks, grabs, as well as defenses against multiple attackers and assailants armed with a firearm, edged weapon, or blunt object.
Krav Maga training stresses the ability to react when surprised. Techniques and training methods emphasize the ability to function from a poor state of readiness, and to move from a passive to aggressive state immediately in order to fight back and survive. Training methods teach students to react effectively under stress and to move efficiently from a position of disadvantage to a position of advantage.
In addition to self-defense, Krav Maga teaches hand to hand combat. This is a more advanced and sophisticated phase and shows how to neutralize an opponent quickly and effectively. It embodies elements related to the actual performance of the fight, including tactics, feints, powerful combinations of different attacks, the psychological dimensions of the fight, and learning how to use the environment to your advantage.
Krav Maga includes specialized training methods to not only challenge students physically but to also instill a special mental discipline meant to strengthen the spirit and to develop the ability to deal with violent confrontations under intense stress. Classes will also incorporate the self-defense techniques taught to law enforcement personnel.
Because of Krav Maga’s combat-orientation, there are no competitions or tournaments. Like other arts, Krav Maga issues colored belts to mark higher levels of expertise. Krav Maga is currently used on a day to day basis by the Israeli Defense Forces (IDF) including their Special Forces Units, Israeli Police and Internal Security Branches. In the United States it’s used by members of the NYPD, members of the FBI, members of the US Armed Forces as well as many other elite units around the world.
Currently, Krav Maga is taught to men, women and children (of all ages and abilities) at community centers, schools, and clubs throughout the world. In Israel, the style has become an important part of the educational system and is taught to elementary and high school students along with being taught at one of the world’s leading physical fitness centers, the Wingate Institute.
Krav Maga continues to be defined by actual modern combat and self-defense experiences, but has also been designed to be implemented by civilians.
WHY SHOULD I LEARN KRAV MAGA?
You will learn to defend yourself. You will gain valuable street-smart self-defense skills with each class you attend. Krav Maga teaches you practical, proven techniques against the most common real-life attacks you might face. Even if you are a person of average physical ability, Krav Maga’s simple, effective techniques will take only a few short months of study to help you feel safe and secure in almost any situation.
You will quickly get in the best shape of your life! Need to lose a little weight? You will actually lose body fat while gaining muscle, so you will look and feel better. You will notice the difference in the way your clothes fit and your overall tone from exercises designed to strengthen the muscles used in self-defense situations. You will increase your endurance, stamina, strength, and flexibility. Krav Maga’s training methods create a fantastic fitness workout you’ll love. Your ability to keep an increased heart rate will improve; you will breathe better; you will sleep better; you will even feel an increase in energy all day long. Start at any level of physical fitness and quickly work your way into your best shape ever.
You will significantly reduce your stress. You will quickly overcome the anxiety and fear of high stress situations. Krav Maga has special training drills designed to help you function under stress, shock, and the adrenal rush of a sudden encounter. You will learn to assert yourself as you are encouraged to break through your limits. The internal “toughness” you develop during these drills will help you avoid the need for a physical confrontation altogether. More importantly, the internal “toughness” you develop will help you deal with all of life’s challenges much more effectively. Krav Maga is a real high energy workout and stress reliever.
You will build your confidence. Krav Maga builds upon your own natural reactions, so it’s easy to learn. Your self confidence will soar as you constantly add new techniques to your arsenal. Our students tell us that Krav Maga gives them a positive attitude and makes them feel good about themselves. Our experienced trainers know exactly how to keep you motivated to achieve your self-defense and fitness goals, so you will return home from each class with renewed vigor and enthusiasm.
You will be on the cutting edge of fitness and self-defense. Krav Maga is one of the fastest growing martial arts systems in the world today. Already in use by the FBI, NYPD, and the US Secret Service, Krav Maga is sweeping the nation. Even celebrities are getting into the act. Angelina Jolie, Jennifer Lopez, Jennifer Garner, Lucy Liu, Matt Damon, James Gandolfini, and Cameron Diaz are just a few of the people combining a great workout with practical self-defense training. And since you can mix the days and times you train, you can fit it into your busy schedule.