Today, October 20th, is International Chefs Day. For the second year in a row, Nestlé Canada is celebrating by teaching children about the importance of healthy eating. This year’s theme is Art on a Plate, which encourages kids to eat new and nutritious foods in a creative and fun manner. At the same time, introducing them to the wonders of the culinary profession and teaching them good eating habits they can carry with them for life.
As part of this celebration, a workshop was held for a class of grade 2 and 3 students earlier this week in the Nestlé Learning Lab at The Canada Agriculture and Food Museum, our Healthy Kids Program Partner in Ottawa, Ontario. The workshop was co-led by Registered Dietitian Julia DiCesare, Nestlé Nutrition Specialist, and our very own Canadian Corporate Chef, Adam Cowan, Nestlé Professional.
The purpose of the event was to let kids be a chef for a day, while learning how to make healthy food choices. Julia and Adam led a fun and interactive cooking workshop creating healthy dishes, all built around the theme of ‘Art on a Plate’. During the workshop, the kids participated in identifying, measuring and mixing ingredients together to create and enjoy a delicious smoothie bowl and a Greek yogurt veggie dip. To top it all off the kids personalized their own chef’s hats and discovered why eating a variety of foods is important. Adam also taught the kids about the joy of cooking and simple kitchen safety.
Globally, Nestlé’s Healthy Kids Program and World Chefs partnered to create a toolkit, which includes healthy recipes and activities for kids with the goal of activating similar workshops in 80 countries around the world. Click here for recipe placemat.
Nestlé and World Chef share the same ambition – to raise awareness of healthier lifestyles and healthy cooking among school-aged children. Since 2014 we have been working together to bring nutrition, health and wellness to chefs and the people they serve.
The Nestlé Healthy Kids Global Program is part of our commitment to increase children’s awareness, knowledge and understanding of healthy eating and physical activity and their impact on health. Download the Healthy Kids Quest educational program for fun learning activities.