Continue to understand and assess our GHG emissions while providing low-carbon energy solutions to our customers.
Given the current climate change context, properly accounting for and managing our Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emissions is paramount. In addition to helping communities and organizations across the country reduce their emissions, we’re taking steps to calculate and assess our own. These efforts contribute to our broader goal of accelerating our country towards a low-carbon economy.
To achieve these goals, we:
- Measure our own carbon footprint consistently across our business to enable future emissions reduction actions.
- Advance climate change research in cooperation with industry associations.
Compiling a GHG Emissions Inventory
In 2017, we completed our first Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emissions inventory, which served as a first step in looking to reduce our emissions as well as an opportunity to solidify our leadership position as a responsible renewable energy producer. The results of this assessment provided us with an understanding of our primary emission sources in addition to confirming that our operations are among the lowest emitters in the energy industry.
To better understand the impact of reservoirs on GHG emissions, we collaborated with the International Hydropower Association (IHA) and the Centre for Energy Advancement through Technological Innovation (CEATI) to stay abreast of the latest advancements in GHG emissions research and calculation methodology. Through that collaboration we concluded that given their older vintage, our reservoirs have GHG emissions equivalent to natural lakes, and therefore minimal impact on the environment.
Equivalent to 36,000 vehicles driven annually
Generation equivalent to
Canadian homes powered annually
SCOPE 1 EMISSIONS
Equivalent to 245 vehicles driven annually
SCOPE 2 EMISSIONS
Equivalent to 310 vehicles driven annually
Our ESG Program
For more information on our GHG emissions inventory, please consult our 2018 ESG Report.Consult our 2018 Report