Dust mites count on humidity in the basement to live, dehumidification can get rid of dust mites.
Problems with dust mites and other indoor allergens and pollutants are becoming more prominent with each passing year. In fact, ICS Cleaning Specialist Magazine reports that the prevalence of asthma and asthma-related health problems has increased by an astounding 75% from 1980 to 2001 alone!
When thinking about dust mites, consider these three numbers:
Dust mites spread rapidly, so it's important to seek professional help from your local Basement Systems dealer to prevent the problem from becoming severe. Call today or click below to get started with a free estimate!
According to the American College of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology, 50% of all respiratory illnesses are caused or aggravated by polluted indoor air. The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) statistics show that the levels of many airborne pollutants are 2-5 times higher than the same levels outdoors. The bottom line? The EPA ranks indoor air pollution as one of the top five environmental risks to public health, and dust mite allergies are among the leading causes of these problems.
Dust mites grow and spread at an alarming rate in every household - no matter how clean it is. Dust mites can grow from eggs to adults in a single month, and they begin to reproduce after only ten days, with females laying up to 2-3 eggs each day. They live 30-100 days, with females laying as many as 270 eggs before they die. According to National Wildlife Magazine, the waste they create continuously as they live counts for 80-90% of the allergic component of house dust.
Dust mites spread a wide variety of allergens into the home that will cause many health issues.
American Family Physician states that controlling dust mites is the most important thing you can do in your house to make your asthma and allergies better. Since this is the most common chronic disease among children, the problem is too important to pass by. Allergies generally develop from ages 6-26, with symptoms emerging late if the environment changes from one with few allergens to one with more.
Dust mite feces contains more than 15 potent allergens that sensitize and trigger allergic reactions in predisposed people. Approximately 10% of the general population and 90% of asthmatic patients are sensitive to dust mite feces allergies, and in many cases, asthma and dust mite allergies symptoms could be decreased or eliminated entirely by reducing exposure.
The American Academy of Family Physicians recommends removing carpet that's been laid over concrete and reducing indoor humidity in the home and especially in the basement. All sources agree that if humidity is lowered below 60%, dust mites will no longer be able to absorb moisture from the air and will dehydrate. As they become unable able to thrive, and they will begin to grow dormant and die.
If you want to help kill dust mites and work to eliminate the symptoms of dust mite exposure, you're going to need a reliable basement dehumidifier. If you're looking for a high-quality basement dehumidification system, there's nothing in the industry as effective and efficient as the SaniDry™ basement dehumidifier. Here are seven fantastic reasons to choose the SaniDry™:
An Energy Star rated basement or crawl space dehumidifier can help remove dust mites and make your home healthier
Save money on your home while helping to remove mold and kill dust mites to make your whole home healthier and more comfortable. Call a Basement Systems dealer for a free basement dehumidification estimate today!
To ensure professional installation and superior service we carefully created an international network of over 350 trusted basement contractors.