As we age our body naturally become weaker. Once bone density starts to decrease it makes it more difficult to complete everyday tasks such as keeping the head upright and stable. Weakened muscles and joints makes for a very uncomfortable and painful situation.
Without the correct neck support, changes in vertebrae at the top of the spine cause the head to tip forward, compressing the throat. As a result, swallowing is more difficult, and choking is more likely. The vertebrae then become less dense and the cushions of tissue (disks) between them lose fluid and become thinner, making the spine shorter.
Bones become brittle and less supportive of their activities, resulting in less activity, which in turn results in decreased health. As broken bones occur, less mobilization results in other health hazards. Family & friends must help in assisting these individuals, and must be alert other alternatives ano prevenative techniques. Visit our website to see how the Neck Sofa is providing support for elderly loved ones all over the nation! necksofausa.com
Take care of your body plus prevent and treat common ailments with a healthy diet and natural remedies. Your body can throw you for a loop at any time. You wake up with a sore throat, you encounter grumbling indigestion, or you overdo it at the gym and arrive home with a stiff neck. Wouldn’t it be great to have a live-in doctor/therapist/trainer to tend to your everyday aches and pains? Here are some great tips to help with whatever ails you, the natural way.
Sour throat? Gargle twice daily with a solution of six pressed garlic cloves mixed into a glass of warm water. Follow the regimen for three days. The fresh garlic juice has antimicrobial properties that fight pain-causing bacteria. The warm liquid soothes inflamed tissue. Cough? Indulge in a square or two of dark chocolate. Researchers found that chocolate’s theobromine compound is more effective than codeine at suppressing persistent coughs without the side effects of drowsiness and constipation. Who says chocolate isn’t good for you?
Having trouble sleeping? Before bedtime, eat a handful of cherries, which scientists discovered are jam-packed with melatonin, the same hormone created by your body to regulate sleep patterns. Another great, all natural way to help with sleeping issues is the Neck Sofa. It is designed to help with sleep apnea and other sleep related problems. This revolutionary product is helping people get the rest and support they need all over the world.
Everyone knows pregnancy can be the most wonderful time in a woman’s life. However it can also be the most painful as well. The Neck Sofa can to help ease the pain caused by pregnancy. When pregnant a woman’s body makes a hormone called relaxin that allows ligaments in the pelvic area to relax and the joints to become looser in preparation for the birth process. The same hormone can cause ligaments that support the spine to loosen, leading to instability and pain.
By using the Neck Sofa on a regular basis while pregnant, it will ease the additional stress caused to your neck, back, hips, knees, ankles and feet. Another fantastic way to use the Neck Sofa during your pregnancy is to help you get a better sleep, as it provides support to your head and neck allowing you to get the rest you need. The less stress on a woman’s body means less stress on the baby. The Neck Sofa makes the perfect baby shower gift. So give yourself or someone you love the gift of health during this amazing time. Not to mention all the great uses for it after the baby arrives as well!
With Neck Sofa’s 12 positions, it offers incredible Versatility and Comfort… Use it as you need it.
If you work in a stressful setting, or in a job where you must sit in a constant position, you most likely have had to deal with neck pain. Sometimes neck pain is subtle, but many times it sneaks in and slowly becomes more and more painful and uncomfortable. Continue reading →
Neck Sofa is the First Neck Pillow / Device of its kind with an Inner Bone Structure for Support
The Neck Sofa Pillow is the first of its kind. With its Inner Bone Structure for support it is the ultimate in technological advanced neck support, and has already helped hundreds overcome neck pain. The Neck Sofa was designed to help alleviate pain in the neck while restoring the normal curvature of the neck and spine. This curvature is often affected by everyday activities, such as work, sleep, sex, or cleaning, that put you in odd positions for an extended amount of time, or repeatedly for an amount of time. Other times one’s neck alignment may become altered is during long road trips, or flights, where the neck is put in a constant position, usually being somewhat jolted by the ride itself. Continue reading →
We all love our holidays. There’s nothing like seeing and reconnecting with family members we haven’t seen in quite some time, and with Thanksgiving, Christmas, and the rest of the holidays coming up, it is sure to mean that we will all be traveling. Traveling can be fun, but it can also be a royal pain in the neck. Literally. Continue reading →
Everyone loves a great massage, whether it is by a professional masseuse, or by a friend or loved one and/or a massage pillow. Some massage pillows are padded and include a vibrating or rolling element. These can be nice, as they don’t require a second person, but they often times only message in one way, and they can severely irritate the skin. Continue reading →