Can you change your accent?
Can you learn a language? If you can learn a language, you can refine those language skills even further.
Remember the beginning stages of learning a new language, and how hard it was to make unusual sounds? Refining pronunciation follows the same process you’ve already been through to master the sounds you have now.
Why do we have an accent when we speak another language?
Each language has a set of linguistic habits. When we learn another language, this information passes through the filter of language habits we are accustomed to using. One example in Spanish is the single ‘r’ and the rolled ‘rr’ sound. Many English speakers have trouble rolling the r sound, as it is not part of the language. But in Spanish, the difference between having that sound, is the difference between pero- (but) and perro- (dog).
Although there is room for misunderstanding, the important thing to remember is to focus on an adequate level of communication.
When we get to business communication and positions of leadership, it can help to get a linguistic ‘tune up.’ Especially if the work requires presentations to groups.
How do we work on clarifying accent?
- Working on a few key words or phrases. Each language group has similar difficulties around pronouncing certain words and sounds in English.
- Understanding how the words are being formed in your mouth. You can investigate this for yourself on youtube, or work with a coach on how you are forming your sounds.
- Get feedback and practise. If you have the right information, and you practise, it is inevitable that you will improve.
The good news on accents
In our international age, a lot of people speak more than one language. So long as we can communicate clearly, we can easily engage an audience.
There’s some interesting information in the book, Compelling People that some accents are perceived as warmer or stronger than others. The examples used are the perceived strength of Arnold Schwarzenegger’s ‘I’m back.’ If you imagine his Terminator character with a more melodic or rounded vowel accent, say French, or Italian, it might sound quite different.
The main point to consider when we’re speaking a second language:
Are we being understood?
In all of our communication we want to make it easy for our audience.
Easy to listen, easy to be engaged, easy to respond.
If you’re getting feedback that some of your words are difficult to understand, with a little feedback, it’s easy to improve.