Lack of drinking water can lead to severe dehydration which if not resolved quickly will result in death. Knowing how to survive a water shortage is essential in keeping you and your family alive. Whether it is a shortage caused by a pipe block or a more severe one occurring during a disaster, preparation is the key. In addition to having emergency water stored somewhere in the house, there are various other places you can get water from within the house.
1. Do not panic, stay calm and think
Suppress any panic that attempts to overcome you. Panicking will not help you in any way and may even prevent you from thinking straight. Instead, stay positive and remain calm and think of places where you can get water from. If you have other family members, it is important to encourage them to remain calm too.
2. Store water beforehand
You should always have emergency water storage in the house all the time. The water stored should be enough for your family for at least three days. Large plastic or fiberglass containers are ideal for storing water for long periods of time. In severe situations, the water you store does not have to be clean. As long as you put a label that says it’s not for drinking, you can use it for many other purposes. You can even use used bottles to store emergency water for uses such as the toilet.
3. Cut down on water usage
This is an obvious point. With a crisis at hand, look for areas where you can cut down on the amount of water used. Normally, people waste a lot of water while carrying out daily activities. For instance, you do not have to bathe with five gallons of water. You can also attempt hand washing which uses less water as compared to a washing machine. In emergency situations, do not do any laundry; reserve all the water for drinking. Even for the toilet, you may want to limit the number of times you flush it.
4. Water sources within the house:
When water runs out the first thing is to go round the house collecting any water left in containers. Even that half a cup that remained when you were making coffee can be used to brush teeth. Other places to check for water include:
•Ice cubes. Remove all the ice cubes from the freezer and put them in a bowl. Leave them for some time to melt.
•The hot water tank. To ensure that this water remains safe, close the valve that leads into the house from the water main.
•Pipe water remnants. If the water line into your house has been closed, there is still some water in your house pipes. Simply go to the lowest faucet on the house and open it. The water will drain from the pipes by gravity.
•Water from the flush but not the bowl. If the water has been chemically treated, do not use it. Purify the water before using it with either water purification tablets or diluted chlorine bleach.
Do not use water from radiators, waterbeds or the swimming pool. This water is toxic and can cause harm to your body.
Knowing how to survive a water shortage can make the difference between life and death during a water shortage emergency.Continue reading >