Osteoporosis is a condition where bone density is lost courtesy of depleting calcium supplies and the odds have fractured bones are gained. New research has indicated that woman can stave off the condition and the possible dental health side effects of tooth loss by drinking 8 to 16 ounces of beer a day, depending the stage of a woman's menopausal cycle.
Osteoporosis is a condition that can impact a person's entire bone structure and the jawbone is no exception to the rule. The mandible is where teeth are supposed to be firmly anchored, however individuals suffering from osteoporosis can experience dental problems (including but not limited to dental abscesses, tooth loss and gum disease). Research released by Cambridge University has indicated that women that consume small amounts of beer on a daily basis may be able to naturally increase bone density and gain a bit of protection against the disease.
In the past, the mysteries surrounding dental health were plentiful, however years of scientific discovery have proved one thing, too much alcohol can cause slews of dental problems. Drinking liquor (including beer) in excess can quickly destroy oral health and general well-being as consuming too much booze is associated dental problems such as tooth erosion, dry mouth and upping the odds of getting throat or mouth cancer. Despite the problems associated with imbibing too much, when consumed in moderation, some liquor can do a body good.
Professor Jonathan Powell of Cambridge University announced the osteoporosis fighting benefits of beer. His research has found that ethanol, a psychoactive drug, one of the oldest recreational drugs and the compound that gives beer its' kick, prevents bone loss as it is a great source of dietary silicon. That silicon is present in beer as absorbable orthosilicic acid and can encourage new bone growth. It is the structure of beer that can help women "battle the falling oestrogen levels and bone deterioration that accompany the aging process," (http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2011/10/18/beer-women-osteoporosis-study-_n_1018387.html).
According to the research, beer is the best food source for the source because of the silicon absorption rate. Humans need about 8 mcg of dietary silicon daily, the equivalent found in 16 ounces of beer. In order for women to get the best benefits of the food, less processed options like ale (as opposed to lager) are recommended.
Estimates estimates suggest that worldwide 200 million women have osteoporosis, resulting in a bone fracture every three seconds (http://www.iofbonehealth.org/facts-and-statistics.html). Women with osteoporosis have an increased risk of tooth loss, standing at three times greater than those not afflicted with the condition. The risks of developing the bone thinning condition increases in postmenopausal women. Drinking 16 ounces of beer daily may become the new recommendation from dentists and doctors as compared with the current approach of treating the condition with bisphosphonate therapies (which has been known to cause Osteonecrosis or dead bone as a side effect).
It is important to note, that women following any type of therapy prescribed by a doctor should in no way substitute beer for the course of action. However, Powell does suggest that "Pre-menopausal women would benefit from drinking a half-pint a day as a means of absorbing silicon, and post-menopausal women would benefit from a pint of beer a day," (http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2011/10/18/beer-women-osteoporosis-study-_n_1018387.html).
Thankfully those professionally diagnosed with osteoporosis, have an assortment of treatment options available. Some options include prescriptions medicine, diet modifications, exercise, vitamin supplements and general lifestyle modifications. Oral hygiene is also a must for minimizing the risk of any dental problems associated with the condition.
In addition to targeting the osteoporosis, individuals must also follow a strict oral hygiene regimen as laid out by a professional dentist. The process will involve brushing teeth twice a day with a fluoride toothpaste, flossing daily to reduce levels of dental plaque and visiting a dentist at least twice a year, maybe even more based on their professional opinion. The strategy is an approach to preventative dentistry, that can save both money and teeth over time. Osteoporosis patients looking to find a dentist to assist on the task can call 1-800-DENTIST to get connected to a dentist in their area.