Continuous learning at the desired pace is among the top five challenges that executives of growing companies face today. The advent of technology, job types and changing profile of the current workforce has brought a discernible shift to the way in which organizations learn. From a predominantly ILT led training mix, the digital device and media led learning has caught on.
The extent of prevalence, adoption and impact of e-Learning in the Philippines and some of the SE Asian countries while lagging compared to the numbers in the developed markets and other parts of Asia, seems to follow the same trend.
The next 5 years will see a strong increase in e-Learning adoption and make the difference among companies that grow and get left behind.
The Philippines, in particular, offers great potential for various forms of e-Learning to become a learning mode to reckon with given the following changes over the last decade both in technology and mindset:
Our Approach (5D)
We follow our proven yet unique 5D project implementation/delivery methodology as a basic framework for the engagement. Each of the 5Ds represents sub-groupings of activities expected to be undertaken in connection with the engagement, although we emphasize that the activities presented herein are in no way final nor complete and may be revised, as necessary.
Micro-learning breaks down instructional content into brief modules, typically a lesson the learner undertakes in minutes instead of hours.
Studies have shown we remember what we are taught when it’s broken down into easily absorbed bits. That’s because human brains retain instruction when it’s doled out in condensed units instead of long, drawn-out sections or when data is piled up in heaps. Micro-learning mimics how we learn best!
Visuals tend to be more interesting and engaging when compared to text. Video-based learning helps learners retain and maintain interest for longer periods of time. Breaking down logical and complex topics into video narrative gives the learners clear concept clarity, as everything can be visualized and explained in detail.
Branching simulations help challenge a set of skills and knowledge acquired or already possessed by the learner. One decision leads to a different story and determines how a scene evolves and what options remain open to the learner.
Branching simulations promote critical thinking and make e-learning more efficient. As the story unfolds, the learners are presented with more and more options and choices and can put their knowledge into practice
Influence of technology upon children and education has been immense. Making use of mobile applications to deliver eLearning results in enhanced interaction. App-based learning also helps in individually focused learning and monitor the progress of individual learners.
Gamification can be defined as the concept of applying game-design thinking to the art of teaching. It enhances learner engagement, activates the rewards system in the brain, which helps speed up the learning and allows learners to retain and recall information better.