Canna lilies are simple to grow from seed, but if you don't pre-treat the seeds, you will be waiting a long time to see a seedling. Cannas (Canna spp.) are fleshy, tropical looking plants with broad leaves and brightly colored flowers. Height varies between species and ranges from 1 1/2 to 8 feet. Cannas are hardy in U.S. Department of Agriculture plant hardiness zones 6 through 10.
Canna seeds are round and have a hard, black outer coating. Before germination can occur, the seed coat has to be broken to allow water to penetrate. The best way to treat canna seeds is by damaging the seed coat and then soaking it in water for 24 hours. Use a knife to notch the seed coat. Dig just deep enough to expose the white part of the seed under the black seed coat. Use room temperature water to soak canna seeds.
The best seed starting mediums are porous and sterile while offering sufficient support to the developing seedling. Vermiculite works well, or try a mixture of half perlite and half sand or peat moss. Use a seed flat with drainage holes in the bottom. Plant canna seeds 1/4 inch deep and about 2 inches apart. During germination and early emergence, it is important to keep the potting medium damp with consistent water. To avoid disturbing the developing canna seedlings, mist the soil until it is evenly damp.
Canna seeds germinate well in soil that is between 65 and 70 degrees Fahrenheit. If possible, drop the temperature down to 60 degrees at night. Use a seed heating pad to regulate the soil temperature and provide bottom heat. Look for canna seedlings about seven to 10 days after planting. Once the seedlings grow 6 inches tall, they are ready to transplant into individual pots or plant out in the garden bed.
Cannas take about 100 days to flower after being planted from seed. In frost-prone areas, start seeds indoors in late winter or early spring. Start seeds six to eight weeks before the last frost date to get the most out of your growing season. In frost-free climates, you can plant canna seeds directly into the garden bed in spring as soon as the soil warms up to 60 degrees Fahrenheit. In USDA zones 6 through 9, the above-ground growth dies back with the first winter frost but in zones 10 and warmer, cannas grow year round.
- Medioimages/Photodisc/Photodisc/Getty Images