The Georges River was an important focal point for Aboriginal life and culture iin the southern Sydney region, offering both food, transport and dreamtime links. Several major language groups existed along the river: Eora to the east, Dharag to the west, north and north-east, Dharawal to the South and Gandangarra in the far south-west.
The early 1800s saw European settlers migrating to the areas along the Georges River. Much of the catchment was cleared for farmlands and housing, however the banks stayed relatively untamed due to their rugged slopes.
Development within the catchment has flourished since WWII. Today, the Georges River and surrounds are a highly significant landscape feature of the Sydney region and the Campbelltown environment. It is home to much of the biodiversity that can be found in the region, including an active Koala colony, and provides immense scenic value to the area. The corridor also offers a number of recreational opportunities for local residents.
Click here to download your copy of the Georges River Bushwalking Guide, and follow the links below to discover more about the walks available around the Georges River in Campbelltown.
Georges River Rd, Kentlyn
Freres crossing is a significant heritage site containing the remnants of an old wooden bridge that formed part of a connection between Campbelltown to Newcastle up to 1917. It is one of the most scenic sites along the Georges River in the Campbelltown area. Take a walk and enjoy the serene environment.
Frere's Crossing Walking Trail:
Distance: 2km return walk along established firetrail
Grade: Medium, includes hills. Trail surface is loose and rocky in places. Steep sections.
Suitable for: Bushwalking and experienced mountain bike riders.
Find out more about Frere's Crossing here.
Picnic Grove, Ingleburn
Situated on the Georges River, the reserve contains the historic Ingleburn Weir, which was constructed in the late 1930s to provide a swimming area for the local community. The reserve is home to a number of endangered plant species, as well as a range of native birds, some marsupials, other small mammals and reptiles.
Ingleburn Reserve Walking Trail:
Distance: 400m return walk takes visitors down to the weir.
Grade: Medium. Sandstone steps. Trail surface loose and rocky in places.
Suitable for: Bushwalking and picnics (picnic tables and toilet facilities are located at the reserve).
Find out more about Ingleburn Reserve here.
Keith Longhurst Reserve (The Basin)
Georges River Rd, Kentlyn
The Keith Longhurst Reserve is a 76 hectare bushland reserve with significant scenic and cultural values. The reserve, formerly known as The Basin Reserve, includes a number of walks down to the Georges River. The Dharawal people originally inhabited the area, and there are many sites of cultural significance.
The Basin Walking Track:
Distance: 2km return walk.
Grade: Medium. The end of the track is quite steep and is only recommended for people of
Suitable for: Bushwalking
The Old Ford Road Walking Track:
Distance: 2.6km return walk.
Grade: Easy. An established, sloping track, suitable for a wide variety of fitness levels.
Suitable for: Bushwalking and mountain biking.
Find out more about the Keith Longhurst Reserve here.
Simmo's Beach Reserve
Fifth Ave, Macquarie Fields
Simmo's Beach is located on the Georges River. Its easy access, picnic facilities and beach area make it a popular site for local residents. The features of the reserve such as extensive areas of bushland, proximity to the Georges River and connectivity with the Georges River Regional Open Space, means it provides a range of recreational opportunities.
Simmo's Beach Walking Trails:
Distance: Various tracks ranging from 500m to 1.5km return walks.
Grade: The tracks range from easy (paved, mostly flat) through to hard
(narrow, sloping, unsealed).
Suitable for: Bushwalking and picnics (picnic tables, BBQ and toilet facilities are located
at the reserve).
Find out more about Simmo's Beach Reserve here.
The Georges River
Georges River Nature Reserve, Georges River Rd,
Ph: (02) 4645 4921
Weather forecast provided by Bureau of Meteorology