If you are a diabetic that has battled the disease since many years, then you should definitely be aware of getting saddled with unfortunate complications that may lurk inside your body. These complications appear in the form of diabetic neuropathies and they can affect your vital organs. One such form is diabetic peripheral neuropathy dpn, which needs treatment at a very early stage in order to save the affected organs.
Dpn or diabetic peripheral neuropathy is among other neuropathies that can strike your body due to poor blood circulation and nerve damage, which is unfortunately caused by diabetes. High blood sugar levels can starve nerves of oxygen and also restrict vital blood supplies to various organs of your body including your heart, lungs, kidneys, eyes, hands, legs, feet, toes and fingers. Smoking and drinking too can hasten the onset of such complications. This can result in Focal, Proximal, Autonomic or Peripheral diabetic neuropathy. Diabetic peripheral neuropathy or dpn is caused when the arms, legs, hands, feet, fingers or toes are affected by poor blood supply and collapsing nerves. You could feel tingling or numbness in your fingers or toes along with cutting or burning pain, which could even reach up to your calf muscle.
If you do feel such a sensation, you should immediately rush to your doctor and confirm your condition by getting an electromyography or emg test done, along with other nerve tests. This will confirm if you do suffer from dpn. Once confirmed, your doctor will immediately put you on anti-depressants and anti-convulsion medicines, in order to reduce the pain and relax your muscles. You could also apply a topical cream on any part which might be causing you pain. If the tests reveal any nerve swelling or nerve compression in any particular part of your limbs, then your doctor might also suggest surgery to alleviate the pain. However, a complete cure might not be possible if the nerves are damaged beyond repair and most doctors suggest treatment only as a means of slowing down the disease.
You could also try out natural alternative medicines such as an antioxidant known as alpha lipoic acid, which has shown encouraging results in European trials. It has been successfully used on humans and most pets except cats. You will also be encouraged to try out physical therapy and occupational therapy or ot to strengthen your limbs and also to learn to take proper care of your vital organs. You will also need to visit your doctor or a hospital for regular checkups to ensure that other organs do not get affected in future. A daily hand and foot care regimen is actually needed from the day that you realize that you have diabetes. This will enable you to locate any problem in its nascent stage and take immediate action to control it. Along with it, a strict control over blood sugar levels, a healthy lifestyle along with adequate exercise should ensure that you remain free from dpn for a very long time.
Hence, to a certain extent, it is in your hands to delay the onset of any diabetic complication and a regular foot care routine along with regular tests should keep you free from any diabetic neuropathies such as diabetic peripheral neuropathy dpn.
An Excellent Healthy Drink for Diabetics!
Did you know that flavored carbonated water has no calories, sugar, body, sweetener, color or preservatives?
The taste is fantastic, extremely refreshing and gives diabetics a great drink without any carbohydrates. A large
and affordable assortment of flavored carbonated water concentrate is available for free delivery world wide from