Gaba Tepe Intended site of the second Allied landing (by Australian and New
Zealand troops) at Gallipoli on 25 April 1915, on the NW coast of
the peninsula opposite Maidos. Possibly because of a navigational
error, they were, in fact, put ashore further north at Ari Burnu.
of central Europe, on the north side of the Carpathians; formerly
part of the Habsburg empire, now in SE Poland and the Ukraine.
Gallipoli Peninsula in NW Turkey between the Dardanelles and the Aegean Sea.
Scene of the disastrous Allied campaign (February 1915-January 1916)
to eliminate Turkey from the First World War.
Gandhi, Mahatma (1869-1948)
Indian political and religious leader, whose civil disobedience
campaigns were a major part of India's struggle for independence
from Britain. Supported Indian participation in the Allied war effort
during the First World War.
East Africa German colony consisting of Tanganyika and
Rwanda-Urundi. Scene of the most protracted conflict between Allied
and German forces in Africa during the First World War, largely
because of the successful guerrilla tactics of the German commander
Paul von Lettow-Vorbeck. After the eventual surrender of his forces
on 25 November 1918, the territory was divided into mandates run
by Britain (Tanganyika) and Belgium (Rwanda-Urundi).
German High Seas Fleet
Name by which the fleet of the German navy was commonly
New Guinea Island in the western Pacific Ocean, north
of Australia. A German colony prior to the First World War, it was
seized by the Allies in 1914 and given as a mandate to Australia
at the Paris peace conference in 1919.
German Samoa Collection of nine islands in the Pacific Ocean. A German colony
prior to the First World War, it was seized by the Allies in 1914
and given as a mandate to New Zealand at the Paris peace conference
South West Africa German colony now known as Namibia. After
an 11-month campaign, the last German forces there surrendered to
South African troops in July 1915. South Africa was awarded the
territory as a mandate at the Paris peace conference in 1919.
Gold Coast British
crown colony in West Africa; now known as Ghana. Defended during
the First World War by the Gold Coast regiment of the West African
in western Galicia. Austro-German forces under Mackensen launched
a successful offensive against the Russian army between Gorlice
and the nearby town of Tarnow on 2 May 1915.
bomber plane, first used in air raids on England in May 1917.
Grand Duke Nicholas
Supreme commander of the Russian army until August 1915, when he was
sacked and replaced by his nephew, Tsar Nicholas II.
Graves, Robert (1895-1985) English poet and novelist. Served on the Western Front
during the First World War, an experience that formed the basis
for his famous autobiographical work Goodbye to All That
Great Powers Term used to describe states with exceptional political, military
and economic power. In early 20th-century Europe, it was usually
applied to Austria-Hungary, Britain, France, Germany, Ottoman Turkey
Grey, Sir Edward (1862-1933) Longest-serving British foreign secretary, a post he
held from December 1905 until December 1916, when the new prime
minister Lloyd George replaced him with the Conservative Arthur
The infantry regiments of the sovereign's bodyguard - consisting
of the Grenadier, Coldstream, Scots, Irish and Welsh Guards.