Sure! Here are five things you can do in Chiang Mai. 

1. Visit the Night Market Bazaar. 
The Chiang Mai night market bazaar is full of stalls and vendors selling just about anything you can think of. From woks to headphones, you can find just about anything in this busy market. You can shop at the many stalls and get gifts for friends and family or try some delicious food on offer as you walk around. The market is located on Tha Phae Road in the Meuang district of Chiang Mai. 

2. Cooking Class. 
Chiang Mai has a litany of incredible food and some incredible restaurants. You can use your time in the city to take a cooking class and learn the skills required to take the taste of Chiang Mai wherever you go. There are many options in Chiang Mai for cooking classes, and most schools will offer hotel pickup and drop-off. Classes can be long. Don't be surprised if you learn up to 7 dishes. 

3. Elephant Nature Park. 
The elephant nature park or elephant sanctuary on the outskirts of Chiang Mai has drawn plenty of praise from visitors for drawing attention to the exploitation of elephants. This sanctuary allows guests to bathe with the elephants. Once you have done your bathing you get the chance to eat yourself before feeding the elephants to round off the day. The address for the elephant sanctuary is Elephant Nature Park Office, Tambon Kuet Chang, Amphoe Mae Taeng, Chang Wat Chiang Mai 50100.

4. Get a massage. 
Anywhere you walk in Chiang Mai or Thailand, for that matter, you will see massage parlors lining the streets. Take the opportunity to indulge in a relaxing hour as a trained professional to ease your aches and pains. For a truly unique experience in Chiang Mai, head to Lila Thai Massage on 37 Rachadamnoen Rd Soi 7. Here the masseuses are also inmates at the local prison, don't worry; these inmates are nearing the end of their sentence and have been professionally trained.

5. Temples. 
With over 300 temples in Chiang Mai, it's a matter of when, not if, you will come across a Wat. Some of these temples are walkable from the main areas. However, some will require a tour or scooter to get to them. When visiting the temples, remember to act respectfully and check the etiquette before visiting. 

Some of the best temples to visit in Chiang Mai are below:
Wat Phra That Doi Suthep
Wat Chedi Luang
Wat Chiang Man
Wat Suan Dok
Wat Chet Yot
Wat Rong Khun
