People of a certain age will remember a time when taking a child to a dentist was not a priority. Most of us used to think that it wasn’t that important to care for their baby teeth because they were just going to fall out to make way for their adult teeth. Well, many parents of that generation were wrong about neglecting their children’s dental health. Studies have shown that children who are not encouraged to take proper care of their teeth will maintain poor oral hygiene habits into adulthood and experience many different types of oral maladies. It’s best to start as early as possible, along with encouraging children to view proper oral hygiene as fun, rather than to be afraid of it.
The key to getting your kids to actively participate in taking care of their teeth is to find a children’s dentist in your area that will teach your little ones that oral hygiene can be fun. Most of us will no longer go to just “any” doctor; we look to our friends, family members, and the Internet for information on which physicians we can rely on to take good care of us. The same holds true for finding a pediatric dentist who will instill in your children how important it is to care for their teeth no matter how young they are.
A pediatric dentist will make sure that your child’s teeth are healthy and maturing properly. He or she will check gum health and make any recommendations about foods to encourage your child to eat or avoid in order to ensure they keep their teeth and gums healthy. A gentle cleaning will be part of every visit, allowing your child to get used to the experience so he or she will not be afraid of it as they get older. A child who fears the dentist will grow into an adult who is reluctant to take care of this or her teeth.
When you find a pediatric dentist in your area, don’t be shy about asking questions about how often your child should visit, and which routines should be established in the home in order to promote healthy habits. Ask about toothbrushes and toothpastes that are geared specifically for children, and how you can take a more active role in helping your kids understand how important it is for them to take care of their teeth. The payoff will be fewer cavities and less stress and aggravation when it comes time for that regular checkup!
Sean Shen is a pediatric dentist who specializes in oral hygiene education for parents of babies and toddlers.