"Beyond disintegration lies dispersion, and Keely can just as easily disperse atoms of matter as disintegrate its molecules, dispersing them into ether. The law of gravity appears in the light of Keely's experiments but one manifestation of a law which provides for the reversion of the process of attraction in the shape of a process of repulsion. Keely, by means of a belt and certain appliances which he wore upon his person moved single-handed, a 500 horsepower vibratory engine from one part of his shop to another, without a scratch on the floor, and astounded engineers declared it could not have been moved without a derrick, to use which would have required the removal of the roof.
"Demonstrating the overcoming of gravity, Keely used an air-ship model weighing about 8 lbs., which, when the differentiated wire of silver and platinum was attached to it, communicating with the sympathetic transmitter, rose, descended, or remained stationery midway, the motion as gentle as that of thistledown floating in the air.
"The experiment illustrating "chord of mass" sympathy was repeated, using a glass chamber, 40 inches in height, filled with water, standing on a slab of glass. Three metal spheres, weighing about 6 ounces each, rested on the glass floor. The chord of mass of these spheres was B flat first octave, E flat second octave and B flat third octave. Upon sounding the note B flat on the sympathetic transmitter, the sphere having that chord of mass rose slowly to the top of the chamber, the positive end of the wire having been attached, which connected the covered jar with the transmitter. The same result followed the sound of the other spheres, all of which descended as gently as they rose, upon changing the positive to the negative. J. M. Wilcox, who was present remarked: "This experiment proves the truth of a fundamental law in scholastic philosophy, that when one body attracts or seeks another body, it is not that the effect is the sum of the effects produced by parts of one body upon parts of another, one aggregate of effects, but the result of the operation of one whole upon another whole."
"We call this the sphere of the natural; but, when we come to higher workings of natural laws, with which we are not familiar, we designate them as "supernatural;" and scientists witnessing some of Keely's experiments, like those of overcoming gravity, of rotation of the needle of a compass,* of the disintegration of water, etc., and not believing in any workings of laws unknown to them, followed in the footsteps, still unobliterated, of the narrow-minded, bigoted persecutors of Galileo; and have denounced Keely as "a modern Cagliostro." [Vibratory Physics - The Connecting Link between Mind and Matter]
369 - Hollingshead "Harnessing the Force of Gravity" using 3, 6 & 9 modes.
Book 02 - Chapter 12 - Gravitation and Radiation
Center of Focalization
Center of Sympathetic Attraction
Center of Sympathetic Coincidence
Figure 13.13 - Gravity Syntropic and Radiative Entropic Waves
Figure 13.18 - Russells Gravity Motor
Figure 15.03 - Opposing Forces of Gravity and Radiation
Figure 15.04 - Gravity Generates Matter about Neutral Centers
Figure 15.05 - Nine Pairs of Gravity Poles
Figure 17.00 - Opposing Forces of Gravitation and Radiation
Figure 17.02 - Gravity divides multiplies and balances Light and Sound
Figure 17.03 - Analysis of the Octave Gravity Bar
Figure 17.04 - Gravity Pressure Recorder - Bar Magnet
Figure 19.15 - Keelys Levitation Experiment
Figure 7.8 - Gravity is the Life Sex and Power Principle
Figure 7.9 - Gravity aggregates Light into States of Matter
Gravity Defined by Russell
gravity - Tesla
HARNESSING THE FORCE OF GRAVITY
Keelys Aerial Navigation
Latent Force and Theory of Vibratory Lift for Airships
law of etheric compensation and restoration
Part 17 - Gravity
pressure condition in motion
Prime Neutral Center
Supreme Neutral Center
sympathetic concordant concentration
Universal Laws Revealed: Keely's Secrets
17.01 - Discovering Cause of Gravity
17.02 - Gravity Defined by Keely
17.04 - Speed of Gravity Propagation
17.06 - Gravity Defined by Cayce
17.07 - Gravity Discussed by Herchel
17.13 - Gravity or Levity
17.16 - Gravity Keely
17.17 - Gravital Sympathy
17.18 - Keelys Gravity Experiments
17.19 - Gravity Keely
17.20 - Acoustic Levitation
"The vibrations induced by this experiment reached over 700,000,000 per second, unshipping the apparatus, thus making it insecure for a repetition of the experiments. The decarbonized steel compressors of said apparatus moved as if composed of putty. Volume of sphere 15 cubic inches, weight of surrounding metal, 316 lbs."
"Gravity is not subject to time or space. It pervades the Universe without reference to time or space, instantaneously and without intermission. It is, however, a sympathetic flow, proceeding from the molecular or mass neutral centers to the earth's neutral center with a power corresponding to the character of each individual molecular mass." He believed gravity dependent on the medium of the polar stream, for he says "If the sympathetic negative polar stream were cut off from the earth the molecular neutral centers would float away into space like a swarm of bees."
"Under my system the gravital flow comes under the order of the "sympathetic concordant of the 9ths" and is that third of the triune combination called the "polar propulsive." Gravity is polar propulsion while magnetism is polar attraction. Both magnetism and gravity can be accelerated by proper vibrations."
"He believed gravity to be the result of a law which provides for a reversion of attraction in repulsion, and which acts by transmission of force under immense Etheric vibration through the "interetheric subdivision." He also showed that gravitation acts "as a lever." MacVicar states "Every individualized object assimilates itself to itself in successive moments of its existence and all objects tend to assimilate one another." Keely says "Gravity is an ever existing eternal force, coexistent with the compound Etheric or high luminous (seventh subdivision) since it entered into, and is an inherent property of, all forms of aggregated matter from their birth. It is the source from which all matter originated and each substance -unit or neutral center is a concordant link, attractive (syntropic) and dispersive (entropic), to all other neutral centers. Each neutral center is the nucleus of what we recognize as substance and is potentially the nucleus of a planet."
"The sympathetic concordants (planetary vibrations) established by the Infinite One from the birth of the planetary neutral centers, are simply the operation of the laws of gravity. The inaudible atomic, Etheric and interetheric vibrations, which control and direct the movements of the Universe, must of necessity from the magnitude of their result, be the most powerful of all sounds." These vibrations collectively constitute the "Music of the Spheres" discovered by Pythagoras of old and so long considered merely a poetic fancy. This is now proved experimentally in Keely's workshop to be an actual fact.
"He calls all planetary masses "terrestrial" and says the "celestial concordant sympathetic vibrations between the spheres govern their motions in their orbits, that at their maximum distance the attractive forces (syntropy) assume supremacy, bringing them toward each other, and at the minimum distance, the repulsive forces (entropy) assume control causing them to again recede from each other.
"Molecular terrestrial masses, composed of the "ultimate ether" bound latent in substance, are sympathetically drawn to the earth's neutral center according to the density of their molecular aggregation, from which must be deducted their celestial sympathetic outreach. In other words, molecular weight consists in the difference between these forces. Either one can be intensified by polar or antipolar vibrations, giving either one predominance. If the celestial (repulsive) predominates, the mass will rise, its velocity proportionate to the concentration of the dominant or the "negative thirds of its mass chords" inducing high neutral radiation together with "celestial attraction." The "terrestrial propulsive" and "celestial attractive" cause ascension and the "celestial propulsive" and "terrestrial attractive" cause descension or increased weight." The Snell Manuscript