Meditation A Tool For Better Physical Health
What do you think of when you consider all the things you can do to improve your physical health? Sure, proper diet and regular exercise are probably at the top of the list (as they should be), but there is one more thing you can and should be doing on a regular basis in order to really live your healthiest life. The simple habit of meditation may have an enormously powerful and positive impact on a person's overall health and wellness to the point they may need to see their primary healthcare provider less often, as I learned after coming across an article by Care 2.
In trying to understand why meditation works, it's necessary to learn about the ways in which it affects the body. Meditation primarily relies on deep breathing and mindfulness techniques, and a session of personal meditation can last anywhere from five minutes to ... well, however long you want it to last. The relaxation and grounding techniques utilized during meditation tend to provide the greatest benefits to cardiovascular health, musculoskeletal health, neurolgical well-being, and gastrointestinal issues.
What does that mean in terms of your health. Studies have shown that people who meditate regularly experienced reduced blood pressure, which in turn improves heart health. When the heart isn't struggling to pump blood, it is not as strained, and is therefore in a healthier state.
As for the benefits to your musculoskeletal health, people who deal with chronic pain in the muscles or joints can turn to meditation for lasting pain relief. This is because meditation can reduce inflammation, which places unnecessary pressure on the joints and soft tissues in the body.
Many people also find digestive issues they may be experiencing prior to taking up regular meditation seemed to go away, or drastically improve, in the days following their decision to meditate. This is partly due to the reduction of inflammation in the body, but it is also due to its stress-relieving capabilities. Gut health and mental health are actually closely tied together, which is why you may notice an increase in stomach issues during times of stress. As stress leaves the body, the digestive tract is less tense and more able to function properly. In this way, meditation is not only good for your physical health, but your mental health as well.