Rubber mulch is made from recycled rubber products, such as old tires, which prevents these potentially harmful materials from going to landfills. Rubber mulch is also useful on playgrounds, preventing bumps and bruises, while adding aesthetic appeal. Rubber mulch does have some problems, which you should consider before you use it.
Although rubber mulch is touted as being a permanent mulch, it does not last forever. As with other organic materials, rubber mulches are slowly broken down by environmental elements, such as sunlight, fungi and bacteria. Although some of the additives used in tire manufacturing are toxic to some of the organisms that degrade rubber, some fungi detoxify these additives.
Rubber mulch may contain plasticizers, accelerators, minerals and organic contaminants that may be hazardous to the environment and human health. While these contaminants, which include aluminum, chromium, copper, selenium, sulfur and zinc, typically exist at low levels, they leach into the soil and nearby water as the rubber breaks down. In addition to minerals, rubber products exposed to contaminants, like lead or other metals, will absorb these materials and release them as they break down. Zinc can be a major problem because it can cause toxicity in the soil. In acidic soils, zinc toxicity can kill your plants because metals like zinc are more available for plant uptake in acidic soils. Some of these materials break down fast but others, such as 2-mercaptobenzothiazole, a common accelerator used in rubber vulcanization, are known to remain in the environment.
Rubber mulch may contain petroleum products, which makes it highly flammable. When ignited, rubber can be extremely difficult to extinguish. According to Washington State University Extension, when compared to other types of mulch, rubber is more likely to ignite, and it should not be used where the possibility of natural or manmade fires is significant.
Soil and Plant Effects
Rubber mulch adds no nutrient to the soil, and it can prevent air, nutrients and water from reaching plant roots. In addition to this, it also encourage shallow rooting, which may be a problem for some plants. Vegetables and ornamentals mulched with rubber can accumulate zinc and other heavy metals over time, because they’re more available than other materials for plant uptake. These can affect plant health and in some cases cause plant death.
Rubber mulch manufacturers differ in the sources of rubber used in mulch. Some use steel-belted radial tires, and the magnets used to remove the steel don’t always get every piece out of the rubber. These wires will rust away in about six months, but in the meantime, handling the mulch without gloves can result in scratches from the metal. Rubber also tends to retain heat, which can be a problem if the mulch is used in areas where people may walk over it in bare feet, and it produces an unpleasant odor when it gets hot.
- George Doyle/Stockbyte/Getty Images