TUESDAY, September 24, 2013 — Women tend to develop cardiovascular diseases, such as heart disease, approximately ten years after the average man, a phenomenon called the female advantage. A new study suggests that younger women, who have not yet experienced menopause, can handle insulin resistance better than men, leading to new questions about how estrogen impacts insulin resistance.
Researchers from Stanford University School of Medicine studied 468 women and 354 men to identify cardiovascular disease risk factors, including high blood pressure, fats levels, triglycerides, and fasting blood sugar. The men and women tested all had some degree of insulin resistance, a condition in which the body does not process insulin properly, which puts the carrier at higher risk for both cardiovascular disease and diabetes.
The researchers realized that when considering the whole group, there were no remarkable differences between the men and the women, but that when they divided the group by both gender and age, interesting patterns emerged. Younger women (those under 51), had lower blood pressure, lower triglyceride levels, and lower fasting blood sugar rates when compared to men in the same age group, even when they had the same level of insulin resistance. Even though women experienced insulin resistance, their bodies were better able to handle it and thus suffered fewer consequences.
However, women aged 51 and over didn’t seem to have this same benefit — their risk of cardiovascular disease was similar to men’s. While the researchers didn’t include whether or not women had gone through menopause, 51 is the median age for menopause. This may suggest that women’s reproductive hormones serve as a natural protection against cardiovascular risk, according to study author Sun H. Kim, MD, MS of Stanford.
“When a woman enters reproductive age — with menstrual cycles and hormones — this is when the division is most prominent,” Dr. Kim said. The division, as her research pointed out, ends when women enter menopause.
This suggests that some element of reproduction is protective, Kim said. Research has already shown that external hormones aren’t enough to solve the problem. “We need to figure out what it is about natural cycles we can’t mimic with hormones,” Kim said.
The results of this study are in line with what’s been previously thought, said Deborah Kwon, MD, a cardiologist at the Cleveland Clinic. “I wasn’t that surprised with the findings of the study — these are things that we know about younger women anyway,” Dr. Kwon said.
In addition to the possible explanation for the “female advantage,” Kwon found a couple of other important takeaways from the study. One is that once women hit menopause, their risk becomes equal to men’s risk of cardiovascular disease. The other is that for younger men, the data showed that if they are less overweight, their risk factors go significantly down for cardiovascular disease, so this is a prime population to target for weight loss.
Kwon also pointed out that the study was done on a primarily white population. Another large unknown factor in insulin resistance is why it affects minority populations more dramatically, particularly those of Hispanic descent, so she suggested that future studies should draw on more diverse participants.
The best thing anyone can do is to try to decrease their insulin resistance by maintaining healthy weight, exercising regularly and eating well, Kim said.