Seventy five years after Japanese Prisoners of War (POW) in Australia staged the biggest breakout of World War II, Cowra farmer Harold Treasure can recall the gunfire and that marked the start of the escape bid.
In the early hours of August 5, 1944, more than one thousand Japanese prisoners held at the Cowra POW camp in Central NSW charged the barbed wire fences, in what became known as the 'Cowra Breakout'.
The Australian guards – initially stunned at the sight of the human waves running at them – responded by firing machines guns and rifles at the escapees.
That night 84-year-old Mr Treasure, who was then a boy aged 8, was living with his family on their farm, about two kilometres away.
"We were woken by the machine gun fire and the light of search lights. There was quite a racket going on," he told nine.com.au.
The "racket" proved to be one of the bloodiest battles on Australian soil as the prisoners – armed with makeshift weapons such as baseball bats, clubs and filed down cutlery – fought the Australian garrison.
THE ESCAPE PLAN
The giant Cowra POW camp – spread over more than 30 hectares – held mainly Italian and Japanese POWs.
After being captured, the Italian contingent were largely content to sit out the war, and saw little disgrace in their surrender.
"We were used to seeing the Italians around the area. Some of them worked on farms. They were part of the community," said Mr Treasure.
But the Japanese took a much different view of their imprisonment. For them, surrender was a mark of dishonour on their family and their country.
When captured many had given false names to save their families disgrace.
"We had no contact with them. They were a different kettle of fish," said Mr Treasure.
When on August 4, the Japanese were told about 700 of their POWs would be sent to another camp in Hay, NSW, an escape plan was hatched.
After setting their huts on fire, four waves of prisoners – wearing baseball mitts and blankets to protect their hands – would charge the perimeter wire.
It was decided that POWs injured or incapacitated during the escape would kill themselves to restore their honour.
When dawn broke on August 5, the camp's fence line was littered with dead Japanese bodies.
In the breakout and subsequent round-up, four Australian soldiers were also officially killed.
But more than 300 POWs had broken free and roamed the surrounding countryside, in what was the biggest breakout of the war.
"A few of them were running across our front paddocks," recalls Mr Treasure.
"My two older brothers were patrolling our house with .22 rifles."
Over the next few days, troops and police tracked down the POWs.
Many of the escapees were recaptured after they had sought shelter from the bitter winter cold in farm buildings. But others died by suicide rather than be recaptured.
Other Japanese POWs were shot trying to flee or were killed by their countrymen.
But after nine days all the surviving escapees had been recaptured.
Mr Treasure says as a young boy he didn't grasp the true tragedy of the Cowra Breakout.
Instead it proved an "exciting" distraction from wartime life.
"If I'd been older, it would have been more serious."