A new study from researchers at the University of Pittsburgh and the U.S. Department of Energy could help speed up carbon-capturing devices for coal power plants, which could reduce the release of harmful quantities of carbon dioxide into the air and have the added benefit of bringing down energy costs.
A new computational model could potentially boost efficiencies and profits in natural gas production by better predicting previously hidden fracture mechanics while accurately accounting for the known amounts of gas released during the process.
When deciding whether to participate in programs designed to conserve energy during peak hours, consumers appear to rely more on their intuition about how much money they’re saving rather than on proof their bills are smaller, a new study has found.
Five scientists from Michigan State University say that hydropower from dams has a legacy of underestimated costs and overestimated value.
CU Boulder and University of Wyoming engineers have successfully scaled up an innovative water-cooling system capable of providing continuous day-and-night radiative cooling for structures.
Energy Conservation/Efficiency | Research to Secure Our Energy Future | University of Colorado Boulder
Two researchers crunch the numbers to determine how much water is withdrawn from the environment by the oil, coal, natural gas, wind and other energy sources.
Energy Conservation/Efficiency | Research to Secure Our Energy Future | University of Southern California
Engineers at the Georgia Institute of Technolgy have developed a new catalyst that speeds up oxygen processing and can easily convert chemical fuel into electricity.
Energy Conservation/Efficiency | Georgia Institute of Technology | University Research | Research to Secure Our Energy Future
An Iowa State University research group have been working to produce semiconductors from materials that are safe, abundant and inexpensive to manufacture.
Energy Conservation/Efficiency | Iowa State University | University Research | Research to Secure Our Energy Future
A University of Pittsburgh researcher has been researching new glass technology that aims to increase the light absorbed by solar panels to give them an extra energy boost.