Dwarf mango tree with huge purple-green juicy fruits of about 1 kg each. One of the most colourful of all. Bears late in season. Not really cold hardy, but being "dwarf" it can be easily protected in winter, grown in a greenhouse or trained on a wall.
This is a small mango tree with very large purple-green fruits. It can be called a dwarf mango. Despite the modest size of the tree, the fruits of this variety "Keitt" is one of the largest and most colourful of all, while the plant is low. It bears very late in season: in the Canary Islands our fruits often ripen in December.
It is not really cold hardy, but being a "dwarf" it can be easily protected in winter, grown in a greenhouse or trained to grow by a southerly exposed wall. Due to its size, it is suitable, more than other types it can grow in pots or containers.
It depends on climate and pruning. It can reach 2-6 m tall. It can even be kept lower if grown in pots, because it can fruit below 1,5 m.
Mangifera indica is an evergreen tree native to India and Southeast Asia, where it has been cultivated for thousands of years. There are hundreds or thousands of varieties with different shapes, sizes, colours and flavours. Mango trees adjust their size to the growing conditions and will reach 5-25 m (15-80 ft). They are pruned low in commercial fields. Young new leaves are usually colourful, orange-pink, changing to a glossy red or copper colour. Later they darken and become leathery and green. Mangifera indica produces one of the most popular fruits of the world: firm, sweet and very aromatic, with a distinctive resinous sweet smell. They contain one large, flat, fibrous seed. The peak season is summer and autumn. Eaten fresh or used in drinks, desserts, fruit salads and salsas. Asian cusine has "1000" uses for mangoes. Even green mangoes are eaten raw as fresh appetizers with salt and lemon juice.
Here in Canarius we offer a grafted potted plant. The graft will have at least one flush of leaves hardened, but most probably two or three. Visit this LINK and see pictures of our fruit trees on the packing desk and learn more about what we ship.
The rootstock used for grafting is a seedling of mango Gomera-1 or Gomera-3. This is commonly used as a rootstock throughout the Canary Islands, because of their ease of growth and root hardiness to cold wet winters and drought.
Click HERE and learn more about our mango trees: Plant Size, Resistance to Cold, List of Varieties in Stock...
|Minimum winter temperature||0 ºC to 15 ºC|