The smell of fries, pizza, tiramisu, steak, and sushi seem like they would fill the air with aromas repulsing each other like oppositely-charged magnets, but Stu had been on a self-inflicted diet for months now and the buffet was calling his name. He only came as part of a mandatory business trip, and now he had to see his coworker’s plates piled higher than their chests with gooey cheese bites and crispy shrimp. The slot machines on The Strip failed to tempt Stu when his coworkers were gambling their money away in celebration of closing the new deal, but the honey-glaze on the bbq ribs had a different type of power.

As a courtesy, Stu had paid for a plate before sitting down because the anxiety to come if the buffet staff might suspect him of sneaking food without paying would be unbearable. So, there it was: a large, empty white plate sitting in front of him. The buffet ticket included a drink, but Stu refused that pleasure as well. Stu began rethinking his life decisions. He had been on this new diet for months and other diets for years with no rewards to show for any of it. The only thing he gained was a conversation topic everyone was tired of hearing about. Stu could no longer simply place the entire blame on food—there must be a different solution.

Stu had enough. The conversating coworkers around him fell silent as they noticed him pick up his plate and excuse himself from the table. No one could believe it. They watched him at the first buffet bar. Then, to the second. Stu stopped at every single station along the route and picked up at least one food item from the inviting warming platters. Stu’s eyes must have been piercing through the plexiglass sanitary guards as he drafted each piece of his bounty.

Returning to the table, Stu’s plate was so tall it obscured his eye line. His tablemates peered from either side of the food tower and saw Stu smiling for the first time in months—years, maybe. Stu proceeded to have the time of his life at the buffet and allowed that experience to renew him to forgo dieting altogether, beginning his search for a new path to a healthier lifestyle.
