What is Marijuana and what effects could it have on me?
| Added by: MedMan Last edited by: MedMan Viewed: 176 times|| Rated by 16 users: 9.00/10|
Contributed by: Hopefull
Also spelled marihuana, the Indian hemp plant, Cannabis sativa
(cannabis), or the crude drug composed of its leaves and flowers. It is
usually dried and crushed and put into pipes or formed into cigarettes
(joints) for smoking. The drug—known by a variety of other names,
including pot, tea, grass, and weed—can also be added to foods and
beverages. Marijuana varies in potency, depending on where and how it
is grown, prepared for use, or stored.
The active ingredient, tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), is present in
all parts of both the male and female plants but is most concentrated
in the resin (cannabin) in the flowering tops of the female. Hashish, a
more powerful form of the drug, is made by collecting and drying this
resin and is about eight times as strong as the marijuana typically
smoked in the United States.
Mentioned in a Chinese herbal dating from 2700 BC, marijuana long
has been considered valuable as an analgesic, an anaesthetic, an
antidepressant, an antibiotic, and a sedative. Although it was usually
used externally (e.g., as a balm or smoked), in the 19th century its
tips were sometimes administered internally to treat gonorrhoea and
The effect that cannabis has depends on the strength, how often
it's smoked, how recently it was smoked and how the body naturally
reacts to the drug.
Relaxation, stress reduction
Creative, philosophical or deep thinking...ideas flow more easily
Increased appreciation of music.
Increased awareness of senses(eating, drinking, smell)
Change in experience of muscle fatigue. Pleasent body feel.Increase in body/mind connection.
Pain relief (headaches, cramps)
reduced nausea (used medically for this)
NEUTRAL:Increased appetite, snacky-ness
General change in consciousness (as with many psychoactives)
Blood shot eyes (more common with certain varieties of cannabis and inexperienced users)
Interrupts linear memory.
Difficulty following a train of thought.
Cheek, jaw, facial tension (less commonly reported)
Coughing, asthma, upper respiratory problems
Difficulty with short-term memory during effects and during periods of frequent use.
Slowness and delayed reactions, especially dangerous when driving or operating machinery.
Racing heart, agitation, and tenseness.
Mild to severe anxiety
Panic attacks at very high doses (usually oral) or in sensitive users
Paranoid & anxious thoughts more frequent
Possible psychological dependence on cannabis
"Mild" withdrawal symptoms occur after daily use in some
users. These may last for 1-6 weeks after cessation of use and can
include anxiety, anhedonia (reduced experience of pleasure), headaches,
general unease/discomfort,difficulty sleeping, and a desire to smoke
In many countries the use and possession of marijuana is illegal.
Don't EVER cross a border while in possession of ANY illegal drug.
| Last modified: 14:50 - Aug 17, 2001|| |