GCSE History (9-1) new interactive scheme of work
We’ve created a new, digital interactive scheme of work for History - a free online planning tool for your KS3 and GCSE History teaching.
What is it?
Like a traditional scheme of work, our interactive scheme of work provides you with a guide for teaching the content, including suggested topics, an idea of when to teach skills and how long to spend on each topic.
However, where our interactive scheme of work differs is that you can tailor it to suit your approach to teaching, recommending a route through KS3 based on the options you select at GCSE and whether you teach KS3 over two or three years.
Our new interactive scheme of work for History:
- prepares your students for GCSE: the interactive scheme of work helps with content selection at KS3 by recommending a teaching route, based on your GCSE options and whether your students are studying GCSE over 2 or 3 years
- helps you manage the content requirements for GCSE by recommending how long to spend on each unit – reducing planning time and giving you more time for teaching
- works seamlessly with your existing digital teaching resources: any existing KS3 Exploring History or Pearson Edexcel GCSE History digital published resources you already have will be integrated into the interactive scheme of work, working seamlessly with them.*
It’s free, and you can start using it now.
Easy to use
Once registered, log in to ActiveLearn using your newly-created username and password, and click on the 'Schemes of Work' option at the top of the screen. Then click on '+ Create new scheme' and select 'History' from the 'Subjects' drop down to start building your customised History scheme of work.
Already subscribed to ActiveLearn Digital Service?
There is no need to register. Log in as normal and the interactive scheme of work will be available. Once in the ActiveLearn site, click on the 'Plan' tab and select 'Scheme of Work'. Then select '+ Create new scheme' to start building your customised History scheme of work.
*Pearson’s paid-for resources, as well as other endorsed resources, are not a prerequisite for the delivery of Pearson Edexcel specifications.