Sodas, soft drinks, fizzy drinks, soda pops… All of these words refer to the same genre of beverage: a typically carbonated non-alcoholic drink. The first soft drinks appeared in the seventeenth century. These clever concoctions were made of water, lemon juice, and honey. In the eighteenth century, scientist Joseph Priestly became the first to make soda water by infusing carbon dioxide into H20.
By the nineteenth century, soda water was sold in many stores. Pharmacists began adding herbs to make the drink more beneficial. This sparkled the idea of adding fun flavorings. In England, sodas were sold in glass bottles. But due to problems in the United States glass industry, Americans could only buy soft drinks at soda fountains, usually located in drug stores or ice cream parlors. In the twentieth century, bottled soft drinks became more readily available. By the 1920s, vending machines allowed easier access to soft drinks. Pop-tabs were invented in the 1960s. (Previously, cans were opened using a can-piercer.)
Serving Size Changes
In the 1950s, an average serving size of soda was seven ounces and the average annual soda consumption was 10.8 gallons. Today, sodas are normally thirty ounces and Americans consume an average of 44.7 gallons a year.
The average teenager drinks two cans of soda a day—868 cans for boys and 628 cans for girls. In the past, sodas were considered a special treat and purchased rarely. This fizzy habit is costing teens an average of $5000 a year.
Start Them Young
Even before kids know what a soft drink is, the major soda corporations are already jockeying for market share. Pepsi, Dr. Pepper, and Seven Up have licensed their logos to baby bottle companies. This encouraged parents to fill the bottles with the soft drinks.
What Is Soda Doing to You?
Drinking excess sugar slows the production of brain-derived neurotrophic factors which causes your brain to struggle with old and new memories. According to a study done by the University of Minnesota, consuming too many sweets makes your brain not know when to stop drinking. So not only are your memories sluggish, you think that you need more soda!
As with any food or drink you choose to devour, gathering information will help guide you to making the best decisions for your body. Cutting back on soda can save you both money and memories!