The Regional Resource Management Plan (RRMP) is the most significant resource planning document for all resource users in Hawke’s Bay. It includes the Regional Policy Statement (RPS) and sets out a policy framework for managing resource use activities in an integrated manner across the whole of the Hawke's Bay region. The RRMP was prepared under the Resource Management Act 1991. The RRMP also incorporates all plan changes that have since become operative.
The Regional Resource Management Plan (RRMP) is the most significant resource planning document for all resource users in Hawke’s Bay.
Key Regional Policy Statement Objectives
Regionally Significant Issues, Objectives and Policies
Regional Plan Objectives and Policies
Information Requirements (for resource consent applications)
Background to the Maori Dimension
Sustainable Land Use
Environmental Guidelines for Surface Water Quality
Known Productive Aquifer Systems in Hawke's Bay Region
Chimney Design Guide & Combustion of Fuels
Heretaunga Plains - Contaminated Vulnerability and Unconfined Aquifer
Water Management Zones
Minimum Flow Rivers
Rivers considered for Riparian Protection
Air Quality Guidelines 2002
Performance Requirements for Qualifications to Apply Agrichemicals
Emission requirements: small scale solid fuel burners
Airshed Boundaries and Airzone Boundaries
Heretaunga Plains sub-region: location map, Heretaunga Plains sub-region: indicative location map of residential greenfield growth areas, Heretaunga Plains sub-region: indicative location map of industrial greenfield growth areas
Tukituki River sub-catchments
Water Management Zones (Tukituki River Catchment)
Surface water allocation and minimum flow sites (Tukituki River Catchment)
Determination of seasonal and annual allocations for water permits at 29 August 2013 (Tukituki River Catchment)
Slope classes (Tukituki River Catchment)
Records to be kept for nutrient budgeting input into a Farm Environmental Management Plan (Tukituki River Catchment)
Requirements for Farm Environmental Management Plans (Tukituki River Catchment)
Total ammoniacal nitrogen concentrations at other pHs and temperatures (Tukituki River Catchment)
Maps of areas within definition of 'wetland'
Statutory acknowledgements have arisen from Treaty of Waitangi settlements and relate to specific areas of importance to a claimant group (known as statutory areas).. Statutory acknowledgements affect processes under the Resource Management Act, including applications for resource consents and local authority responsibilities. This document includes those statutory acknowledgements that wholly, or in part, cover statutory areas within Hawke’s Bay. This document does not form part of the Hawke’s Bay Regional Resource Management Plan and is for information purposes only.
Disclaimers and Copyright
While every endeavour has been taken by the Hawke's Bay Regional Council to ensure that the information on this website is accurate and up to date, Hawke's Bay Regional Council shall not be liable for any loss suffered through the use, directly or indirectly, of information on this website. Information contained has been assembled in good faith. Some of the information available in this site is from the New Zealand Public domain and supplied by relevant government agencies. Hawke's Bay Regional Council cannot accept any liability for its accuracy or content. Portions of the information and material on this site, including data, pages, documents, online graphics and images are protected by copyright, unless specifically notified to the contrary. Externally sourced information or material is copyright to the respective provider.
© Hawke's Bay Regional Council - www.hbrc.govt.nz / +64 6 835 9200 / email@example.com