We cannot always avoid stress or even change the situations that cause it. What we can do, however, is learn to deal with stress more effectively. But causes stress in the first place, what are the symptoms and what should a stressed-out person do to cope?
What is stress?
Stress is part of life. Life without stress is not life. Stress can be positive as well as negative. Stress is something we cannot eradicate or avoid as there will always be different demands and pressures on us at different stages of our lives. When we find it difficult to cope with the pressures it can feel difficult to cope with which makes us feel 'stressed'.
But it is important to recognise that feeling stressed also serves us well, because stress is a normal response to things you feel threatened by. If we feel stressed it means our hard-wired survival system (freeze, fight or flight) has kicked in, which is primarily there to protect us from physical (dangerous) threats. Our body prepares us for self-protection by increasing our breathing rate and blood-levels of hormones such as adrenaline and noradrenaline. This all acts to provide our muscles with oxygen and increased blood sugar, enabling us to have more energy to run faster or fight harder.
So this is useful when we are in a physically threatening situation but our body still responds in the same way when we are trying to manage non-life-threatening stresses or emotions. Unfortunately, in these situations there is no physical outlet for this extra energy and we therefore feel the on-going effects of stress, physically, emotionally and behaviourally. And with the fast paced, constantly connected world we now live in, our threat systems are online so much more and we are becoming more sensitised to the increased stimulus our brain has to process every day.
What are the symptoms of stress?
Stress can creep up on you. You can get used to the feelings and not recognise them as symptoms of being stressed. Its worth trying to take a step back and reflect on any changes in the way you feel (physically and emotionally) and live your life. If you have felt stressed in the past you may already be aware of how this affects you physically, emotionally and behaviourally. The physical responses to stress stem from our thought process and the meaning we place on our experiences and situation.
Physical responses to stress
- increased heart rate/chest pain
- feeling nauseas
- upset stomach/
- poor concentration
- quicker/shorter breath
Behavioural changes caused by stress:
- Reduced/increased appetite
- Problems sleeping
- Using alcohol or other drugs to help relax
- Isolating ourselves from friends and family
Emotional changes caused by stress:
- Feeling moody/low mood
- Irritable and short tempered
- Lonely or isolated
- Poor concentration
- Racing thoughts
- Memory difficultiesFocus on negative focus
How can we prevent stress?
When we are stressed our fight or flight system is online. Therefore we need to proactively engage with ways of being which soothe and calm down our fight/flight system. This can include:
✔️ Reducing our caffeine intake
✔️ Engaging with regular physical activity
✔️ Reduce the amount of stressors we have in our lives
✔️ Engage with daily with relaxation techniques such as soothing breathing
✔️ Ensure you are seeing friends/family and talking to people as this will help provide you with resources you may need to deal with a life stressor
✔️ Do not look at your phone or social media for at least 2 hours before you go to bed otherwise the brain will still be processing it when you try to go to sleep
✔️ Ensuring you are getting the right amount of sleep for you (this doesn’t have to be 8 hours, but should be what is right for you to wake up feeling resting in the morning)
✔️ Ensure you have downtime and alone time. This provides our brain with the much need rest it requires from the fast paced and stimulus driven world we live in
How to cope with stress
Because we all experience stress differently there isn’t one answer to dealing with stress – it is individual to the person. Its helpful to experiment with different techniques in order to find out which ones work for you. In this way, you take control of your life rather than letting stress control you.
Although there are numerous self-help strategies to use, sometimes professional advice may help you to manage and understand your stress better. Start with your doctor or seek advice on how to find a therapist. Remember, if you think you need advice or help because of your symptoms or how you're feeling; just get it, because it works - whenever you are ready.
Stress management tips
The best stress busting techniques include:
If you know that something will put you under pressure, make sure that you are as prepared as you can before the situation. Gain as much knowledge and prior understanding so that you feel that you are going into the situation with the information to work with and realistic expectations set.
Given that we understand how an event is experienced different for everyone and that it becomes stressful due to our interpretation of it, we can also sometimes try to ‘reframe’ a situation i.e. the way you look at it or perceive it, is likely to change the way you experience it. To reframe an event you may need to seek help from a professional but you can also start to look at this yourself.
Firstly, identify your thoughts and how you have interpreted a specific event. You may notice that you have some negative thought patterns which are common to your way of thinking. If you can recognise how some of these negative thought patterns are impacting how you experience something, then start to challenge them once you are aware of them.
If you are able to see that there are other ways of looking at or interpreting an event, then replace the automatic thoughts with ones that are more helpful, more positive. Use your self-talk to provide less negatively charged ones and start to e.g. view the threat as a challenge – something that could feel motivating if you were able to work through it.
✅ Self-calming and soothing techniques
Self-calming and relaxation techniques are designed to help you relax, reduce the tension you may be experiencing as well as the anxiety which can accompany stressed feelings. Anxiety and tension will fuel the experience of stress therefore managing them will have a positive impact. Self-calming and relaxation techniques can include:
Breathing techniques e.g. the 7-11 technique. For two minutes three times a day, breathe in for the count of 7 and out for the count of 11. This will physically calm you down and reduce the physical sensations of stress and anxiety.
A 10 minute walk outside (preferably in the greenery!). It has been shown that walking, especially outside in nature helps reduce our levels of stress. So try and grab even 10 minutes walking time outside, regardless of how busy life feels.
✅ Positive self-talk and visualisation
We will be feeling stressed generally because of the way we are thinking. Therefore simply providing ourself with more positive self-talk as opposed to the critical self talk will help to reduce our stress levels.
Also visualisation is a powerful tool to help reduce stress. Engage with visualising a calm, safe place which you have experienced in the past (many people find nature scenes or relaxing times on the beach), connecting with all the elements of this memory (you can find many guided recordings online if you struggle to do it yourself) to bring that memory to life.
It has been shown that visualising something the way we want it to go (e.g. giving a presentation or having a difficult meeting with our manager) increases the chances of it actually turning out this way. Visually something happening positively will therefore have a calming impact on us, giving us the best opportunity for us to respond in the forthcoming situation the way we would like to respond.
✅ Getting help or support
If you experience of stress is causing you and those around you problems you are likely to need help; get it. It will help. Start with your GP. There could be stress management courses in your area which you could benefit from or you may have the opportunity to do some one-to-one therapy.