Get Full Essay Get access to this section to get all help you need with your essay and educational issues. The average high school student in this generation shows to have higher stress and anxiety levels, along with increased medical problems from this stress, than ever before. With students and their undeveloped minds, stress takes a larger toll on their current and future health. But what exactly can cause so much stress on a student, what effects will it have on them, and why is no one doing anything about it?
Stress is a very common problem being faced today. Every individual will experience stress in one or the other time. These definitions indicate that stress represents those conditions under which individuals have demand made upon them, that they cannot physically or psychologically meet, leading to breakdown at one or other of these levels.
Stress is usually thought of in negative terms. But ii can manifest itself in both positive and negative way. It is said to be positive when the situation offers an opportunity for one, to gain something. It is often viewed as motivator, since in its absence the individual lacks the spirit necessary for peak performance.
Distress is the term used to indicate negative stress.
Almost any change in the environment- even a pleasant change such as a joyful trip- demands some coping, and a little stress is useful in helping us to adapt. What acts to produce distress varies from person to person, but some events seem to be stressors for every person.
Examples of stressors are: Injury or infections of the body, dangers in environment, major changes or transitions in life which force us to cope in new ways.
Physical stressors like noise, pollutions, climatic changes, etc. Hustles of everyday life centering on work, family, social Effect of stress essay, health and finances.
The physical, environmental and social causes of the stress state are termed stressors. Once induced by stressors the internal stress state can then lead to various responses. On the other hand, psychological responses such as anxiety, hopelessness, depression, irritability, and a general feeling of not being able to cope with the world, can result from the stress state.
Stress has a number of immediate effects. If the stressors are maintained, long-term behavioural, physiological, emotional and cognitive effects occur. Example, a patient spends more money on treatment, may experience continued stress even after the cure of the disease, because repayment of debt cause stress for long time in him or a patient whose leg is amputated after accident may continue to worry about it.
On the other hand, many people have developed ways of coping with stressors, so that they are able to respond adaptively. Teaching people adaptive ways of handling stress, so as to promote the wellness cycle is an important part of the newly emerging field of behavioural medicine.
Stress is not always harmful. In fact, it is recognised that low levels of stress can even helps for better performance.
For example, a student can prepare well for forthcoming examination only if he has some stress. However, excess level of stress is undoubtedly harmful. The effects of stress are divided into three categories: Commonly appearing stress related bodily disorders are-peptic ulcers, hypertension, chronic fatigue, hormonal changes, increased heart rate, difficulty in breathing, numbness of limbs, heart disease and reduction in immunity, etc.
Anxiety, depression, hopelessness, helplessness, anger, nervousness, irritability, tension and boredom may be experienced. Decreasing efficiency, making mistakes, inability to take decisions, under eating or overeating, sleeplessness, increased smoking, develop addiction to alcohol and drugs, forgetfulness, hypersensitivity or passiveness, accident proneness and interpersonal difficulties are seen.
Stress is linked to disorders such as cancer and heart disorders. There are several mediating variables that determine whether stress becomes dangerous or not.
For example, good coping mechanisms which can help to reduce stress, having good social support, often help in reducing stress. Perception of stress or how a person views stress is also very important. For example, a person may not perceive a situation as stressful whereas the same situation may be perceived as highly stressful by some other person.
Personality character like hardiness or emotional stability helps to withstand effects of stress. Hans Selye, a renowned biological scientist defines stress as the nonspecific response of the body to any demand upon it. The GAS consists of 3 stages: It is an emergency response of the body.
In this stage prompt responses of the body, many of them mediated by the sympathetic nervous system, prepare us to cope with the stressor here and now.Stress management can be complicated and confusing because there are different types of stress.
There are three main types of stress, acute stress, episodic acute stress, and chronic stress. Each has their own characteristics, symptoms, duration, and treatment approaches. Essay on Stress: Causes And Effects. Words 4 Pages.
Stress: Causes and Effects Stress is an ongoing dilemma that occurs in each and everyone’s life. It is a factor that is undoubtedly a part of daily living.
Due to the trivial problems that occur in people’s daily lives massive amounts of stress can arise. Major Causes and effect of. In conclusion, stress in children has many causes and effects. The notion that stress only affects adults is wrong. Too much stress, often referred to as toxic stress, is detrimental to the life of a child.
Toxic stress affects the physical, emotional, psychological, and social aspects of a child. Due to stress, the blood vessels get constricted and it can have a tremendous effect on the blood supply leading to high blood pressure and even heart attack.
Since the risk of attack is higher, it can lead to rise in hyper tension and cause lots of problems in the long run. - The Effect Stress has on Working Memory Question What is the effect of stress on working memory. Stress has been shown to influence working memory (Schoofs, Pabst, Brand, & Wolf, ).
The purpose of this experiment is to determine whether the stress has . Nov 25, · Effects of stress essay. 4 stars based on 70 reviews iridis-photo-restoration.com Essay. Teaching assistant experience essays james garfield memorial address essay quoting shakespeare in essays dissertationen suchen dnbi essayer konjugation sein chill song names in essays mahavira jayanti essay about myself hygienic food essay art catalogue.