Much of the United States just endured the hottest temperatures of the year, with many states sweltering in 100-degree-plus weather. Washington, D.C., posted temperatures of 110 degrees on July 21, and the heat was so intense in New York City that Mayor Bill de Blasio declared an emergency. As high as temperatures climbed in these cities, they aren’t the hottest in the country. These are the hottest cities in America.
July 2019 might be the hottest on record, and it came after the hottest June on record, 1.71 degrees Fahrenheit above the 20th-century average of 59.9 degrees, according to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). The agency also reported that Antarctic sea ice coverage fell to a record low in June.
Yes, it’s hot out there, but not everywhere. There are plenty of places in the world where you need a sweater and gloves, even in summer. To identify the coldest place on Earth in the dead of summer, 24/7 Wall St. reviewed the average monthly temperature for the coldest summer month (June-August for areas in the Northern Hemisphere, December-February for areas in the Southern Hemisphere) from data compiled by the North Atlantic Atmospheric Association (NOAA).
In 28 places on our list the average summer temperature is less than 40 degrees Fahrenheit. Further, there are five places where the average summer temperature is at or below freezing.
The overwhelming majority of the coldest places in the dead of summer are in the Northern Hemisphere, such as places in Greenland, Russia, and Canada. The outliers from the Southern Hemisphere include locations in Chile, South Africa, and Australia. The coldest places on our list in both hemispheres are not necessarily inhabited. These are the coldest inhabited places on Earth.
To identify the coldest place on Earth in the dead of summer, 24/7 Wall St. reviewed the average monthly temperature for the coldest summer month (June-August for areas in the Northern Hemisphere, December-February for areas in the Southern Hemisphere) from a universe of 7,281 weather stations around the world for the year 2018.
Weather station data comes from The Global Historical Climatology Network-Monthly (GHCN-M) version 3, a program of the North Atlantic Atmospheric Association (NOAA). Geographic locations are listed as the closest area to the coordinates given for the weather stations whose data is used. All other data was also obtained from the GHCN-M. We chose not to include locations in Antarctica because the preponderance of coldest places on that continent would have skewed the results for the list.
Correction: Due to a transcription error, a previous version of this article incorrectly listed for the bullet point “Avg. temp. during coldest summer month.” the coldest temperature in the coldest month of the year. This data has been updated to the coldest temperature in the coldest month of the summer.