Architects design various structures, such as homes, businesses, and factories. They oversee the construction process; therefore, they must be familiar with the plan and how to execute it properly until the final touches are made. The proper education is required when undertaking such an important task, such as constructing a home or building that must withstand the elements of time and harsh weather conditions. It is a huge responsibility. An online Bachelor of Architecture (B.Arch.) degree is required, along with an internship and a passing grade on the Architect Registration Exam to gain state licensure.
For all your hard work, as this process can take upwards of five years, you can gain an entry-level position working at an architectural firm, or you may choose to be self-employed in this field. The job growth rate is projected to increase by 4 percent between 2016 and 2026, which is slower than average for all occupations. Since the field of construction tends to ebb and flow with the state of our economy, uncertainty can arise at any time; therefore, as students search for internships and permanent job positions, they can expect stiff competition, without a doubt.
With an online Bachelor of Architecture degree, the average salary of an architect, according to the BLS in May 2017 was $78,470 annually. However, if you have several years of on-the-job experience, you can earn upwards of $120,000 per year; although, many factors will affect the salary of an architect. The size of the firm, your job location, as well as, your experience and education should be considerations when determining your wages. If you would like to earn a higher salary, you should obtain your master’s degree and other certifications, where applicable.
What’s it like being an architect? Primarily, architects spend most of their time in an office setting as they use drafting software to design structures. In this position, you must enjoy working with clients, other team members, and architectural engineers. As your designs come to fruition, you will be tasked with overseeing the construction process, often taking you outdoors in extreme weather conditions.
Will your online Bachelor of Architecture degree limit you to designing structures only? There are other concentrations in architecture to consider in which your B.Arch. degree will be most helpful, such as in architectural engineering, landscape architecture, as well as, interior design, industrial design, civil engineering or as a land surveyor. Architecture itself can be categorized as residential, commercial or industrial if you would like to specialize in a specific type of structure. If you are also interested in the environment around you, perhaps you are interested in the fairly new concentration of green design. In this concentration, a green architect works to develop structures made of environmentally friendly materials, uses solar energy and designs structures that fit cohesively into their landscapes. In addition, they only use systems designed to cut energy costs. This eco-friendly type of construction is the way of the future.
If you are interested in this exciting career field, please see our options for the Best Online Schools for Bachelor of Architecture Degree Programs that we have compiled for your convenience.