Using a Venn diagram helps your students learn to compare and contrast in a fun way. There are 7 Venn diagrams in this packet, all featuring an elf. I've included color as well as black and white templates. Use the black and white copy for students to write their own, then call them up for a whole-group discussion and add everyone's ideas onto the colored Venn diagram.
If your students enjoy The Diary of a Wimpy Kid, they're sure to get excited about this very creative writing prompt. Includes templates to make a file-folder diary, diary pages, clip art to decorate their diary cover with, or use these as incentives and give them to students for good writing, effort, improvement etc. I've also included 30 writing prompt ideas to jump start your students' creative minds.
If you have an Elf On A Shelf in your classroom, a super-fun writing extension is to have your students keep a journal of the elf's daily adventures. I've included prompts for PK as well as older kiddo's. Encourage them to illustrate their page. Make the journals out of file folders and have students decorate their cover.
Students practice giving directions in this fun writing prompt that makes a cute bulletin board: "Hats Off to Great Directional Writing!" Encourage students to use transitions, ordinal numbers + adjectives. Pom poms and white glitter add that finishing touch.
You requested them, so here they are "Elf-abet" cards. Includes a 3-page tip list of things you can do with the cards, including games. There are also a variety of upper and lowercase worksheets + assessments.
The elf is watching and reporting back to Santa. Students write why they think that they should be on Santa's "nice" list. Includes a Santa's List poster to use as a good-behavior motivator.
Students respond to an elf-help wanted poster from Santa, in this fun writing prompt, that's a perfect transition after reading the story Elf on a Shelf. An official elf helper button + a "You're hired!" certificate are also included.
Children read, add end punctuation, circle the capital letters, underline the adjectives, trace and write the directional words and then color, cut and glue the matching picture.
Cover lots of Common Core State Standards as students read, add end punctuation, underline capital letters; trace and write the shape word; trace and write the color word, trace the shape and then draw and color that shaped nose on the reindeer.