Dear parents and little humans,
These tiny humans with big hearts gave our current TDT(Sharing the planet) a new meaning. These caring learners planned to celebrate their Children’s Day with their new buddies.
They hosted a mini carnival for the mentally challenged children. They managed and organised everything on a very short notice and pulled off an absolutely amazing event.
These young minds really astonished everyone with their maturity and compassion.
To be absolutely honest, I cannot describe what difference these children were able to make today.
Indeed, I am a tremendously proud teacher.
Today they learned the power of giving.
Complete the publishing part by writing the passage again keeping in mind all the corrections done by the teacher in the last piece.
HAVE AN AWESOME DAY 🙂
The language HW for today is the following link(reading):
Sr. KG Team
Day 1, Tuesday.
Discussion on the Panelist session was done. Learners were updated about the visit to NGO and criteria for the presentation was shared.
Students were introduced to Limerick poems. They were shown few examples as well as a teacher created poem was shared.
Bullying session was conducted.
UOI: Complete the given worksheet.
Have a great day !
Happy Children’s Day! 🙂
Solve the given worksheet.
Vaishali and Chesta.
Day 1, Tuesday
UOI: Learners were introduced to the terms Location and Settlement. Later, they watched a video related to it.
Students were introduced to the term survey through whole class discussion. Later, they did a sorting activity in groups to revise the types of questions.
Students were introduced to ‘Limerick – a humorous five-line poem with a rhyme scheme a-a-b-b-a‘. Later, the teacher modeling session of creating a limerick was conducted.
Children’s Day was celebrated with the students.
Students have to do the following:
- Read the handout on different types of questions given to them.
- Answer the following questions in their Math notebook:
- Have you filled any survey/questionnaire?
- If yes, for which situation (purpose)?
- Have you conducted any survey?
- If yes, for which situation(purpose)?