There was no going back after Dennis got his first taste of remote work. Forty years in the workforce had come and gone as he worked his way up the corporate ladder, and things never really changed. Not until 2018, when his Alabama employer began to offer a brand new benefit: As a reward for good work, employees would be offered one day of remote work. Though the concept was foreign, it intrigued Dennis, and he worked towards gaining as many remote days as possible. 

As his first day of work at home passed, he felt like this was something he could get used to. The convenience was unmatched -- who wouldn't prefer a five-minute commute to the home office over twenty minutes in traffic? 

Dennis continued to strive towards earning more of this reward and by the next year, his work week consisted of two days at home and three days in the office. Settled into the new routine, he felt he could do this forever. If he could always experience this much flexibility, maybe he didn't even have to retire... 

The split allowed him the flexibility to run errands before the stores closed while picking his work up again at a time that felt more convenient. Things couldn't possibly be better. 

Then, in 2020, his work became fully remote. Five days of work at home seemed too good to be true; it improved his concentration and productivity, and there were far fewer meetings. For the first time since joining the workforce, Dennis had autonomy over his schedule. Working remotely for two days was fantastic, but he quickly realized that five days was the sweet spot. There was no reason to return to the office now. 

When talking with other people, Dennis seemed to notice a pattern. All of his coworkers that failed at remote work were the types of people that would attend meetings with paper and pen, pretending to look busy the entire time. But anyone who was a self-starter, who could find their own motivation, seemed to be thriving. 

Still, there was one more group of people he had yet to consider: The bosses. What was a boss's purpose, anyway? Did they actually do anything but micromanage their underlings? He couldn't help wondering what all of the bosses and higher-ups were doing during their remote working time, since there was nobody for them to watch or manage. If they don't see people working... what's their purpose?

Sure enough, another year came and went, and Dennis learned the answer. The managers and bosses needed employees back in person so desperately that they drove everybody back to the office. Well, everybody who didn't quit. 

After he had a taste of full-time remote work, Dennis knew he could never go back. When he got his call to return to his 2019 schedule of two days home and three days in-office, that was the final straw. The camel's back broke. He knew it was time to move on. 

Sending an email back to the company, Dennis announced his retirement and decided to accept another job offer. Even though this new offer had a smaller salary than his previous position, it didn't matter. A fully remote position made up for that. Not to mention, his old employer would be paying out his monthly retirement benefits now, bringing his income to a higher level than before. 

This was the new American Dream.
