India takes tremendous pride in its heritage, which is showcased in its hundreds of monuments. Some of these remind us of a glorious past, some imbue spirituality and some compels to praise its artistry. Best of all these monuments have been listed as UNESCO World Heritage Sites, which are a testimony of Indian culture, heritage, architecture and art.
These UNESCO World Heritage Sites are managed by Indian Government. Many of these sites even underwent restoration work, but with their old-world charm left intact. Forts, palaces, temples and trains (Darjeeling Himalayan Railway); India is brimming with miraculous creations.
Historical UNESCO World Heritage Sites in India
The Seventh Wonder of the World and a UNESCO World Heritage Site, Taj Mahal is not merely a site that brings us to the pages of history; it is an epitome of true love, brilliant architecture and artistic precision. The white-marble mausoleum was commissioned by Shah Jahan for his wife, Mumta Mahal, way back in 1632. And to complete the masterpiece it took about 22 years and as much as 20,000 artisans.
The Monuments of Khajuraho (Khajuraho Group of Monuments) are a reflection of the architectural intellect of people in erstwhile India. Most of these, as per historians, were built by Chandela Dynasty between 950 and 1050 CE. By 12th century, there were about 85 temples in Khajuraho of which only 20 withstood the test of time. These temples are dedicated to two religions; Hinduism and Jainism. Close proximity and similarity of constructions of these temples depict harmony between the two religions during that era.
Historic cities like Fatehpur Sikri and Hampi paint an inspiring picture of the lifestyle of erstwhile rulers and their rich taste in architecture.
Religious UNESCO World Heritage Sites in India
Churches and Convents of Goa collectively form a UNESCO World Heritage Site. These remind us of Portugal rule in India. Se Cathedral, Basilica of Bom Jesus and Church of St. Francis of Assisi are some of the monuments in the group and most of these are located in Old Goa.
Brihadeeswarar Temple of Tamil Nadu (Lord Shiva), Kailasa Temple (Lord Shiva) and Khajuraho Temples are amongst many religious UNESCO World Heritage Sites of India.