Our hearts work beat by beat, second by second for 24 hours a day, never resting. Over the average lifetime, our hearts beats about 2.5 billion times. Furthermore it’s one of the most vital organs that keeps us alive, therefore it’s important to keep our heart healthy.
Heart is an organ that pumps blood throughout the body via circulatory system in the first place, in addition it supplies oxygen and nutrients to the tissues & removes carbon-di-oxide and waste materials subsequently. If your blood cholesterol is high it causes plaque to build up in the artery walls which higher the risk of heart disease.
To keep your heart healthy many steps can be taken to lower cholesterol level like Eating healthy foods, Exercising and Losing Weight.
What are the 5 Super Foods To Keep Our Heart Healthy?
5 Super-Foods to keep your heart healthy are :
1. Flax Seeds
Good source of Omega-3 fatty acids, known as “good” fats that helps cardiovascular system through different mechanisms, including anti-inflammatory action and normalizing the heartbeat. Each tablespoon of Flax seed contains about 1.8 grams of omega-3 which have shown heart-healthy effects.
2. Pumpkin Seeds
They are good source of anti-oxidants, magnesium, zinc and fatty acids, all of which may help to keep your heart healthy by reducing blood pressure in the first place and increasing good cholesterol likewise. Eating only a small amount of pumpkin seeds can provide you with a substantial quantity of essential nutrients.
3. Sunflower Seeds
Great source of Vitamin C, which helps in preventing cardiovascular disease. Being an anti-oxidant, Vitamin E prevents radicals from oxidizing cholesterol. On oxidation, cholesterol sticks to the blood vessel walls and causes Atherosclerosis, thus leading to blocked arteries,heart attack or stroke. A quarter cup of sunflower seeds provides over 90% of the daily value of Vitamin E which can further promote good heart health.
4. Chia Seeds
Tiniest are power pack of good nutrients. They are an excellent source of Omega-3 Fatty acids, rich in anti-oxidants, and they provide fiber, iron and calcium. Omega-3 Fatty acids help raise High Density Lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol, the “good” cholesterol that protects against heart attack and stroke.” As a result promotes heart health. But it’s always advisable to soak chia seeds in water before consumption.
5. Hemp Seeds
They have a mild, nutty flavor and are often referred to as hemp hearts. They contain over 30% fat and are exceptionally rich in 2 essential Fatty acids, Linoleic acid (Omega-6) and Alpha-Linolenic acid (Omega-3). Great source of arginine and gamma-linolenic acid, which consequently have been linked with a reduced risk of heart disease.