Foxglove aphids (Aulacorthum solani), also referred to as the glasshouse potato aphid, has a broad host range and is often found in greenhouse and garden plants. Although aphid species are difficult to distinguish, the foxglove aphid can be identified by its shiny body and markings around the abdomen and cornicles. Managing foxglove aphids requires careful monitoring to catch infestations before they become widespread.
Foxglove aphids attack a variety of plants from early spring until late fall. Aphids are small insects, measuring less than 1/8 inch long, and have sucking mouth parts used to feed on your plants. Foxglove aphids are typically light green in color, with dark green markings at the base of the cornicles, which are tubes at the hind end of the abdomen. However, according to the University of California, there are other forms of foxglove aphids that range in color from green to orange and pink. Some foxglove aphids may have black markings on the abdomen as well.
Aphids give birth to living young in the spring and summer, and you may find all stages of development feeding on your plant at the same time. Aphid reproduction changes from the spring to the fall. The aphids that hatch in the spring reproduce parthenogenetically in the summer. This means that during the summer months, the female foxglove aphid does not need to mate with a male to produce young. Each female aphid can produce young on her own, and all of these are females that are ready to produce new aphids in as little as 7 to 10 days. The true sexual forms appear in the fall, and these aphids do require a male and female mating so that the females can lay eggs that will overwinter and hatch in the spring. Aphids produce both winged and wingless forms and the wingless forms are typically the aphids you see attacking your plants. The winged forms are produced when populations are high, and these fly to other plants to begin new infestations.
Foxglove aphids are often found deep within the plant, where they feed on the leaf sap of the younger leaves. They’re known to spread several plant diseases such as lettuce mosaic virus. They feed on a variety of garden plants, including foxglove, lettuce, campanula, columbine, chrysanthemum, gladiolus, lily, pansy, scarlet sage, verbena and violets. Heavy infestations can cause leaf distortion and lack of vigor in your plants, but otherwise healthy plants can survive. The primary issue with aphids feeding in your garden is the honeydew they secrete while feeding. This sweet substance attracts ants and can lead to sooty mold infections.
Foxglove aphids are easily knocked off plant foliage, and a strong spray of water from your garden hose is often enough to remove aphids from most plants. The aphids that you knock off are usually unable to climb back onto the plant. Monitor your plants to catch infestations of foxglove aphids early. According to the University of California, this aphid species tends to disperse throughout your plant rather than establishing colonies as other aphids do. The foxglove aphid’s rapid rate of reproduction and its tendency to move deep within the plant can make it difficult to control. However, infestations of aphids can be chemically controlled with insecticides containing imidacloprid, oxydemeton-methyl, dimethoate, acetamiprid, pymetrozine, flonicamid, or spirotetramat.