Whiteflies attack vegetable plants in summer. Hot weather, combined with dust buildup and poor air circulation, favors these small pests. Although whiteflies pose the greatest threat to vegetables grown in a greenhouse, they can also become a problem in a garden bed. An organic control plan prevents a whitefly infestation without the need for harmful chemicals.
Whiteflies have pale yellow bodies and white wings. The small pests tend to collect in groups on the undersides of vegetable leaves, where you can also see their small clusters of eggs. They feed by piercing the leaves and sucking out the sap, which results in leaf damage, distorted growth or discoloration. Whiteflies also exude a sticky honeydew which leaves behind a residue on the foliage. This residue sometimes causes mildews and molds to grow on the leaf surface.
It's often possible to control outdoor whitefly populations with physical removal if you catch an infestation early. Pinch out and dispose of badly infested leaves so the flies don't spread. Rinse small colonies off the plants with a sharp spray of water. You can also vacuum adult whiteflies out of the air when they are flying between plants, although this is more suitable for vegetables grown indoors or in a greenhouse. Vigilant physical removal in the early stages of an infestation may prevent the whiteflies from spreading so you won't need further control methods.
Mulch and Traps
Reflective mulches tend to repel whiteflies from vegetable beds. A silver foil mulch, applied over the soil and around the base of the vegetable plants, helps prevent the pests from choosing your garden as a feeding ground. Make sure the vegetable plants are still getting enough water under the mulch. Sticky traps placed around the base of plants attract the whiteflies away from the vegetables and also provide a method for monitoring the extent of the infestation. Using the traps in conjunction with mulch can eliminate a minor to moderate infestation.
Predators and Organic Controls
Ladybeetles, lacewing bugs and bigeyed bugs all feed on whiteflies, which helps keep the population in check. Avoiding chemical controls and using organic controls prevents accidentally killing these natural predators. Organic insecticidal soaps, rubbing alcohol or neem oil can kill whiteflies if you spray it directly on a colony. Spray these controls at dusk to avoid accidental contact with beneficial insect predators. Rinse the foliage with clear water the following day so the organic chemicals don't leave behind a residue on the vegetables, which can weaken the plants.
- Hemera Technologies/AbleStock.com/Getty Images