What time is it? Time to spring clean your health
Where do you begin? Start with the choices you make at the grocery store. Sticking to whole foods and taking the time to read labels can have a positive impact on your health.
LAS CRUCES - Spring signifies new beginnings and while you may be gearing up for that big spring cleaning at the house, it may also be a good time to clean out your diet, ridding it of foods that can sabotage your health.
One way to do this is by “eating clean,” a lifestyle and diet that focuses on eating fresh, wholesome foods that have undergone little or no processing, such as lean meats, fresh fruits, vegetables, nuts and seeds, beans and whole grains, like brown rice, millet, amaranth and quinoa.
“Depending on where you read about his movement, some (clean eating diets) are going to be more strict than others,” said Brigit Dooley, RD, assistant director of the Didactic Program in Dietetics at New Mexico State University. “But overall, I think it’s beneficial because it reduces the amount of salt, excess fats and added sugars that a person would eat.”
According to the Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, most Americans exceed recommendations for added sugars, saturated fats and sodium, and about three-quarters of the population do not eat enough vegetables, fruits, dairy and oils.
Eating foods high in sodium, or salt, can increase blood pressure and risk for heart disease and stroke, while eating foods that contain saturated fats can raise cholesterol and are often high in calories. Eating trans fats can also increase risk of developing heart disease, stroke and Type 2 diabetes, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the American Heart Association.
A diet high in added sugars (sugars and syrups added to foods or beverages when they are processed or prepared) can contribute to weight gain, poor nutrition and tooth decay, according to Mayo Clinic.
Dooley said while eating clean is not necessarily the result of any kind of scientific study, eating more whole foods (foods that are as close to their natural form as possible) can be a good way to improve health and increases intake of vitamins and fiber.
While approaches to eating clean vary, some of the other principles often associated with this lifestyle include eating five to six small meals a day (three meals, with snacks in between) to rev up metabolism, exercising regularly and avoiding calories consumed through beverages, according to cookinglight.com.
Beverages, like soft drinks, fruit drinks, sweetened coffee and tea, energy drinks, alcoholic beverages and flavored waters are the major source of added sugars in a typical U.S. diet, according to ODPHP.
Navigating the grocery store
If you’re just beginning to eat clean, or taking on any new diet, Dooley said one of the first things you should do is change the way you think about it.
“Look at it as a lifestyle change,” she said. “So it’s a way of eating instead of a diet that you’ll go on for a little bit.”
Eating clean begins with the choices you make at the grocery store, so start by selecting fresh fruits, vegetables and other whole foods, Dooley said.
“Make sure (you) include lots of variety — lots of different foods from all the different food groups, and keep it as colorful as possible,” she said. “The variety makes sure you are getting all the nutrients, vitamins and minerals your body needs to function properly.”
Another important part of eating clean is being able to decipher labels.
“If (you’re) looking at packaged foods, I would look for ingredients that you can pronounce and that are familiar,” Dooley said.
To avoid highly processed foods, stick to foods that contain five ingredients or less, Dooley said.
Labels on packaged foods can help you avoid foods high in sodium, added sugars, unhealthy fats and cholesterol.
“Every food label has a percent daily value and that’s how much of that food would contribute a particular nutrient to a daily diet,” Dooley said. “Five percent or less is considered low, and 20 percent or more is considered high. So we’d want to stay under that 20 percent.”
According to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration website, the FDA is proposing to update the nutrition facts label found on most food packages in the U.S. that would include updated serving size requirements, a new design and new requirements for for certain package sizes. In 2015, the FDA issued a supplemental proposed rule that would also require declaration of the percent daily value for added sugars — something that is not currently available on food labels.
"(New government dietary guidelines for Americans) recommend no more than 10 percent of your daily calories in added sugars," Dooley said. "So if you're on a 2,000 calorie diet, no more than 200 calories should come from sugar."
Living a 'clean' lifestyle
Sarah Harlow, 25, an employee at Mountain View Market Co-Op in Las Cruces, said she's been eating clean for more than a year. For her, eating clean is about moderation and eating foods that are whole, or unprocessed as much as possible, she said.
“I try to eat a lot of fruits and vegetables and high quality meats that are pasture raised and ethically produced,” Harlow said.
She also believes that it's important to follow your body’s cues, she said. “If I’m craving a salad, I go for it,” she said. “If I’m craving a hamburger, that’s great.”
She also enjoys a glass of wine every now and then, but abstains from drinking soda and limits sugary foods, she said.
Since starting to eat clean, Harlow said she has more energy and has been able to manage the depression, anxiety and fatigue she has experienced since she was a teenager.
“Eating clean helped me feel better about myself and life in general,” she said. “It gives my body the tools it needs to deal with my anxiety a little better.”
Harlow said while she finds eating clean an easy lifestyle to follow, it does require planning ahead for meals.
“It’s important to take a day and do a meal prep so you have something in the kitchen that’s ready,” she said. “As long as I have food prepared for myself, it’s really easy.”
Harlow said for people just starting to explore eating clean, she suggests trying new foods to keep it interesting.
“Try a different vegetable every week and see what you think,” she said.
Ceara Angel, executive chef at Angelfood Chef Services, a healthy meal plan and prep business, said she also tries to eat clean and reinforces healthy eating with her two teenage sons.
"I'm much stricter with my diet than my teenagers," Angel said.
Angel said for her, eating clean is about being conscious of what she eats, knowing where her food comes from and eating local and organic when possible.
Angel said her advice to others trying to eat clean is to take the time to read labels on the back of packaged foods because words like 'organic' and 'all natural' get thrown around a lot.
“‘All natural’ doesn’t necessarily mean natural,” she said. “It’s misleading. It’s a marketing ploy so people will buy their products.”
Angel said eating clean, along with an active lifestyle, has helped her lose weight and keeps her mind sharp.
“The most important thing is you are what you eat and you have to remember that,” she said. “If you’re trying to heal from something physically or mentally, the food that you put in your body is going to affect the way that you heal.”
The right fit
Harlow said when eating clean, she thinks it’s important for each person to stick to guidelines that they feel are best for their body and that not every “clean” diet is going to work for everyone.
“It’s really what your body needs and what your lifestyle requires,” she said.
It's also important to allow yourself to make mistakes when trying to stick to a new diet, or way of eating, Dooley said.
“Because we’re humans, we’re bound to slip up once and a while,” she said. “Know that you always have the choice to get back on track, so just pick up from where you left off and keep going; I wouldn’t make a big deal about it.”
When craving something that’s outside of your diet guidelines, Angel said she suggests just taking care of the craving so you don’t end up binging on other things later.
It's also important to enjoy your eating style, Dooley said.
“For some people that may mean including an indulgence every now and then,” she said. “The key is not to go overboard, and if it ultimately helps you stick to your healthy eating plans as a whole, then it’s OK.”
Dooley said because there is so much conflicting information out there on what’s healthy and what’s not, it’s important to make sure you get your information about healthy eating from a credible source, such as a registered dietitian and websites like eatright.org or choosemyplate.gov.
Basic principles of eating clean
- Eat whole foods: Unprocessed foods, such as fruits and vegetables, whole grains, grass-fed and free-range meats, low fat dairy products, unsalted nuts and seeds.
- Avoid processed foods: Any food that has a label and is made with more than one ingredient. You don’t have to eliminate all processed foods (like whole grain pasta or natural cheeses), but if you can’t pronounce an ingredient on a label, don’t put that food in your shopping basket.
- Eliminate refined sugar: Refined sugar provides nothing but calories. Other sweeteners can be used, but with all the good foods you add to your diet.
- Eat five or six small meals a day: Eating smaller meals throughout the day can help rev up your metabolism.
- Cook your own meals: Instead of buying meals in a box, cook meals from scratch. Clean, whole foods need little preparation beyond chopping and sauteing to make a satisfying meal.
- Combine protein with carbs: For the most satisfaction from your diet, and so you’ll be less tempted to eat junk food, combine protein with carbs or carbs and fat to fuel your body and quash hunger pangs.
Source: Eating Clean for Dummies cheat sheet at dummies.com