Prostate cancer also referred to as the “Hidden Cancer” is one of the primary causes of death among American men. It is estimated that drinking green tea regularly reduces the risk of prostate cancer by two-thirds.
Several studies have supported the fact that drinking six to 15 cups of green tea daily can significantly reduce the chance of developing prostate cancer.
Some researchers believe that the antioxidants present in green tea may have a protective effect against certain cancers. A study conducted on men at increased risk of developing prostate cancer demonstrated that the substances present in green tea known as catechins, are quite successful in preventing the development of prostat cancer. Catechins are the major group of polyphenols in green tea. The most important catechin present is EpiGalloCatechin-3-Gallate (EGCG). EGCG may cause cancer cells
to die as normal cells do. It may stop the angiogenesis process, i.e. formation of new blood vessels, cutting off the blood supply to cancer cells, without harming healthy tissue. The polyphenols present in the tea, effect the cells exposed to testosterone, the male hormone, which usually stimulates prostate cancer. However, the effect depends on the dosage.
According to research published in the December 2005 issue of Cancer Research, Green Tea Polyphenols prevent Prostate Cancer development at multiple levels. The polyphenols present in green tea, prevent the spread of prostate cancer by targeting the molecular pathways that shut down the proliferation and spread of tumor cells.
Green tea is mainly consumed in Japan, China, and other Asian nations. Its benefits have made green tea popular in the Western countries as well. Asian countries typically consume three cups a day or more of green tea.
Green tea extracts are also available in capsules. It is recommended to take three capsules of green tea extracts daily to avoid prostrate cancer. However, the amount of green tea to be consumed daily has yet to be determined for beneficial effects.
Green tea is made from the leaves of Camellia Sinensis plant. The difference between black tea and green tea is that black tea is fermented and processed and removes most of the protective phytochemicals. Green tea is unfermented usually brewed using 1 to 2 teaspoons of the dried tea in a cup of boiling water or steeped for 3-15 minutes. Green tea is also promoted as an herb that can prevent certain bacterial infections, stomach problems, vomiting, and diarrhea. It also helps reduce tooth decay, blood pressure, cholesterol levels, and blockages of the blood vessels in the heart, which can lead to heart attacks.