Spending too many hours glued to a screen could have a damaging effect on toddlers’ brain development, a study warns.
Scientists compared MRI scans of almost 50 children under six with the results of questionnaires completed by their parents setting out how long they spend on phones, tablets and watching TV.
Youngsters spending more than the recommended one hour each day staring at screens displayed lower levels of development in white matter, which effectively represents the brain’s internal communications system.
That was also linked to lower language and literacy skills and indicated a slower brain processing speed, according to the results.
The study, published in the Journal of the American Medical Association’s Pediatrics, examined 47 boys and girls aged between three and five.
Lead author Dr John Hutton, director of the Reading & Literacy Discovery Centre at Cincinnati Children’s Hospital, said 28 of the children, or six in ten, had their own smartphone or tablet and 19 (41 per cent) had a television or portable device in their bedroom.
He added: ‘The findings highlight the need to understand effects of screen time on the brain – particularly during stages of dynamic brain development in early childhood – so providers, policymakers and parents can set healthy limits.’
The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) recommends screen use for two to five year-olds be limited to one hour per day of high-quality programs.
Parents should also watch with them to understand the information – and apply it to the world around them, they added.
Scientists believe screen time fails to stimulate the brain in the same way as reading books and can reduce sleep – which is essential for a child’s development.
However, critics are sceptical about the dangers of screen time in children and have criticised the quality of available scientific evidence.
Dr Hutton said: ‘In a single generation, through what has been described as a vast ‘uncontrolled experiment,’ the landscape of childhood has been digitised, affecting how children play, learn and form relationships.
‘In addition to traditional programming, rapidly emerging technologies, particularly portable electronic devices, provide unprecedented access to a wide range of media.
‘Use begins in infancy and increases with age, and it was recently estimated at more than two hours per day in children younger than nine years, aside from use during childcare and school.’
The AAP advises designated shared times when screens are banned – such as during dinner or in the car – as well as media-free locations such as bedrooms.
Parents should also deny any screen media other than video-chatting to infants under 18 months.
They further stressed the importance of exercise and sleep.
‘This study found an association between increased screen-based media use, compared with the AAP guidelines, and lower micro-structural integrity of brain white matter tracts supporting language and emergent literacy skills in pre-kindergarten children,’ Dr Hutton said.
‘Given that screen-based media use is ubiquitous and increasing in children in home, childcare, and school settings, these findings suggest the need for further study to identify the implications for the developing brain, particularly during stages of dynamic brain growth in early childhood.’