Chapter 1 - AP Government Herman
Terms in this set (35)
a hierarchical authority structure that uses task specialization, operates on the merit principle and behaves with impersonality; a system of government in which most of the important decisions are made by state officials rather than elected representatives.
something of value that cannot be withheld from a group member.
ex. money, clean air, etc.
a system of selecting policymakers and of organizing government so that policy represents and responds to the public's preferences.
a belief in the equality of all people.
a theory of government and politics contending that societies are divided along class lines and that the upper-class elite will rule
the institutions and processes through which public policies are made for a society
money received by a government
gross domestic product
the sum total of the value of all the goods and services produced in a nation
a theory of government and politics contending that groups are so strong that the government is weakened
the belief that individuals should be left on their own by the government
an organization of people with shared policy goals entering the policy process at several points to try to achieve those goals
the principle that the government should not meddle in the economy
the state of being free within society from oppressive restrictions imposed by authority on one's way of life, behavior, or political views
the political channels through which people's concerns become political issues on the policy agenda.
ex. the media, elections, interest groups
a fundamental principle of traditional democratic theory. When choosing among alternatives, the will of the majority half should be followed and respected.
a principle of traditional democratic theory that guarantees rights to those who do not belong to the majorities.
a theory of government and politics that politics is mainly a competition among many groups, each one pressing for its own preferred policies.
the issues that attract the serious attention of public officials and other people actually involved in politics at any given time.
a condition that occurs when no coalition is strong enough to form a majority and establish policy. The result is that nothing may get done.
the effects a policy has on people and problems. impacts are analyzed to see how well a policy has met its goal and at what cost.
the branches of government charged with taking action on political issues.
4. bureaucracy (most political scientists consider this the 4th policymaking institution)
the process by which policy comes into being and evolves over time. People's interests , problems, and concerns create political issues for government policymakers. These issues shape policy, which in turn impacts people, generating more interests, problems, and concerns.
lack of enthusiasm towards politics
*low voter turnout
commonly shared attitudes, beliefs, and core values about how government should operate.
an issue that arises when people disagree about a problem and how to fix it.
all the activities used by citizens to influence the selection of political leaders or the policies they pursue.
the process by which we select our governmental leaders and what policies these leaders pursue.
a belief in the power of regular people and in their right to have control over their government rather than a small group of political insiders or a wealthy elite.
a choice that government makes in response to a political issue.
the use of government authority to control or change some practice in a private sector. they pervade the daily lives of people and institutions.
a basic principle of traditional democratic theory that describes how a few leaders act on behalf of many followers.
groups that have a narrow interest, tend to dislike compromise, and often draw membership from people new to politics.
a written law passed by a legislative body
a way of organizing the government so all the power resides in the central government.
The belief that one's political participation really matters - that one's vote can actually make a difference
YOU MIGHT ALSO LIKE...
American Government - Your Voice, Your Future | Matthew Kerbel
Herman AP Gov Chapter 1 Vocab
Government in America AP Edition Chapter 1 Terms
Government in America: Chapter 1 (Introducing Government in America) Key Terms
OTHER SETS BY THIS CREATOR
AP Human Geography - Agriculture
AP Government -15 Required Supreme Court Cases
AP Government Required Documents
AP Human Geography Chapter 4 Test Review
THIS SET IS OFTEN IN FOLDERS WITH...
Chapter 2 - AP Government Herman
Chapter 3 - AP Government Herman
Chapter 8 - AP Government Herman
Congress, Chapter 11 - AP Government Herman