How to Get Your Magnolias to Bloom
There are a few reasons why your magnolias might not be blooming, and a few ways you can help them begin blooming. You should be able to see magnolia blossoms in the later spring months and especially in May.
Most magnolias grow best in climate zones seven through nine, though it can survive in colder climates. However, in the cooler environments, it will be harder for your magnolia bush to bloom, because the flower buds, as the most delicate and tender parts of the plants, will often die out before they bloom.
If this is the case, there isn’t a way to really change your atmosphere, however, you can do things that may still help your magnolias bloom. Make sure that your soil has plenty of nutrients and when you water your magnolia trees, water them with warmer water.
If you have a smaller magnolia bush or tree that is potted, consider moving it indoors throughout the winter. If it is in a warmer climate, it may be able to produce blossoms, however, it is important that your tree or bush gets a lot of sun and water.
Though these tips will not always produce buds, it will make your magnolia bushes’ bud producing chances a little higher.
If you are living in the right climate zones your plant may be a little weaker than others if it isn’t getting the magnolia nutrients that it needs to survive. It could be missing important nutrients or even micronutrients.
To determine if your soil lacks the nutrients needed for your magnolia tree or bush, you can test your soil by calling your local cooperative extension service. They will be happy to test your soil for you and tell you what nutrients are missing or if there are any nutrients that are preventing your magnolias from blooming. For example, soils that are rich in nitrogen will help plants produce more leaves and fewer blooms.
After your soil is tested, you will want to mulch your magnolia plants with a mulch type that will benefit your plants. Ask your cooperative extension service representative what they would suggest you do and follow their instructions accordingly. You may also want to mulch the roots of the plants to make your plants stronger. To do this, you will want to make holes in the ground around your magnolia bush or tree. Make sure that they are deep enough to reach the roots and place the mulch around the roots. Fill your dug up soil around the roots. Building up the strength in the roots will help your plant thrive overall.
Also make sure that your plant is getting the amount of water it needs to survive.
Other Versions of Magnolias
If your magnolia bush or tree still will not produce blooms, you may need to plant stronger and hardier members of the magnolia plant family, such as the “Brachen Brown Beauty.”