Are you a beginner or an intermediate level programmer? Want to learn the basics or enhance your programming skills even further?
In a survey done by a reputed online forum StackOverflow, half of the participants agreed to have written their first computer program by the time they were sixteen. They also concluded that Python was voted to be the fastest-growing major programming language. This shows how bright the future of programming is. In this post, I have shared a few tips to become an expert programmer.
Here Are the 5 Things You Can Do to Quickly Become Good at Computer Programming
1) Improve your logic building skills
No matter how well versed you are with the syntax– of the programming language– you won’t be able to solve complex real-world problems until you have got logic building skills. What is logic building you ask? Logic building is the use of age-old, tried and tested computer algorithms in problem-solving. The more you use boilerplate algorithms, the better you will get at coming up with unique solutions.
2) Attend a coding Bootcamp
A lot of newbie programmers wonder whether joining a coding boot camp is worth it. Before signing up with a boot camp company, make sure you assess the ROI of the boot camp. Will you be able to get your investment back after the boot camp? If yes, then how long will it take? To make things simpler, visit the Council on Integrity in Results Reporting (CIRR) website and compare several coding boot camps and their ROIs.
3) C Language
Software companies may not prefer to build their applications using C but it is one of the oldest programming languages. Also, it is more compatible with a machine than it is for a human. Hence, by diving deep into C, you can learn the fundamentals of programming in a more in-depth way. However, do not waste your time trying to build applications in C. It is arduous and cumbersome.
4) Practice a lot to gain confidence
Anything you do for the first time feels difficult and unattainable. Whether it is learning to drive a car, adopting a new lifestyle, meeting a new person, or learning to write code. With practice, things get easier. But bear in mind that learning to code is not as easy and straightforward as learning to drive a car. You need patience, understanding, and resilience. After a few months of practice, you will be able to write code without referring to boilerplate code or templates–just like an expert does.
5) Learn a server side programming language like PHP
Not everyone can begin with functional programming languages like Java or Python. PHP is a programming language I found the easiest to learn and wrote code in. Plus, to develop real-world applications with Java and Python, you not only need to be proficient with the language itself but also with other related elements. This is not the case with PHP. Just set up the development environment on your PC, learn a bit of MySQL and begin building web applications.
I hope the above-mentioned tips help you in your journey as a programmer. Often, in the initial phases of learning how to code, it is better to take the tried and tested beaten path. You can use your creativity once you reach a decent level.