AP Chapter 13
Chapter 13: Economic Unrest and Social Unrest (1830-1850)
How did Industrialization spread across Europe?
How did Industrialization change the European labor force?
How did Industrialization affect European families?
What role did women play in the Industrial Revolution?
How did the establishment of police forces and the reform of prisons change society?
How did socialism challenge classical economics?
Why did a series of revolutions erupt across Europe in 1848?
Toward Industrial Society
The labor force
III. Family structures and the Industrial Revolution
Women in the early Industrial Revolution
Problems of crime, order, and poverty
VII. 1848: Year of Revolution
VIII. In Perspective
anarchists (483) Marxism (484) utopian socialists (481)
Chartism (470) Pan-Slavism (493)
Corn Laws (481) utilitarianism (480)
Chapter 13 Review Questions
- What inventions were particularly important in the development of industrialism? How did industrialism change society? Why were the years covered in this chapter so difficult for artisans? How was the European labor force transformed into a wage labor workforce?
- How did the industrial economy change the working-class family? What roles and duties did various family members assume? How did the role of women change in the new industrial era?
- What were the goals of the working class in the new industrial society, and how did they differ from middle-class goals? Why did the working class and the middle class pursue different goals?
- Why did European states create police forces in the nineteenth century? How and why did prisons change during this era?
- How would you define socialism? What were the chief ideas of the early socialists? How did the ideas of Karl Marx differ from those of the socialists? What historical role did Marx assign to the proletariat?
- What factors, old and new, led to the widespread outbreak of the revolutions in 1848? Were the causes in the various countries essentially the same, or did each have its own particular set of circumstances? Why did these revolutions fail throughout Europe? What roles did liberals and nationalists play in the revolutions? Why did they sometimes clash?