While it may sound counter-intuitive, drinking warm or room temperature water in the summer heat is actually better for your body than iced beverages.
The body has its own cooling mechanisms like sweat and breathing, so it doesn’t need ice water to cool off on a hot summer day. For centuries, cultures in Asia, Africa and around the world actually drank hot tea when it was hottest outside, and still do to this day.
But why? Who wants to drink hot tea when it’s 100°F (37°C) out? What is it about cold foods that our bodies just do not agree with? Well, because the body is between 70%-80% fluid, any fluids that are consumed become part of the whole. When the majority of the fluid we consume happens to be cold, that can make it harder for our bodies to properly circulate blood, among other dysfunctions.
If we can bring heat to our bellies (any time of year) then that will help increase the flow of cool water energy
to the rest of the body. This increases core temperature and helps us maintain a state of homeostasis
in which our bodies better adapt to extreme outside temperatures.
On a hot summer day, iced drinks can cool you down in the moment and can be very needed at times if you’re overheating, for example. But for long-term maintenance of a regulated temperature originating from the inside, making a habit of drinking warming drinks on a regular basis will improve your overall health.
Try this refreshing ginger lemonade to warm the belly while allowing the rest of your body to cool off this summer.
Honey Ginger Lemonade Recipe
Nature provides many gifts which are designed to warm our insides and establish the ideal inner temperature, and ginger is one of them. Ginger is naturally warming and soothing to the body which helps in digestion, nausea, insomnia, and many other ailments.
Here’s what you’ll need:
Makes 10 servings of about 8 ounces each.
½ cup honey
⅓ cup sliced fresh ginger
1 ½ cups fresh lemon juice
8 cups of water
A few mint leaves (for garnish)
Combine 2 cups of water and ginger in a medium saucepan and bring to a boil at medium-high heat for 2 minutes.
Turn the stove off and remove the pan from the heat, stirring in the honey.
Let it steep for 10 minutes, and once it reaches room temperature, put it in the refrigerator to chill.
When you are ready to serve, remove from the fridge and transfer to a pitcher with 6 cups of water and the lemon juice, and stir. Add some stevia if you prefer a sweeter taste, and more lemon for less sweet.
Sprinkle the mint leaves on top and enjoy!
Adding some fresh ginger to your summer drink is a refreshing way to keep the inner balance of the body stable and even fight disease.