Ice hockey evolved from simple stick and ball games played in the United Kingdom. The origins of the game date back to the 19th century. It was when the modern-day hockey was played on ice. The sport has then gone on to become one of the largest in the world. There are several major participants originating from North America.
The objective of ice hockey is to hit a small puck across the ice. You should then hit it into a goal with a hockey stick. One point is awarded every time the puck goes into the goal. The puck passes around the players on the ice. It’s the opposition job to try and prevent the other team from scoring. At the end of the game, the team with the most goals wins.
If the game ends in a tie, it will go into overtime. The first team which then scores first will be the winner. Ice hockey contains some strict rules. The game plays on an ice rink measuring 61m in length by 30m in width. You will find the rink divided into three main sections. The middle section includes a centre circle where the games start. It is the neutral zone.
At either side of the neutral zone, there are attacking and defending zones. These depend by whichever team has the puck at the time. There are two end zone faceoff circles and spots in each attacking and defending zone. You will also find a goal crease which is a half-circle surrounding the goal. The board’s area is behind the goal.
In Ice hockey, each player must have their own hockey stick along with ice skates and a range of padding. This may include gloves, arm guards, shoulder pads, padded shorts, helmet and face mask. Each team must have a maximum of 20 players. But only 6 can be on the ice at any one time. The others are used as substitutes.
The six starters include 5 outfield players and a goaltender. Usually, each player has a specific position. But they are free to move around the ice depending on the game or tactics. Each round lasts for three 20 minute periods. The game clock stops for every stoppage. Once the time is up in each period, the game stops.
Some Rules on Ice Hockey
— The game starts with a face-off. The referee drops the puck between two opposing players. They should scrap to win position for their team.
— Players can use physical force to win the puck off their adversary.
— Players who commit a minor penalty will need to leave the ice for two minutes.
— A minor penalty can include tripping an adversary with their stick or hooking with their stick.
— Major penalties occur when a player is removed from the ice for up to 5 minutes. These may include inflicting injury on opposing players or fighting.
Ice hockey comes with many interesting rules which make it fun. Would you like to give it a try virtually? Aspers.com is the ideal destination. Hop over to the site and find the likes of Break Away Deluxe Slot. It is themed on ice hockey and plays out over a 5×5 grid.
What might interest you more is Aspers Casino Promotions! While surfing through the website, you may have a glance at the promotions page. It constantly rewards bonuses which can be used on games. Enjoy one of the most popular sports in the world through your mobile phone!