Arthritis is the common for older people, and it is long-lasting, and in its start spreading on the whole body and it can lead to the complete deformation of some joints. As the Greek words say "ATHRON" -which means joints and "ITIS" -which means inflammation the arthritis is inflammation of joints.
As there are many kinds of illness and they all refer to joints here are the most familiar ones: Rheumatoid Arthritis, Osteoarthritis and Gout.
This serious disease can appear at any age of the human life. It is much more dangerous than osteoarthritis, because the bones and muscles do not function, since the ligaments and tendons are damaged by the illness. This autoimmune illness by which synovial membranes that line the joints inflame and reduces the make of deformation and pain of all the joints and also disturb the muscles, tendons and other tissues of the body.
This deteriorating and progressive illness happens to people over 40 years of age, and it usually attacks knees and spine. In this case the bones become bigger and the space between them smaller, so that they scrub among themselves and make great pain.
The big amount of uric acid makes accumulation and formation of the crystals in the area of the joints, bringing inflamation and irritation, causing this illness, which attacks knee, elbow, thumb and the big toe.
Many people believe that the living conditions cause this very painful illness. But the truth is that this may be a reason as well as the trauma in an accident or a bad fall. Diversity of reasons that initiates arthritis are, joint Instability, environmental factors, hormonal factors, food allergy, psychological factors, nutrient deficiency.
Home therapy for arthritis
To feel better it is recommended to cover the painful joint with a cloth and sleep with it.
Pain from Arthritis can be lessened by smooth olive oil massage.
For home massage which reduces pain at once you can use the mixture of olive oil and Pressed Garlic, Juniper, Lavender, Sage, Rosemary, Thyme, or Sassafras oils in proportion 1:10.
First of all bowels should be cleaned by half-heated purgative for a few days.
Massage and steam baths bring great relief.
It is recommended to use vitamin C, zinc and calcium, but not to take cold baths but swim in the sea water.
Using hot vinegar for the massage before going to sleep is a good home therapy.
To prevent Arthritis it is good to use dandelion leaf as diuretic, and its root is cleaning liver and bowels.
Camphor, ginger, Epsom salt, omega-3 fatty acids in fish oil, can help in curing arthritis.
Nettle Soup is recommended in the diet for arthritis.
It is not good to sit for a long time but it is also recommended not to move too much, because of the possibility of damaging of ligaments.