KSF Space Foundation and Edison effects Mexico has launched recently a success near space mission from Mexico carrying a platform consisting of Small Sats from different universities (Morocco, Mexico & UK) and schools with ability to transmit IoT command from earth to Space vice versa. This mission considered the world’s 1st near space mission of its kind.
The Stratos Satellite CubeSat Scientific experiment includes: Accelerometer, Gyroscope, Magnetometer, pressure, humidity, UV spectrum analyzer, thermopile sensor, Camera and Video Recording, GPS, Altitude sensor, Radiation sensor, Gas Sensor, CO2 and Methane. Research focusing on stratospheric studies on Ozone Layer and beyond to conduct scientific experiments to estimate seriousness of Global Warming and Climate Change
Also, KSF Space is preparing to launch this October’19 new space mission to near space carrying new small sat and for the 1st time microbiology testing instruments in the microgravity. This mission is dedicated to universities and schools (medicine and biotechnology schools) who are interesting to send their biological experiment / tissue / cell to outer space for testing and examining the behaviour of the cells / tissues in micro-gravity / near zero gravity above earth by 35 KM Alt. As minimum altitude using KSF Space “Space Capsule”
Launching with closed containers will protect the biological sample / cell / from the elements during ascent to Earth’s stratosphere.
Dr. Kayyali Says “We welcome experiments and nanosatellites from universities and schools to join our future missions; we are always open to help and guide academic research all over the world”
KSF Space Foundation was initially founded to enable cost-efficient access to LEO with zero-environmental impact flying solutions. The foundation offers access to near-space and LEO for research and scientific experiments in many fields, as Earth or Space Observation, biological testing, satellite positioning detection, earth magnetic field measurement, radio transmit, atmosphere science and technology experiment.
KSF Space Foundation also announced the launch of the world’s first NanoSatellite Engineering Professional “NEP Certification” for space education and the space industry.
More about KSF Space, www.ksf.space