Our editors will review what you’ve submitted and determine whether to revise the article.Join Britannica's Publishing Partner Program and our community of experts to gain a global audience for your work!
Bronwyn Bishop, in full Bronwyn Kathleen Bishop, (born October 19, 1942, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia), Australian Liberal Party politician who served in the federal Senate (1987–94) and House of Representatives (1994–2016); she was speaker of the House from 2013 to 2015.
Bishop was educated at the University of Sydney. She was admitted to practice law in 1967 and was elected 20 years later to represent New South Wales in the Senate, having decided early in her life to be a politician:
I wanted to have a say. Then I thought if I’m going to write the laws of the land, I really ought to understand them. So I decided to do law at university, which was a pretty unusual thing for a girl to do.
Bishop rose to national prominence as a member of the Senate Estimates Committee, where her televised criticism of tax officers, including the head of the tax department, gained her wide popular support.
By 1993 Bishop was the choice of many Australian conservatives as their most popular personality. Following the disastrous and unexpected defeat of the conservative coalition in the March 1993 general election, Liberal Party leaders in Canberra decided to stick for the time being with their losing chieftain, John Hewson. They overlooked the clear call for new blood focused around the personality of the populist Bishop, and, accordingly, throughout 1993 the conservatives were destabilized by continued rumours and suggestions of a possible leadership challenge.
Recognizing her charisma, Hewson tried to win her over to his camp, but he failed. Bishop rejected Hewson’s offer to join the 1993 shadow cabinet in a junior capacity, and almost immediately public opinion polls confirmed the wisdom of her decision by keeping her ahead of Hewson as preferred leader of the Liberal Party. While Bishop’s main target was Hewson, she did not spare Prime Minister Paul Keating. She castigated Keating for his visit to meet Queen Elizabeth II that September. She said it was unconstitutional and that he should cut short his European trip, which she claimed the country could not afford, and return home to attend to the problems of the budget and the economy.
Although Bishop aimed for a leadership position in her party, Australian parliamentary practice demanded that party leaders hold seats in the House of Representatives. In October 1993 a vacancy occurred in the House of Representatives for the safe seat of Mackellar, and immediately Bishop announced her intention to leave the Senate to seek preselection for that seat, which she won in a March 1994 by-election. Her challenge for the Liberal leadership two months later, however, was unsuccessful. Bishop won reelection through the 1990s and early 21st century. During the premiership of John Howard she served as minister for defense industry, science, and personnel (1996–98) and minister for aged care (1998–2001).
In 2013 Bishop was elected speaker of the House, but her tenure was marred by controversy. She drew criticism for her perceived partisanship, and in July 2015 a travel-expense scandal erupted after it was revealed that she had taken a taxpayer-funded helicopter flight to a fund-raiser. The following month Bishop resigned as speaker. In 2016 she lost the preselection vote for her House seat, and she left the post later that year.
Learn More in these related Britannica articles:
Liberal Party of Australia
Liberal Party of Australia, one of the major Australian political parties. In its current form it was founded in 1944–45 by Robert Gordon Menzies. The term “Liberals” was used in federal politics from 1901 by radical protectionists; they continued to…
University of Sydney
University of Sydney, coeducational institution of higher learning in Sydney, nominally private but supported financially by both the Commonwealth of Australia and New South Wales. Founded in 1850, it is Australia’s oldest university as well as its largest. The university is composed…
New South Wales
New South Wales, state of southeastern Australia, occupying both coastal mountains and interior tablelands. It is bounded by the Pacific Ocean to the east and the states of Victoria to the south, South Australia to the west, and Queensland to the north. New South Wales also includes Lord Howe Island,…