OUR CURRICULUM STATEMENT 2018-2019
- Do Academies need to follow the National Curriculum?
Academies do not have to follow the National Curriculum but must teach a broad and balanced curriculum which includes Numeracy, Literacy and Science.
Academies must follow the Early Years Foundation for Nursery and Reception classes.
Academies must also make arrangements:
- Year 1 Phonics Check
- KS1 teacher assessments
- KS2 National tests
2. What about the Curriculum at St Cyprian’s?
At St Cyprians Greek Orthodox Primary Academy we implement the National Curriculum for England, statutory from September 2014 in the core subjects of Numeracy and Literacy in Years 1 to 6.
The National Curriculum can be downloaded from www.gov.uk/government/publications/national-curriculum-in-england-primary-curriculum
The emphasis is on developing the children’s reading, writing and mathematical skills.
See the key objectives Reading, Writing and Maths for the skills by year group. CORE TARGETS
Read Write Inc Phonics scheme is used from Early Years to Year 2. Please see below for a video on how Phonics is taught.
We try to create a stimulating environment in which children enjoy learning. We provide an academically challenging curriculum which allows all children to develop their talents and interests.
3. What about non-core subjects?
We have a themed approach to teaching which includes all other foundation subjects. Subjects are linked more cohesively, making learning meaningful for all children.
4. How is the curriculum structured?
We follow the Early Years Foundation Stage Curriculum 2013. The curriculum is planned/assessed using development matters objectives through a topic approach and following children’s choices of learning.
Years 1 – 4
The foundation subjects i.e. Geography, Science, History, Art, D & T and Music are delivered through a themed approach, see Curriculum Challenge Map.
All themes start with a question.
We believe this promotes the spiritual, moral, mental and physical developments of all pupils.
Religious Education (R.E.), Greek Enrichment, Personal, Social, Health and Economic (PSHE) education and Languages are taught discretely, as are certain aspects of Music, P.E., Computing
Years 5 - 6
We have discrete subject teaching as we believe this prepares pupils for the responsibilities and opportunities, experiences of later life. We use subject objectives in the National Curriculum 2014 as guidance. See Curriculum map.
5. What about assessment?
The Academy has devised it's own bespoke assessment programme. It is based on number of objectives met at the end of each academic year.
The current Year 6 children will be sitting SATs May 2020 and will be scored out of 100 for each paper.
Early Years will be assessed using the Early Learning Goals from the EYFS.
Key Stage One SATs will continue to be teacher assessed.
6. What about Modern Foreign Languages?
Languages taught at the school:
Greek language, 3 times a week
Greek Enrichment 1 hour per week. (Mythology, singing & dancing)
The curriculum is evaluated on a yearly basis.