1 Lab 7.1.9b Introduction to Fluke Protocol Inspector DCE SanJose1 S0/0 S0/0 SanJose2 #1 #2 Objective This lab is a tutorial demonstrating how to use the Fluke Networks Protocol Inspector to analyze network traffic and data frames. This lab will demonstrate key features of the tool that can be incorporated into various troubleshooting efforts in the remaining labs. Background / Preparation The output in this lab is representative only. Output will vary depending on the number of devices added, device MAC addresses, device hostnames, which LAN is joined, and so on. This lab introducing Protocol Inspector will be useful in later troubleshooting labs as well as in the field. While the Protocol Inspector (PI) software is a valuable part of the Academy program, it is also representative of features available on other products in the market. Note: The configuration files used for this lab are available from the instructor. They will be used for other labs, so please do not change any configuration settings. The configuration contains several components for testing purposes and is not intended to represent a good production configuration. At least one of the hosts must have the Protocol Inspector software installed. If the lab is done in pairs, having the software installed on both machines means that each person can run the lab steps. However, each host may display slightly different results. Step 1 Cable the lab as shown in the diagram Note: This is exactly the same lab configuration as the Network Inspector lab. Load the configuration files Lab3-SanJose1Config.txt and Lab3-SanJose2Config.txt into the appropriate routers. These files are available from the instructor. Configure the workstations as follows, which is the same as the NI lab: Host #1 Host #2 IP Address: IP Address: CCNA 1: Networking Basics v Lab 7.1.9b Copyright 2003, Cisco Systems, Inc.
2 Subnet mask: Subnet mask: Default Gateway: Default Gateway: Step 2 Start Protocol Inspector EDV program From the Start menu, launch the Fluke Protocol Inspector EDV program. Note: The first time the program is run, a message will appear that asks, Do you have any Fluke analyzer cards or Fluke taps in your local system? If using the educational version, click on No. If answering yes or if the following screen appears, just click on OK without selecting any ports. There are four main Protocol Inspector views, which include the following: Summary View Detail View Capture View of Capture Buffers Capture View of Capture Files The program opens in the Summary View. This view shows several windows used by the tool. The Resource Browser window in the upper left corner shows the only monitoring device that is available, which is the NDIS Module (NIC) of the host. If there were Protocol Media Monitors, they would be displayed with the associated host devices. The Alarm Browser on the left side and Message Area at the bottom will be covered later. The Monitor View, which is in the main window on the upper right, monitors one resource per window in a variety of viewing options. The example below and probably the startup screen show no information in the Monitor View window. The Stop in the upper-left corner of the Monitor View window confirms that no monitoring is occurring CCNA 1: Networking Basics v Lab 7.1.9b Copyright 2003, Cisco Systems, Inc.
3 NIC Resource Browser Monitor View Message Area Step 3 Start the Monitor / Capture process To start the monitoring/capturing process, use the Start button or Module Start from the menu system. The Utilization chart should start showing activity like the graphic below: The word Arm should appear where Stop had been before. If opening the Module menu, notice that Stop is now an option while Start is muted. Do not stop the process yet. Restart it again if it is stopped. The tabs at the bottom of the window show the resulting data in a variety of forms. Click on each and note the result. Transmit (Tx), Alarms, and Alarm Log will be blank. The following is the Received 3-18 CCNA 1: Networking Basics v Lab 7.1.9b Copyright 2003, Cisco Systems, Inc.
4 (Rx) frames, which indicates that Broadcast and Multicast frames are being received, but they may not show any Unicasts. Using the console connection to the router, ping the monitoring host ( or ), and notice that Unicast frames appear. Unfortunately, the errors shown in the third column will not appear in the lab exercise unless a traffic generator like the Fluke Networks OptiView product has been added. The Description tab reveals the MAC address, manufacturer, and model of the NIC. It also shows which Error Counters are on. Take a few minutes to become familiar with the tabs and the scroll features of the window. Step 4 View Details To go to the Detail View window click on the Detail View button in the toolbar or double click anywhere on the Monitor View chart. This will open a second window that should look something like the following, after maximizing the Utilization / Errors Strip Chart (RX) window CCNA 1: Networking Basics v Lab 7.1.9b Copyright 2003, Cisco Systems, Inc.
5 Note: If necessary, activate all toolbars on the View menu. Initially, the chart output is the same as before. However, there are many more toolbar and menu options than in the Summary View. Before looking at these features, confirm that the Chart and Table tabs show the same information that was seen earlier. Like all Windows compliant programs, placing the mouse over a button brings up a screen tip briefly identifying the purpose of the button. As the mouse moves over the buttons, notice that some are muted. This means that the feature is not appropriate under the current circumstances. In some cases, it is not supported in the educational version. Note: There is a complete display of the toolbars and what they do in the Appendix at the end of this lab. Click on the Mac Statistics button to see the Rx frame table data displayed in another format. The result should be obvious. Maximize the resulting window. The one piece of new information is the Speed, which shows the NIC transmission rate. Click on the Frame Size Distribution button to see a distribution of the size frames being received by the NIC. Placing the mouse over any bar will display a small summary like the one shown below. Maximize the resulting window CCNA 1: Networking Basics v Lab 7.1.9b Copyright 2003, Cisco Systems, Inc.
6 Try the Pie, Bar, and Pause buttons in the upper-left corner. Note that the Pause stops the capture, so click on it again to resume the capture. Look at both the Table and Chart tab displays as well. With the sample configurations, the student should be getting mainly small frames, because the only thing happening is routing updates. Try using the extended Ping feature from the router Console connection, and specify 100 pings with a larger packet size. If maximizing each new display, return to any previous view by using the Window menu. The student can also Tile the windows. Experiment with the Window menu features and then close any unwanted views. Click on the Protocol Distribution button to see a distribution of the protocols being received by the NIC. Placing the mouse over any bar will display a small summary panel. Maximize the resulting window CCNA 1: Networking Basics v Lab 7.1.9b Copyright 2003, Cisco Systems, Inc.
7 Try each of the buttons and tabs to see the results. The Net button shows only network protocols. The 323 button refers to the H323 Voiceover IP protocols. Look at the Frm (frame) and the Abs Bts (absolute bytes) and Rel Bts (relative bytes) to see the results. Remember that the Pause button stops the capture. Click on the Host Table button to see the MAC stations and related traffic. Notice the Spanning Tree, AppleTalk, and OSPF traffic. Be sure to look at the Table tab to see the actual values. Click on the Network Layer Host Table related traffic. button to see the network (IP/IPX) stations and 7-18 CCNA 1: Networking Basics v Lab 7.1.9b Copyright 2003, Cisco Systems, Inc.
8 Any pings and any additional hosts that might have added to the configuration will impact the actual addresses that appear on the right. Click on the Application Layer Host Table application. button to see the network station traffic by Experiment with the next three buttons. They create host-to-host matrices for MAC, Network, and Application layer conversations. The following is an example of the Network Layer (IP/IPX) conversations. Of the next two buttons, the first is the VLAN button that shows network traffic on VLANs. This sample does not use VLANs. Remember this button when troubleshooting VLANs later CCNA 1: Networking Basics v Lab 7.1.9b Copyright 2003, Cisco Systems, Inc.
9 The second button creates a matrix comparing MAC and Network station addresses to names. In the following example the second row is a Novell station. The Name Table button opens the current name table for viewing or editing. The Expert View button shows the expert symptoms discovered. These statistics are how the PIs try to point out potential problems. The underlined options bring up additional detail windows if there are any values recorded. The sample for this lab will not show much, but it will look over the options for debugging ISL, HSRP, and other types of problems that will be seen in later labs. Step 5 Stop the capture process To stop the frame capture to look at individual frames use the Stop the menu. button or Module Stop from 9-18 CCNA 1: Networking Basics v Lab 7.1.9b Copyright 2003, Cisco Systems, Inc.
10 Once the capture has been stopped, click on the Capture View button. With the education version, a message box appears announcing that the capture is limited to 250 packets. Just click OK. The resulting window can be a little overwhelming at first. Maximize the window to hide any other windows open in the background. In looking over the results, note that there are actually three horizontal windows open. The top window lists the captured packets. The middle window shows the detail of the selected packet in the top window, and the bottom window shows the HEX values for the packet. By positioning the mouse over the borders among the three windows, a line mover or two-headed arrow will appear. This allows the distribution of space for each window to be changed. It may be advantageous to make the middle window as large as possible and leave five to six rows in each of the other two, as shown above. Look over the packets listed in the top window. DNS, ARP, RTMP, and other types of packets should be found. If using a switch, there should be CDP and Spanning Tree packets. Notice that as rows are selected in the top window, the contents of the other two windows change. Select information in the middle window, and notice that the HEX display in the bottom window changes to show where that specific information is stored. In the following example, selecting the Source Address (IP) shows HEX values from the packet CCNA 1: Networking Basics v Lab 7.1.9b Copyright 2003, Cisco Systems, Inc.
11 Note also the color coding makes it easier to locate information from the middle window in the HEX window. In the following example with a DNS packet, the data in the Data Link Control (DLC) section of middle window is purple, while the Internet Protocol (IP) section is green. The corresponding HEX values are the same colors. Notice in the above example the EtherType is 0x0800. This indicates that it is an IP packet. Notice the MAC addresses for both the Destination and Source hosts as well as where that data is stored in the HEX display. In the same example, the next section in the middle window is the User Datagram Protocol (UDP) information, which includes the UDP port numbers. The structure of the middle window changes for each type of packet. Take a few minutes to select different packet types in the top window, and then look over the resulting display in the other two windows. Pay particular attention to the EtherType, any port numbers, as well as source and destination addresses, which include both MAC and network layer. There should be RIP, OSPF, and RTMP or AppleTalk packets in the capture. Make sure that the important data can be located and interpreted. In the following RIP capture, notice that this is a RIP version 2 packet. The multicast destination address is ,and that the actual route table entries can be seen. What would the multicast destination address be in version 1? CCNA 1: Networking Basics v Lab 7.1.9b Copyright 2003, Cisco Systems, Inc.
12 If there are any CDP packets, figure out the platform. The following is from a Catalyst 1900 switch. Experiment until comfortable with the tools. Step 6 Save the captured data To save captured data, use the Save Capture button or choose File Save Capture from the menu system. Accept the All option by using the Continue button. The student can save just a range of captured frames with this window. Use a proper file name and store the file on the appropriate disk. If the CAP extension is showing when this window opens, make sure it remains after typing the name CCNA 1: Networking Basics v Lab 7.1.9b Copyright 2003, Cisco Systems, Inc.
13 Use the Open Capture File button and open the file called Lab3-2 PI Lab.cap. If it is not available, then open the file that was just saved. The student is now using the Capture View of Capture Files. There is no difference in tools, but the title bar at the top of the screen indicates that a file is being viewed rather than a capture in memory. Step 7 Examine frames Select a frame in the top window and try the buttons. The arrows by themselves move up or down one frame. The arrow with single line is top or bottom of the current window, while the arrow with two arrows is the top or bottom of the entire list. The arrow with the T also moves to the top of the list. Use the Search buttons to perform searches. Type text like OSPF in the list box. Then click on the binoculars, and it will move from one OSPF entry to the next. Experiment until comfortable with the tools. Reflection a. How might this tool be used in troubleshooting? b. Is all of the data on the network being analyzed? c. What is the impact of being connected to a switch? CCNA 1: Networking Basics v Lab 7.1.9b Copyright 2003, Cisco Systems, Inc.
14 Appendix: Toolbars CCNA 1: Networking Basics v Lab 7.1.9b Copyright 2003, Cisco Systems, Inc.
15 15-18 CCNA 1: Networking Basics v Lab 7.1.9b Copyright 2003, Cisco Systems, Inc.
16 16-18 CCNA 1: Networking Basics v Lab 7.1.9b Copyright 2003, Cisco Systems, Inc.
17 17-18 CCNA 1: Networking Basics v Lab 7.1.9b Copyright 2003, Cisco Systems, Inc.
18 18-18 CCNA 1: Networking Basics v Lab 7.1.9b Copyright 2003, Cisco Systems, Inc.
184.108.40.206 Networking for Homes and Small Businesses Student Packet Tracer Lab Manual This document is exclusive property of Cisco Systems, Inc. Permission is granted to print and copy this document for non-commercial
Computer Networks I Laboratory Exercise 1 The lab is divided into two parts where the first part is a basic PC network TCP/IP configuration and connection to the Internet. The second part is building a
Packet Tracer 3 Lab VLSM 2 Solution Objective Create a simulated network topology using Packet Tracer Design an IP addressing scheme using a Class B subnetwork address and VLSM Apply IP addresses to the
Lab 3.1.2 Creating a Logical Network Diagram Objectives Use router and switch commands to obtain information about an existing network. Use Cisco Network Assistant to obtain information about an existing
Topology Diagram All contents are Copyright 1992 2007 Cisco Systems, Inc. All rights reserved. This document is Cisco Public Information. Page 1 of 6 Addressing Table Device Interface IP Address Subnet
University of Jordan Faculty of Engineering & Technology Computer Engineering Department Computer Networks Laboratory 907528 Lab. 2 Network Devices & Packet Tracer Objectives 1. To become familiar with
Visio Enabled Solution: One-Click Switched Network Vision Tim Wittwer, Senior Software Engineer Alan Delwiche, Senior Software Engineer March 2001 Applies to: All Microsoft Visio 2002 Editions All Microsoft
4m. MONITORING OF ETHERNET/IP NETWORK TRAFFIC. Wireshark (see Section 6) is a network packet analyser. It is used to: troubleshoot network problems, examine security problems, debug protocol implementations,
Page 1 of 20 Configure the 1721 Router for VLANs Using a Switch Module (WIC-4ESW) Document ID: 50036 Contents Introduction Prerequisites Requirements Components Used Network Diagram The Role of Switched
CS 326e F2002 Lab 1. Basic Network Setup & Ethereal Time: 2 hrs Tasks: 1 (10 min) Verify that TCP/IP is installed on each of the computers 2 (10 min) Connect the computers together via a switch 3 (10 min)
Switching Basics and Intermediate Routing CCNA 3 Labs and Allan Johnson Introduction Switching Basics and Intermediate Routing CCNA 3 Labs and s is a supplement to your classroom and laboratory experience
Management Software AT-S106 Web Browser User s Guide For the AT-GS950/48 Gigabit Ethernet Smart Switch Version 1.0.0 613-001339 Rev. A Copyright 2010 Allied Telesis, Inc. All rights reserved. No part of
The IP Transmission Process V1.4: Geoff Bennett Contents Communication Between Hosts Through a MAC Bridge Through a LAN Switch Through a Router The tutorial is divided into four sections. Section 1 looks
8 Configuring Network Address Translation (NAT) Contents Overview...................................................... 8-3 Translating Between an Inside and an Outside Network........... 8-3 Local and
Lab 5.5.3 Developing ACLs to Implement Firewall Rule Sets All contents are Copyright 1992 2007 Cisco Systems, Inc. All rights reserved. This document is Cisco Public Information. Page 1 of 8 Device Interface
16.3.2 Lab: Configure Windows XP Firewall Print and complete this lab. In this lab you will explore the Windows XP Firewall and configure some advanced settings. Recommended Equipment Two computers directly
5.0 10.3.1.8 Lab - Configure a Windows 7 Firewall Print and complete this lab. In this lab, you will explore the Windows 7 Firewall and configure some advanced settings. Recommended Equipment Step 1 Two
5.0 10.3.1.9 Lab - Configure a Windows Vista Firewall Print and complete this lab. In this lab, you will explore the Windows Vista Firewall and configure some advanced settings. Recommended Equipment Step
Catalyst Layer 3 Switch for Wake On LAN Support Across VLANs Configuration Example Document ID: 91672 Contents Introduction Prerequisites Requirements Components Used Conventions Background Information
Creating a Web Site with Publisher 2010 Information Technology Services Outreach and Distance Learning Technologies Copyright 2012 KSU Department of Information Technology Services This document may be
5.0 10.3.1.10 Lab - Configure a Windows XP Firewall Print and complete this lab. In this lab, you will explore the Windows XP Firewall and configure some advanced settings. Recommended Equipment Step 1
Lab 8.3.2 Conducting a Network Capture with Wireshark Objectives Perform a network traffic capture with Wireshark to become familiar with the Wireshark interface and environment. Analyze traffic to a web
Table of Contents Page 1: Motion Detection 1.0 Configuring Motion Detection for LX Apollo / LX Zeus DVRs 2 1.1 Motion Playback on LX Apollo / LX Zeus DVRs 3 1.2 Scheduling Motion and Continuous Recording
Network Probe User Guide Network Probe User Guide Table of Contents 1. Introduction...1 2. Installation...2 Windows installation...2 Linux installation...3 Mac installation...4 License key...5 Deployment...5
Chapter 10 Troubleshooting This chapter provides troubleshooting tips and information for your ProSafe Dual WAN Gigabit Firewall with SSL & IPsec VPN. After each problem description, instructions are provided
Objectives University of Jordan Faculty of Engineering & Technology Computer Engineering Department Computer Networks Laboratory 907528 Lab.4 Basic Network Operation and Troubleshooting 1. To become familiar
Lab 3.10.2 Use Network Inspector to Observe STP Behavior Objective The purpose of this lab is to observe STP behavior with the Network Inspector switch trace feature. Scenario A new switched network has
School of Information Technology and Engineering (SITE) CEG 4395: Computer Network Management Lab 3: Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP) Operations Objective To become familiar with basic SNMP operations
Configuring the PIX Firewall with PDM Objectives In this lab exercise you will complete the following tasks: Install PDM Configure inside to outside access through your PIX Firewall using PDM Configure
BASIC ANALYSIS OF TCP/IP NETWORKS INTRODUCTION Communication analysis provides powerful tool for maintenance, performance monitoring, attack detection, and problems fixing in computer networks. Today networks
How To Understand and Configure Your Network for IntraVUE Summary This document attempts to standardize the methods used to configure Intrauve in situations where there is little or no understanding of
What is Network Agent? Websense Network Agent software monitors all internet traffic on the machines that you assign to it. Network Agent filters HTTP traffic and more than 70 other popular internet protocols,
Capture and analysis of the network traffic with Wireshark Lab Objectives Understanding the purpose of Wireshark Studying configuration settings and capture options of Wireshark Studying Wireshark filters
Introduction to Network Security Lab 1 - Wireshark Bridges To Computing 1 Introduction: In our last lecture we discussed the Internet the World Wide Web and the Protocols that are used to facilitate communication
9 Configuration Wizards 9.1 Introduction to Wizards ACP ThinManager uses wizards for configuration. Wizards take two forms. List Wizards associate Terminal Servers and ThinManager Servers with their IP
Lab 7.2.9 Load Balancing Across Multiple Paths Objective Configure Load balance across multiple paths. Observe the load balancing process. Background/Preparation Cable a network similar to the one in the
Using Cisco UC320W with Windows Small Business Server This application note explains how to deploy the Cisco UC320W in a Windows Small Business Server environment. Contents This document includes the following
Expert Reference Series of White Papers The OSI Model: Understanding the Seven Layers of Computer Networks 1-800-COURSES www.globalknowledge.com The OSI Model: Understanding the Seven Layers of Computer
Module 1: Reviewing the Suite of TCP/IP Protocols Contents Overview 1 Lesson: Overview of the OSI Model 2 Lesson: Overview of the TCP/IP Protocol Suite 7 Lesson: Viewing Frames Using Network Monitor 14
How to Configure an Initial Installation of the VMware ESXi Hypervisor I am not responsible for your actions or their outcomes, in any way, while reading and/or implementing this tutorial. I will not provide
Avaya Wireless AP Device Manager User Guide February 2003 Avaya Wireless AP Device Manager User Guide Copyright Avaya Inc. 2003 ALL RIGHTS RESERVED The products, specifications, and other technical information
School of Information Technology and Engineering (SITE) CEG 4395: Computer Network Management Lab 4: Remote Monitoring (RMON) Operations Objective To become familiar with basic RMON operations, alarms,
Lab 2.3.2 Configuring OSPF with Loopback Addresses Objective Configure routers with a Class C IP addressing scheme. Observe the election process for designated routers (DR) and backup designated routers
Lab VI Capturing and monitoring the network traffic 1. Goals To gain general knowledge about the network analyzers and to understand their utility To learn how to use network traffic analyzer tools (Wireshark)
Configuring a Check Point FireWall-1 to SOHO IPSec Tunnel This document describes the procedures required to configure an IPSec VPN tunnel between a WatchGuard SOHO or SOHO tc and a Check Point FireWall-1.
Introduction MagicQ and Capture Using MagicQ with the Capture visualiser This document is intended to enable you to get MagicQ PC and MagicQ consoles working with the Capture visualiser. When you are using
Distinct Network Monitor Version 4.2 User s Guide Distinct Corporation 3315 Almaden Expressway San Jose, CA 95118 USA Phone: +1 408-445-3270 Fax: +1 408-445-3274 Email: email@example.com WWW: http://www.distinct.com
Network Load Balancing Step by Step installation of Network Load Balancing in Windows Server 2008 R2. Prerequisite for NLB Cluster 1. Log on to NODE1 Windows Server 2008 R2 system with a domain account
Features Overview Guide About new features in WhatsUp Gold v12 Contents CHAPTER 1 Learning about new features in Ipswitch WhatsUp Gold v12 Welcome to WhatsUp Gold... 1 What's new in WhatsUp Gold v12...
0215 IS SERIES IP Network Direct System QuikStart Programming Guide 1 4 GHI 2 ABC 5 JKL 3 DEF 6 MNO PRIVACY TRANSFER LIST SETTING 7 PQRS 8 TUV 9 WXYZ ZOOM 0 # WIDE Programming Videos ATTENTION: This is
Note: This case study utilizes Packet Tracer. Please see the Chapter 5 Packet Tracer file located in Supplemental Materials. CHAPTER 5 OBJECTIVES Configure a router with an initial configuration. Use the
(Instructor Version) Instructor Note: Red font color or gray highlights indicate text that appears in the instructor copy only. Optional activities are designed to enhance understanding and/or to provide
ESXi 5.0 vcenter Server 5.0 This document supports the version of each product listed and supports all subsequent versions until the document is replaced by a new edition. To check for more recent editions
AXIS Camera Station Quick Installation Guide Copyright Axis Communications AB April 2005 Rev. 3.5 Part Number 23997 1 Table of Contents Regulatory Information.................................. 3 AXIS Camera
Configure A VoIP Network Prof. Mr. Altaf. I. Darvadiya Electronics & Communication C.U.Shah College of Engg. & Tech. Wadhwan(363030), India e-mail: firstname.lastname@example.org Ms. Zarna M. Gohil Electronics & Communication
CHAPTER 3 Using the Content Distribution Manager GUI The Content Distribution Manager is the central location from which much of the work of creating and managing ACNS networks and hosted content can be
Guideline for setting up a functional VPN Why do I want a VPN? VPN by definition creates a private, trusted network across an untrusted medium. It allows you to connect offices and people from around the
ProSafe Plus Switch Utility User Guide 350 East Plumeria Drive San Jose, CA 95134 USA December 2012 202-10524-05 NETGEAR, Inc. All rights reserved No part of this publication maybe reproduced, transmitted,
Secure Remote Access Solutions APPLIANCES SonicWALL SSL-VPN Series SSL-VPN 200 Getting Started Guide SonicWALL SSL-VPN 200 Appliance Getting Started Guide Thank you for your purchase of the SonicWALL SSL-VPN
LESSON 13 Managing Devices OBJECTIVES After completing this lesson, you will be able to: 1. Open System Properties. 2. Use Device Manager. 3. Understand hardware profiles. 4. Set performance options. Estimated
This section provides installation and troubleshooting steps for Windows 2000/XP: Preliminary steps see page 23. Quick CD-ROM install steps see page 23. Other methods of installation see page 24. Quick
Table of Contents Configuring Commonly Used IP ACLs...1 Introduction...1 Prerequisites...2 Hardware and Software Versions...3 Configuration Examples...3 Allow a Select Host to Access the Network...3 Allow
P-2024 VoIP Analog Telephone Adaptor Quick Start Guide Version 3.60 7/2007 Edition 1 DEFAULT LOGIN IP Address http://192.168.5.1 Password 1234 Copyright 2007. All rights reserved. Overview Use your P-2024
KRAMER ELECTRONICS LTD. USER GUIDE Ethernet Configuration Guide (Lantronix) P/N: 2900-300321 Rev 6 Contents 1 Connecting to the Kramer Device via the Ethernet Port 1 1.1 Connecting the Ethernet Port Directly
How to Create VLANs Within a Virtual Switch in VMware ESXi I am not responsible for your actions or their outcomes, in any way, while reading and/or implementing this tutorial. I will not provide support
IBM Tivoli Network Manager 3.8 Configuring initial discovery 2010 IBM Corporation Welcome to this module for IBM Tivoli Network Manager 3.8 Configuring initial discovery. configuring_discovery.ppt Page
Lab 6.2.3 Managing the MAC Address Table Objective Create a basic switch configuration. Manage the switch MAC table. Background/Preparation Cable a network similar to the one in the diagram. The configuration
User s Guide for Polycom CX7000 Systems 1.1 August 2012 3725-63878-001/C Trademark Information Polycom, the Polycom Triangles logo, and the names and marks associated with Polycom s products are trademarks
Agilent Technologies Advisor SW Edition Application Note 1371 Network Troubleshooting using the Advisor SW Edition Introduction High-performance testing and diagnostic tools are essential for monitoring,
File Sharing Peter Lo CP582 Peter Lo 2003 1 File Sharing What is it? How is it different from File Transfer How it it done? CP582 Peter Lo 2003 2 This lecture we move away from the topic of transferring
Review questions 1 Data information is sent onto the network cable using which of the following? A Communication protocol B Data packet C Media access method D Packages 2 To which TCP/IP architecture layer
Fundamentals of UNIX Lab 16.2.6 Networking Commands (Estimated time: 45 min.) Objectives: Develop an understanding of UNIX and TCP/IP networking commands Ping another TCP/IP host Use traceroute to check
1. APPLE AIRPORT EXTREME 1.1 Product Description The following are device specific configuration settings for the Apple Airport Extreme. Navigation through the management screens will be similar but may