It’s not easy being a big bank these days. Consumers hate them, shareholders have beef with them and regulators can’t figure out what to do with them.
— Halah Touryalai, Forbes Staff
We hear it every day. The Democrats wage war on the Republicans by stating that the income gap is greater than ever before. They shout executives make millions while the employees make minimum wage. It’s not fair, they say.
Raise the minimum wage and life will be good. Really? Let’s examine the root cause of all of this blather and bullshit.
We have seen the rich get richer as banks consolidate through mergers and acquisitions. This has allowed them to become stronger institutions as they can better leverage their assets and equity. Follow the money.
How did all of this happen?
Woodrow Wilson, a Democrat, replaced William Taft as president in 1913, the same year of the 16th Amendment which created the Income Tax and the IRS. The Federal Reserve Bank was founded on December 23, 1913 thereby centralizing the power of U.S. banks into a privately owned entity that controlled interest rates, money supplies, credit creation, inflation, and indirectly employment.
The Fed lends money to the government and earns interest, or fees, on that money the government could create free of charge. This marshalled in the beginning of the gradual rise of national debt, from about $2 billion to $20 trillion. The value of one dollar has fallen to a purchasing power of about 3 tarnished copper pennies.
You can read how all of this happened here:
The government then started borrowing from banks instead of self-financing, as it had done prior to granting the power of money-creation for the private banking system. Three years after signing the Federal Reserve Act into law, however, Wilson is quoted as having stated:
I am a most unhappy man. I have unwittingly ruined my country. A great industrial nation is controlled by its system of credit. Our system of credit is concentrated. The growth of the nation, therefore, and all our activities are in the hands of a few men. We have come to be one of the worst ruled, one of the most completely controlled and dominated governments in the civilized world. No longer a government by free opinion, no longer a government by conviction and the vote of the majority, but a government by the opinion and duress of a small group of dominant men. — Woodrow Wilson
Really, Woody? You’re a most unhappy man. You were part of that small group of dominant men. Now all of us are most unhappy with you.
You, and your Democrat buddies, destroyed the economic system of this beautiful, debt free republic and now your democrat kiddies are claiming the system is not fair. That is blatant hypocrisy. You’re unhappy. The entire nation is unhappy and much worse. You have caused the country to be divided to such a grave extent that it will take a miracle to heal.
You can add a few prominent Democrat donors, such as billionaires Warren Buffett, Bill Gates, George Soros and Mark Zuckerberg who are playing us like pawns/suckers as they buy elections and divide us further as a nation.
Oh no, you say. It was the Republicans. They did it. They are the greedy goons who hate the poor and steal their largess from the backs of the working people.
I agree the Republicans are complicit in this crime against “We the People.” They talk a good game, but are in effect amateurs trying to look nice in front of the media. Their crime was to stand by sheepishly and let all of this happen.
People treat banking like an electric utility where if you flip the switch it has to be there for you. But the truth is banking is a business that aims to make profits for shareholders." — Nancy Bush, bank analyst.
The bank’s gotta do what a bank’s gotta do: make money. But how banks go about making that money is one way to differentiate them. They make money when the Fed creates money for them printed out of thin air. Then they lend it out to us at obscene interest rates. Interest paid on free money. That my readers is why we have three percent of the purchasing power we had 100 years ago. That is why the minimum wage is not a living wage. But then it was never meant to be a living wage, was it? It was meant to be starting wage!
Does it make you most unhappy to know that the bankers/politicians have brainwashed us into hating each other so they can stay in office and rule us like serfs while they make obscene salaries and benefits at your expense?
The 10 Most Wanted Criminals are (not counting the 546 in DC):
10. TD Bank U.S. Holding Co. — Assets: $253.2 billion
9. HSBC North American Holdings Inc. — Assets: $291.61 billion
8. Capital One Financial Corp. — Assets: $313.7 billion
7. PNC Financial Services Group Inc. — Assets: $362.13 billion
6. Bank of New York Mellon Corp. — Assets: $377.37 billion
5. U.S. Bancorp — Assets: $415.94 billion
4. Wells Fargo & Co. — Assets: $1.75 trillion
3. Citigroup Inc. — Assets: $1.77 trillion
2. Bank of America Corp. — Assets: $2.15 trillion
1. JPMorgan Chase & Co. — Assets: $2.42 trillion
In case you’re wondering, the grand total is $8.336 trillion. I’m sure it will be much more when you read this as they are printing new money as fast as they can. Well, no, not exactly. They are creating money as fast as they can key it into the computers.
I made you most unhappy as well, didn’t I. Don’t despair, go to your big bank this week and withdraw your money. Take it to a local bank that is owned by local people. They will treat you right and provide more benefits at less cost.
The solutions to our economic and money problems are documented in 20/20: A Clear Vision for America.
God Bless us all and God Save America. Our country, our Constitution; our currency, our civilization and our children who need you now more than ever.
Subscribe to Bill's monthly newsletter!
Please enter your name and e-mail below, and we will add you to our mailing list.
Finally, an author who brings you solutions, instead of problems.
Americans have lost faith in their overreaching federal government. “We the People” don’t need to be overregulated or have their taxes misspent. Americans are victims of a crumbling economy, high prices and stagnant wages. They view government as bloated and politicians as corrupt.
They do not trust the leadership at any level. They see politicians of both parties as self-centered narcissists whose only objective is re-election. The author is like you, with one principal difference and 20 reasons for optimism. His “Vision” of America is “clear.” It is a vision of the Constitution and America the way it could be, the way it should be. The author’s eyesight is twenty-twenty.