- Kappa Sigma
The Kappa Sigma Fraternity claims that its origins can be traced back to
According to this tradition, the students used secret words and signs to protect their ranks from betrayal. These forms and rituals became the basis of their organization. It embodied their ideals and allowed for both the safety of their members and the strong unity of the society. The society slowly grew to large numbers, taking in those students who desired the protection it could offer. With a strong foundation in the loyalty and quality of its members, the ancient order grew into a strong organization. Over time, its strength and unity transformed the order from a protective society against Cossa into something much greater, a true brotherhood. The society continued to grow and spread its glory to the great universities of Europe, and continued to do so throughout much of the
On December 10,
In that same year, the Five Friends and Brothers searched for others who would complement their diverse personalities. They initiated two more in that first year, Samuel Isham North and John Edward Semmes. The following year, two of the Five Friends and Brothers left the University, as did Semmes, leaving its future in the hands of Brothers Arnold, Boyd, Rogers and North. They initiated three more into the order that year. On March 18,
Bowen worked quickly the following year to find prospective members. He, along with his first initiate, Goodwin Williams, began searching for new members who could fulfill the expectations of the founding brothers. Brother Semmes returned to the University that spring, and he discovered that Bowen had added five new brothers to the order.
The next year, 1872, marked a milestone in the history of Kappa Sigma. Three new initiates were welcomed into the brotherhood, including Thomas Wright Strange. The members of the chapter, known now as the Zeta chapter, decided that they wanted one additional member that year. Thomas Strange introduced the name of Stephen Alonzo Jackson. He was chosen for initiation into the order in 1872 despite personality conflicts. It cannot be understated the importance of their choice to look beyond their personal conflicts and initiate Jackson as the order would have never had a more influential and dedicated brother.
On an autumn night in 1872, Jackson was initiated into the order. From the moment of his initiation, he began his work as a great leader in the order of Kappa Sigma. He helped in every aspect of the chapter operations, and later became Grand Master of the Zeta chapter at the University of Virginia.
Jackson's contributions to the fraternity stretch far beyond chapter leadership. He was given the nickname, "the Golden-Hearted Virginian." During his membership, he expanded and revised the ritual of Kappa Sigma. He created the Supreme Executive Committee (SEC), which now serves as the governing body of the Kappa Sigma Fraternity on a national level. Jackson also introduced the idea of a frequent, national convention of all Kappa Sigmas, a practice now continued by the biennial Grand Conclave, and characterized the event as "the finest hour" of Kappa Sigma.
Jackson's vision for the future was summed up in his "Apples of Gold" speech given at the Grand Conclave, 1878. "Why not, my Brothers, since we of today live and cherish the principals of the Kappa Sigma Fraternity, throw such a halo around those principles that they may be handed down as a precious heirloom to ages yet unborn? Why not put our apples of gold in pictures of silver? May we not rest contently until the Star and Crescent is the pride of every college and university in the land!"
These innovations in ritual and government helped to transform Kappa Sigma from a small, local fraternity at the University of Virginia into the international fraternity it is today. He worked with his chapter and friends at nearby university to establish new chapters of the growing order as well as traveling the nation to find more locations worthy to host a chapter. Jackson's passion for the success of the fraternity still influences its actions to this day. Evidence of his work can be seen in the many milestones that Kappa Sigma has reached to this day. His ideals for recruitment and expansion can be seen in the 300+ campuses that have hosted chapters of the order and the more than 250,000 men who have been initiated into the order since its conception.
In 1965, Kappa Sigma bought an estate to be the new perpetual home for the fraternity. In 1966, the SEC at the time formed Kappa Sigma Inc, claimed it to be in charge of the estate, and began to solicit for donations from brothers. In 1967, Kappa Sigma Inc changed its name to the Kappa Sigma Memorial Fund and filed to be a foundation for tax purposes. This made two foundations for the Kappa Sigma Fraternity (the other being The Kappa Sigma Endowment Fund). During this time the KSMF changed the laws of the organization instating life terms for the board and becoming a 501c3 tax-deductible organization. By the 1990s the Fraternity and KSMF grew apart due to a disagreement over a legal opinion requiring a lease agreement for the Fraternity's use of the KSMF-owned headquarters property. The disagreements culminated in a lawsuit filed in 2001 wherein the Kappa Sigma Fraternity asserted claim to the property which the KSMF had originally purchased. The case eventually reached the Virginia Supreme Court, where the justices ruled that, while there was some merit to the Fraternity's case, the Fraternity had filed suit nearly two decades past the time required by the statute of limitations. Since the ruling the Kappa Sigma Fraternity began construction and fundraising of $6 million for a new headquarters in the Spring of 2005. [cite web | title = Housing Kappa Sig: Headquarters for controversy | publisher = The Hook | url = http://www.readthehook.com/Stories/2004/07/29/coverHousingKappaSigHeadqu.html ] At the 66th Conclave, the Kappa Sigma Endowment Fund was declared to be the only official educational foundation of the fraternity.
In 2002, along with
Kappa Sigma's new international headquarters had its grand opening on June 2, 2007.
In fall of the 2007 academic year, Kappa Sigma broke the record for the fourth year in a row for new pledges (4,248). [ [http://www.kappasigma.org/php-bin/news/showArticle.php?id=165&ref= Pledge record broken again by Kappa Sigma] ] . The grand total for the 07-08 academic year was 6,770 pledges. [ [http://www.kappasigma.org/php-bin/news/showArticle.php?id=178&ref=&PHPSESSID=c99173ea84c783c15fc6393c2f23cfea Kappa Sigma News ] ] 30 new chapters were also established in that academic year putting Kappa Sigma as the third largest fraternity in terms of active campus locations.
Kappa Sigmas are taught to live their lives by the Star and Crescent, which are the symbols of the Fraternity that make up the official badge:
The Star and Crescent shall not be worn by every man, but only by him who is worthy to wear it. He must be a gentleman... a man of honor and courage... a man of zeal, yet humble... an intelligent man...a man of truth... one who tempers action with wisdom and, above all else, one who walks in the light of God. [ [http://188.8.131.52/search?q=cache:y5yl5Vl9fnYJ:www.kappasigma.org/ppt/MBK.ppt%3FPHPSESSID%3D4ece+%22the+star+and+crescent+shall+not+be+worn%22+site:kappasigma.org&hl=en&ct=clnk&cd=1 The Star and Crescent] ]
The Star and Crescent is also used as part of the guidelines behind Kappa Sigma's strict no-tolerance anti-hazing policy. The Fraternity takes all allegations of hazing very seriously and routinely pulls charters from guilty chapters which can be as old as 130 years.
They also follow the four cornerstones of the Fraternity: Fellowship, Leadership, Scholarship, and Service.
A five member Executive Council (EC) leads each chapter and colony. The five officers consist of the Grand Master (President), Grand Procurator (First Vice President), Grand Master of Ceremonies, (Second Vice President), Grand Treasurer, and Grand Scribe. Each chapter and colony also has a number of committee chairs (the number varies by chapter) to plan chapter events. These committee chairs usually are overseen by the Grand Procurator.
An Alumni Adviser (an AA) and up to several Assistant Alumni Advisers (AAA), provide advice and assistance to each undergraduate chapter and colony. Above them are District Grand Masters (DGM) and Assistant District Grand Masters (ADGM) who serve as liaisons between the undergraduate chapters and colonies and the Supreme Executive Committee. There are over sixty districts covering America and Canada divided into five Areas. Typically, each district comprises all of the Kappa Sigma chapters and colonies in a State or Province, or a portion of a State or Province.
At the international level, the Supreme Executive Council (SEC) sets policy for the fraternity, disciplines chapters, and approves the formation of colonies and chapter. The SEC consists of the Worthy Grand Master (WGM), the Worthy Grand Procurator (WGP), the Worthy Grand Master of Ceremonies (WGMC), the Worthy Grand Scribe (WGS), and the Worthy Grand Treasurer (WGT). The WGM, WGP and the WGMC each serve a two-year term, while the WGS and WGT each serve a four-year term with either the WGS or the WGT elected along with the other officers at the biennial Grand Conclave.
There also exists several committees under the SEC. The UAC which is made of undergrads representing the five areas and are present at all SEC meetings. Their chief function is to provide input to the SEC from an undergrad perspective. There is also a Ritual commission made up of several alumni brothers who travel around to the various chapters to assist them with Ritual work or help install chapters or colonies. Lastly there are Area Recruitment Managers (ARM) who are in charge of recruitment goals and provide assistance to struggling chapters in their respective area.
There is a professional administrative staff that manages the day-to-day operations the Fraternity at the international headquarters in Charlottesville.
Kappa Sigma Endowment Fund
In 1919, the Kappa Sigma Endowment Fund was established "to support the charitable and beneficent purposes of the Kappa Sigma Fraternity". [ [http://ef.kappasigma.org/about.php Kappa Sigma Endowment Fund] ] The Endowment Fund's first donors contributed $101 as the foundation for the fund's assets. Currently, the Endowment Fund has two primary recognition levels for donors, the One of Jackson's Men program - for donors who contributed $1000 or more to the Endowment Fund, and the Heritage Society for planned gift donors.
The Endowment Fund assists with the educational and leadership programming at each Conclave and Leadership Conference. In addition, each year, the Endowment Fund awards $250,000 in scholarships to undergraduate members. These Scholarship and Leadership Awards are presented on Founders' Day (December 10). To date, the Endowment Fund has contributed over $4.5 million in scholarships since 1948.
Currently, the Endowment Fund, along with the Kappa Sigma Fraternity, holds in trust for the members of Kappa Sigma, the fraternity's headquarters in Charlottesville,
The Endowment Fund sponsors leadership conferences each year held in conjunction with Kappa Sigma's biennial Conclave and Regional Leadership Conferences. In 2009, the 67th Grand Conclave and Leadership Conference will be held in San Antonio, TX.
Currently Kappa Sigma leads the Greek world in terms of donations and service hours as part of the "Greater Cause" program. Every chapter organizes its own charitable events, usually donating the proceeds to a local charity. Some of the bigger events that local chapters organize are the "Catch-A-Dream Charity Classic Football Game" organized by the Delta-Chi Chapter at
At the 66th Grand Conclave the Fraternity announced a new charity entitled the "Kappa Sigma Fraternity Military Heroes Campaign." The effort focuses service and donations towards soldiers disabled or killed in the line of duty. The American chapters raise money for the
* [http://www.kappasigma.org Official Website]
* [http://ef.kappasigma.org Kappa Sigma Endowment Fund]
* [http://www.militaryheroescampaign.org/Default.aspx Kappa Sigma Fraternity Military Heroes Campaign]
Wikimedia Foundation. 2010.
Look at other dictionaries:
Kappa Sigma Philippines — is a student fraternity based in The Philippines. They describe themselves as a fraternity of free thinking men committed to the principle of individual empowerment and objective free thought . [ [http://www.kappasigmafraternity.net/ Kappa Sigma… … Wikipedia
Kappa Sigma Sigma — Infobox Fraternity letters=ΚΣΣ name=Kappa Sigma Sigma colors=Green, and Gold symbol=Shield and Crescent motto= A kappa sig nunquam mendums A Kappa Sig never falters crest= founded=May 10, 1916 birthplace=University of Redlands type=Social… … Wikipedia
Phi Kappa Sigma — Infobox Fraternity letters = ΦΚΣ name = Phi Kappa Sigma crest = motto = Stellis Aequus Durando ( Equal to the Stars in Endurance. ) nickname = Phi Kaps, Skulls, or Skullhouse colors = Black and Old Gold symbol = Maltese Cross flower = Yellow… … Wikipedia
List of Kappa Sigma Members — This is a list of notable members of Kappa Sigma.Government Politics*Robert J. Dole (Gamma Omicron), Former Senator, Kansas (1969 1996); 1996 Republican Party Presidential Nominee. *Sonny Perdue (Beta Lambda), Governor of Georgia (2003 ) *Richard … Wikipedia
Lambda Kappa Sigma — Infobox Fraternity letters = ΛKΣ name = Lambda Kappa Sigma crest = motto = Esse Quam Videri ( To be, rather than to seem ) colors = Old Gold and Columbia Blue symbol = Caduceus flower = Yellow Chrysanthemum founded = 14 October, 1913 birthplace … Wikipedia
List of Phi Kappa Sigma chapters — Active Chapter = *Alpha, University of Pennsylvania *Beta, Princeton University * [http://alpha.dickinson.edu/storg/phikap/ Epsilon] ,Dickinson College *Zeta, Franklin Marshall College *Theta, Kenyon College *Mu, Tulane University *Omicron,… … Wikipedia
List of Kappa Sigma chapters — This is an updated list of the Chapter names of Kappa Sigma, current as of April 28, 2007. Undergraduate Chapters are listed first, followed by Colonies, and ending with Alumni Organizations. All are listed alphabetically by state, then city,… … Wikipedia
Sigma Alpha Mu — Founded: November 26, 1909 (1909 11 26) (age 101) at City College of New York Founders … Wikipedia
Sigma Chi — ΣΧ 200px Armoiries de Sigma Chi Contexte général Champs d action International Zone d influence International … Wikipédia en Français
Sigma Alpha Rho — ΣAP Founded November 18, 1917 West Philadelphia, Pennsylvania Type Religious … Wikipedia