Are you interested in children’s books about states or that have strong settings? I have a list of children’s books by setting at the Reading Through the States.
It’s Arizona’s centennial year, and to celebrate let’s take a look at two books about Arizona’s history that are sure to excite children: Arizona Way Out West & Witty: Awesome Activities, Humorous History, and Fun Facts! by Lynda Exley and Conrad J. Storad, illustrated by Michael Hagelberg and Arizona Way Out West & Wacky: Awesome Activities, Humorous History and Fun Facts! by the same team.
Conrad Storad is well-known here in Arizona for his children’s picture books with Southwest themes, as well as science topics. Lynda Exley’s son, Michael J. Moorehead, is also known in Arizona because he is already a published author, at 12! (He wrote The Student From Zombie Island: Conquering the Rumor Monster).
In case you are wondering why there are two titles in the series, Arizona Way Out West & Witty is presented as a library edition. It is in chapter book format and is not consumable, and it comes with a curriculum guide in the back.
On the other hand, Arizona Way Out West & Wacky is an activity book that covers the same material, but in an interactive, consumable way. It has word searches, crossword puzzles, and coloring pages, as well as other fun activities.
I thought that was an interesting way to solve an age old dilemma. How do you market consumable books to libraries and schools, yet keep the activities fun and interactive for children? It seems that having two formats might be one answer. Now I wonder how sales of the two books compare, and whether having such similar titles is resulting in any confusion. I do know that Arizona Way Out West & Witty was chosen as the 2012 ONEBOOKAZ for Kids winner.
Arizona Way Out West & Witty: Awesome Activities, Humorous History, and Fun Facts!
Paperback: 118 pages
Publisher: Five Star Publications, Inc.; Library Edition edition (January 17, 2012)
Arizona Way Out West & Wacky: Awesome Activities, Humorous History and Fun Facts
Paperback: 112 pages
Publisher: Five Star Publications, Inc.; 1st edition (October 29, 2011)
Nonfiction Monday is a blogging celebration of nonfiction books for kids. We invite you to join us. For more information and a schedule, stop by Booktalking to see who is hosting each week.
This week’s round-up is at Simply Science.