You can browse our books easily with any of the following filters, hover over the filters or their titles to see their descriptions.
Or you can use quick search or switch to advanced search for better results...
Animal features come in all sorts of shapes, sizes, patterns, and colours, and they serve many different purposes. Animal Part Smarts introduces and labels animal parts, helping new readers learn to read while also learning about their favourite animals. Tightly controlled vocabulary and repetitive text patterns work together with crisp and colourful photographs to create an engaging and supportive reading experience.
The animal kingdom is full of unlikely friendships! From the grasslands of Africa to the middle of the ocean, animals across the world team up to trade food, protection, and much more to help one another survive. This series about symbiotic relationships proves that opposites attract!
The Arctic is a barren land of blustering winds and sub-zero temperatures unfit for many of Earth's animals. But some have evolved to make this frozen world their home. Each title in Animals of the Arctic is filled with descriptions of adaptations, from special coats to inventive behaviours, explaining how animals survive in the Arctic!
The desert is one of the most extreme biomes on Earth! Temperatures skyrocket as the sun rises and quickly plummet as it sets. These extremes have not stopped animals from making it their home. From roadrunners excreting salt to conserve water to bighorn sheep going days without a drop, this series explores the special ways animals of the desert have adapted to survive in this harsh biome.
The sun beats down on the African savanna, while icy winds whip across the Great Plains in North America. There's nothing to shelter the animals that live in this wide-open biome from the harshness of these elements, so they must find other ways to survive. Profiles, maps, and other features support low-level text telling all about how animals have adapted to the grassland biome they call home.
Thin, cold air and steep slopes make mountaintops formidable to most animals. But some species thrive at these high altitudes! This low-level series examines alpine animals and how they adapt to their high-up homes. Features illustrate the range, diet, and adaptations of each animal to support levelled text. Young readers can find out what life is like on top of the world!
The hot, humid rain forest is habitat to more than half of the world's plant and animal species! From colourful toucans to enormous anacondas, this informative series explores how the animals adapt to survive in the world's most diverse biome.
Swamps, marshes, and other wetlands are home to some of the world's most interesting animals. But life isn't always easy for these creatures. They must adapt to escape predators, find food, and build shelter in their watery habitats. Packed with features such as animal profiles and range maps, this low-level series will give readers a sneak peek into the lives of the animals that make homes in the wetlands biome.
Grab your ticket and enjoy the show with these exciting and informative books. Learn all about the world's most entertaining events like rodeos, concerts, and the Super Bowl. With easy text and thrilling pictures, these hi-lo books will have all young readers shouting for an encore!
Get ready for some hands-on arts and crafts fun! From handprint painting to cool collage art, this series is full of projects to engage and inspire. The easy step-by-step instructions make the projects not just fun but totally doable!