The Formulus is the new one-stop shop for research scientists looking to search through millions of formulations quickly and efficiently. It can be a potential game changer for India's pharmaceutical and agrochemical sector, the CAS said in a statement.
The device called Orion is geared to people who used to be able to see but lost their vision to injury or disease, according to researchers at the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) in the US.
The 'OncoDiscover' technology has been approved by the Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation, the national regulatory body for pharmaceuticals and medical devices
The new sensors have a spiraling microscopic tube that wicks sweat from the skin. By tracking how fast the sweat moves through the microfluidic, the sensors can report how much a person is sweating.
Anti-rejection drugs are known to cause serious infections and even cancer in recipients.
The soft and conformable monitor can broadcast electrocardiogram (ECG), heart rate, respiratory rate and motion activity data as much as 15 metres to a portable recording device such as a smartphone or tablet computer.
The study was aimed to gain insight on the prevalence and mechanism of drug resistance in Helicobacter linked diseases so as to help develop strategies with more rational antibiotic combinations for treatment.
Scientists used deep learning to detect malignant lung nodules with performance meeting or exceeding that of radiologists
According to pharmaceutical scientist Nazrul Islam, from Queensland University of Technology (QUT) in Australia, lung cancer is one of the deadliest and most common cancers.
Scientists found that deleting RBMXL2 gene from chromosome 11 blocked sperm production
Scientists said that this fruit is hundred time sweeter than sugar and could replace Stevia which is used as a sweetener by diabetic patients as the fruit has anti-diabetic properties.
Researchers at the University of Exeter in the UK, who designed the devices and magnetic control mechanism, have also created a mathematical model that allows them to predict their behaviour in different environment, such as microfluidic channels or complex liquids.
Kaposi sarcoma (KS) is a cancer that develops in lymph or blood vessels, and usually appears as lesions on the skin, inside of the mouth or internally.
"Doctors already use computer-based tools to work out whether a patient is at risk of heart disease, and machine-learning will allow more accurate models to be developed for a wider range of conditions," said Steele.
This is the first time that data on air pollution and lifespan has been studied together in order to examine the global variations in how they affect overall life expectancy.
They are James Allison of the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center; Dr Carl June of the Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania; and Dr Steven Rosenberg of the National Cancer Institute.
The new method, described in the journal Science Translational Medicine, is cheaper and easier to carry out, ideally enabling health care providers in poorer communities to adopt the technology.
The hope is that this would help patients alleviate pain as well as regain some functions like control of muscles, bowel and bladder, researchers said.
The system, called Reinforcement Learning for Structural Evolution (ReLeaSE), comprises two neural networks which can be thought of as a teacher and a student.
Parkinson's is caused by a lack of dopamine made by brain cells and researchers have long hoped to use stem cells to restore normal production of the neurotransmitter chemical.