An inquiry based approach
Children are powerful, competent and capable members of our community. They are also curious learners who naturally investigate, inquire and engage the world around them. Time, space and people influence how children approach learning and how they see themselves as learners. Our environment and interactions will reflect a positive influence on how children view themselves so that their self-esteem, self-worth and rights are always held in high regard.
Children are decision makers in our educational program which engages children as constructors of the curriculum. Our educational programs embrace all children as an investigator, risk taker and partner in directing their own learning.
Underpinning children as decision makers is the belief that children have rights and responsibilities as active participants in their learning and their life. The right to be heard is the beginning of all consultation across our curriculum. We also believe that children learn and develop through active and constructive involvement in play. Children will experience a ‘hands on’ approach to learning where they are challenged to explore, investigate and discover.
Our classrooms provide child led and interest based learning programs. Our Teachers and Educators observe the children on a regular basis, evaluating their needs and creating a curriculum from these observations. We believe that children learn and develop through active and constructive involvement in play. The joy in exploring meaningful interests for the children comes in the process of the journey of discovery, not just the accumulation of knowledge. Children learn to challenge their own thinking, listen to others ideas, become researchers, be present in the moment and enjoy the whole process!
In the spirit of respect, Kardinia Childcare and Kindergarten recognises the Aboriginal Peoples of Australia as the Traditional Custodians of the Land. We pay our respects to them, their culture and their Elders past, present and future