The Clean Water Here social media campaign culminated on March 22, 2017 – UN World Water Day, to help people understand the nature and scope of the global water crisis by promoting safe drinking water in the United States.
World Water Day is coordinated by UN-Water and the 2017 campaign was led by UN Environment, UN-HABITAT, United Nations University and the World Health Organization.
As part of the initiative, dignitaries, celebrities and the public lent their own social media voices to create the largest U.S. clean drinking water social media campaign in history.
“People have the mistaken belief that the need for safe drinking water only exists in the developing world,” said Lani Dolifka, the creator of Clean Water Here. “We wanted to draw attention to the thousands of people living in this country who still do not have adequate drinking water,” added Dolifka, who also serves as CEO of Watermill Express, the largest drive-up pure drinking water company in the United States. “The recent crisis in Flint Michigan changed all that, which is why we promoted UN World Water Day by highlighting the need for safe drinking water here at home.”
A proud Founding Partner of Clean Water Here, Watermill Express has been providing a sustainable alternative for clean, affordable drinking water in the United States for over 30 years.
Clean Water Here co-creator David Clark is also the founder of Water Now, which in 2015 and 2016 was the largest celebration of UN World Water Day around the world. The combined social-media voice of Water Now exceeded one and a half billion people with supporters who included Lady Gaga, Ryan Seacrest, Pharrell Williams, Alicia Keys, Pitbull, Britney Spears, Fergie, Justin Bieber, Maroon 5, One Direction, along with the United Nations, World Vision and Sesame Street.
“Watermill Express is the ideal Founding Partner for Clean Water Here because it is a leading solution to the domestic water crisis,” said Clark.
For more info visit:
Founded by Watermill Express CEO Lani Dolifka, Clean Water Here promotes the need for safe drinking water in the United States. Research indicates that out-of-date plumbing, sometimes over 100 years old is delivering water through pipes that often leak contaminants into the water. In addition, old-fashioned water treatment facilities may not always address 21st-century contaminants like pesticides, industrial chemicals and arsenic. So who is most likely to be drinking this water that is known to cause disease – the poorest and most vulnerable among us. Clean Water Here is dedicated to educating the public about this important issue. For more information visit cleanwaterhere.org.
Clean Water Here founding partner Watermill Express is the largest drive-up pure drinking water company in the U.S. and the green alternative to prepackaged water. Watermill Express customers reuse their own clean containers to reduce pollution from single-use plastic water bottles. Founded in 1984, Watermill Express supports causes that promote the health and welfare of children and families. For more information visit watermillexpress.com
World Water Day has been observed since 1993 when the United Nations General Assembly declared March 22 as the annual “World Day for Water.” Coordinated by UN Water in support of the 193 member nations of the UN, this day is devoted to implementing recommendations and promoting concrete activities within their countries regarding the world’s water resources. In addition to the UN member states, a number of NGOs promoting clean water leverage World Water Day as a time to focus public attention on the critical water issues facing the world. For more information visit worldwaterday.org
Gallery of Select Celebrity Posts: