Stem Cells – Your Body’s Personal Repair Kit
You’re probably wondering, “just what are stem cells and why are they important to my body?”
Here’s a simple definition of what a stem cell is: a stem cell is an undifferentiated cell of a multicellular organism that is capable of giving rise to indefinitely more cells of the same type and from which certain other kinds of cells arise by differentiation.
To put it very simply, stem cells are your body’s natural internal repair system. They are the very foundation cells of our bodies and they have the ability to repair injured tissue and replace lost cells on a daily basis.
If our body is attacked by disease or we sustained an injury, stem cells respond to very specific chemical signals and then go about facilitating healing by differentiating into the specialized cells our bodies need in order to repair itself. There must be a sufficient number of cells and they must receive the correct signal when disease or injury attacks our body. The result will be a compromised healing response.
Stem cells have the ability to help restore damaged or diseased organs and tissue. They can also help the body to heal by creating certain growth factors and other body chemicals that promote repair. This is the essence of regenerative medicine.
Your Stem Cell Supply May Not Be Sufficient
The problem in our bodies is degeneration. As we age, the amount of stem cells in our body goes down. This also means that our bodies ability to repair itself also diminishes. A re-infusion of stem cells can help wake up our bodies natural repair system and processes.
When stem cells are injected into the body or administered through an IV, they seek out the degeneration and inflammation and proceed to repair the damaged tissue or organ.
Your body has been designed to heal itself. Stem cells are a part of your body system that enables it to repair damaged tissue, reduce inflammation and balance your immune system.
If you have questions about stem cell therapy, give our office a call today. We would love to set up a consultation time, talk with you about your health and wellness challenges, and derive a plan that will help you get your life and health back.