CAREER & COLLEGE WEBSITES
The best decisions made are those that are well informed and are based on the facts. The following websites are essential for anyone needing accurate job information. Students, job seekers, educators and counselors will be able to find thorough job descriptions for hundreds of careers including tasks and responsibilities, working conditions,average earnings, and much more.
U.S. Department of Labor Bureau of Labor Statistics
This website is from the United States Department of Labor. A search index for finding information for a specific occupation is available. Another option is to review a listing of all occupations in alphabetical order.Great for discovering the ten fastest growing occupations.
O-Net Online Occupational Information Network
This premiere online resource is designed so that users may search for occupations using keywords, job families or by viewing a complete list.Select skills search to use a list of your skills to find matching O*Net occupations.
Career One Stop
By selecting Occupation Information, you can build a profile with employment, wages, skills, and more. Find high-growth and high-wage occupations. Learn about cutting-edge tools and technology used in specific occupations.
Welcome to Advance CTE: State Leaders Connecting Learning to Work! Career Technical Education (CTE) is at the forefront of our nation’s efforts to drive America’s success and vitality. It is our commitment to support our members, collaborate with partners and engage policymakers to advance CTE – learning that works for students, for secondary and postsecondary schools, for businesses and industry, and for America.
College BoardGet connected to your college. Find official college planning and preparation tools to help you succeed. Register for the SAT exam. Visit the College Board website - your inside source.ACT College Placement TestCollege Affordablity GuideCollegeAffordabilityGuide.org is owned and operated by a group that has been creating post-secondary education resources since 2008. We take pride in our ability to provide students with objective, fact-based resources.Xello (formerly Career Cruising)Xello is an interactive career resource designed for people of all ages. If you want to find the right career, explore different career options, or plan future education and training, you've come to the right place! Students MUST use this site to request transcripts. Every Elizabethtown Area School Student in grades 6-12 has a portfolio on this website. To access your personal portfolio use the link above.
Career Zone Pennsylvania
PennsylvaniaCareerZone has been developed among the PA Department of Education andthe PA Department of Labor and Industry and contains comprehensive information on 900 occupations. Users are encouraged to work through the Interest Profiler, Work Importance Profiler, and Assess Yourself Assessment based on the Holland Codes for self-exploration
American Education Services
Whether you are a high school student deciding what you want to be, or a parentfiguring out a way to pay for college, this is your one-stop career and college planning site.Getting a job: Listed below are some websites that are useful when creating a resume and preparing for interviews and job searching
PennsylvaniaCareerLink is a cooperative effort to provide one-stop delivery of career services to job seekers, employers and other interested individuals.
PA Center for Workforce Information & Analysis
Lancaster County Workforce Investment Board
Workforce Investment BoardThe Lancaster County Workforce Investment Board website is a valuable toolto access employer needs and job growth trends. It also offers resource materials on the labor market, economic development and workforcedevelopment.County OfficeCountyOffice.org is the most accurate internet database of county government offices in the United States. Use our site to locate your county assessor, board of elections, chamber of commerce, child support offices, colleges, coroner, courts, and much more, with all relevant details.
Find out information regarding all aspects of military living: includes military news, careers, pay and benefits, education, and much more.PA Transfer & Articulation CenterPA TRAC enables students ot easily identify courses and degrees that transfer to the participating colleges and universities.Best CollegesOur regularly updated collection of college rankings will keep student infomred about what schools across the country have to offer in terms of top-rated academics and student lifestyle. From degree programs to campus amenities, we do the research on what matters.