Published on Dec 23, 2013 and last reviewed on Jan 09, 2019 - 1 min read
The number of people suffering from kidney problems is increasing every day. However, we can follow a few simple steps to keep ourselves safe and protected from them.
The incidence of renal disorders has been increasing rapidly over the past few decades, leading to an enormous burden on the limited health care resources available in most countries.
Various causes have led to this manifold rise in the number of people suffering from kidney diseases of which the major ones include:
Diabetes, i.e., uncontrolled increase in blood sugar levels and hypertension, i.e., uncontrolled increase in the blood pressure are one of the most important causes of renal disorders, especially chronic kidney disease. Recent research has undoubtedly proven the relation of obesity not only with increased risk of developing diabetes and hypertension but also an increased risk of developing renal dysfunction.
Better availability of healthcare resources both to patients and doctors has also led to better surveillance and increased detection of renal disorders, which is a good sign pointing towards an efficient healthcare system.
Steps to Decrease the Rapidly Growing Incidence of Renal Disorders:
Lifestyle Modifications in Preventing Renal Disorders:
All these measures combined will take us a long way ahead in our endeavor to decrease the incidence of renal diseases and build a healthy kidney world.
Article Overview: This article emphasizes the impact of diabetes mellitus on oral health problems and its management. Read Article
Diabetes mellitus is a metabolic disorder which affects the uptake and use of glucose by the human body. As a result, the glucose level in the blood rises beyond normal which has an overall impact on the general health and oral cavity. Types Of Diabetes Insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus: It oc... Read Article
Article Overview: This article tells about the misconceptions prevalent among people against having anti-hypertensive pills. Read Article
Blood Pressure and Symptoms - A Gist : Blood pressure is basically the pressure faced by the walls of the blood vessels when the blood is ejected from the heart with a level of force. Under normal circumstances this force is essential for the blood to circulate well in the body. Raised blood pressur... Read Article
Article Overview: Diabetes is one of the leading cause for permanent blindness. It is very essential for us to know to avoid the complications of diabetes. Micro-vascular complications will involve eyes, kidneys and nerves in common. But early detection and prevention will avoid permanent disability. Read Article
"EYES are the most beautiful organs created by nature which enables us to have vision. It is very important factor for individuals to be independent in their life" Diabetes is a metabolic syndrome entity which is characterized by hyperglycemia, high blood pressure and dyslipedemia. It causes variou... Read Article
Do you have a question on Hypertension or Diabetes?Ask a Doctor Online