A hybrid fruit that is closely related to tangerine and pomelo, an orange is rich in vitamin C. It is a very good source of other vital nutrients such as niacin, riboflavin and thiamine. Although it is more popular for its juice, it is considered a valuable material in making different kinds of products like teas, perfumes and bridal bouquets. Learn how to plant orange seeds and make the best out of this nutritious and delicious fruit.
Planting orange seeds is a moderate task. Finding the right materials and acquiring proper knowledge are enough to get the job done. The materials needed include fertilizer, clear plastic wrap and pot. It is also good to consider the right quality of mixing soil. More importantly, select good quality seeds in order to grow the best quality of fruits possible.
Steps in Planting Orange Seeds
After eating an orange that you really like, preparing the seeds is a highly important step. Use lukewarm water to wash the seeds. Try to get fresh seeds. Allow them to stay in water overnight. After preparing the seeds, it is now time to shift the focus on the soil. Check out the nearest gardening store for some high quality soil mix, which is made up of sand, perlite and peat moss.
Different pot sizes are needed to accommodate the various stages of growth of the plants. Aside from peat pots, it is good to use paper cup, plastic cup or any small container at the start of the process. As the seeds grow into sprouts, there will come a time when much bigger pots are necessary to accommodate growing seedlings. For this reason, it is highly important to prepare various pot sizes.
After procuring the right pots and soil for the task, it is now good to start planting the seeds on the pots. In a nice pot, put ample amount of soil. Plant each seed at least 2 times longer than their dimensions. When this is over, pour some water on the pots until enough moisture is acquired by every pot. Do not pour too much water because the soil will become soggy.
Use the clear plastic wrap on top of the plants. For this important step, it is also possible to use ziplock bags and plastic garbage bags. It will also help to put the plants in relatively warm areas. In addition, be sure to check the soil moisture regularly. It is good for the soil to be moist but not too much. When the plants grow, it is good to replant them and then fertilize. Try to fertilize them every 4 to 6 weeks to ensure great quality fruits. An orange tree usually takes at least 6 to 10 years before they bear fruit. When the pots cannot accommodate the plants anymore, it is appropriate to transfer them outdoors.
For more information on How To Plant Orange Seeds read: