Tree Nurserries Project
FoU’s tree nurseries are the central element of its efforts to give back to the local community and the world. The tree nursery/tree planting project started a decade ago when FoU recognized that reforestation would make a big difference locally, and trees’ absorption of the greenhouse gas carbon dioxide helps slow climate change globally.
The project has grown over the years, and currently the 4 mega-tree nurseries in the West Usambara Mountains stock over 15 million trees. In addition,20 schools tree nurseries provide youth with opportunities to do their part in the climate crisis.
We thank our valuable funding partners whose vision and generosity has allowed the project to flourish, and encourage them and new funding partners to provide financial resources so we can redouble our efforts to plant trees for the sake of the planet. Please contact us. [INCLUDE A LINK TO THE CONTACT FORM]
Trees are planted for a number of purposes:
- Reforestation to replace native trees and renew the African Rainforest.Tree planting.
- Agroforestry where subsistence farmers plant food trees in their fields to increase land productivity, improve family nutrition, and raise a surplus that can be sold at market, helping them to graduate from extreme poverty
- Woodlots where people raise fast-growing trees for cooking fuel, building materials, and other uses – eliminating the harvest of trees from forests and forest reserves
This 3-legged stool model is absolutely necessary to manage the renewal of forests in the Eastern Arc Mountains. While it would be ideal for people to use solar cookers or high-efficiency cookstoves, those cost money they don’t have. Plus people use wood for many purposes, and woodlots can provide that resource and protect the forest.
Helping farms thrive through Agroforestry
The livelihoods of Usambara communities are deeply dependent on farming for incomes and food. 45% Usambara County residents are employed in family agriculture (subsistence farming), mostly on small land holdings of 2 acres or less.
The FoUFruits for Livelihoodsprogram works with vulnerable families (defined as those with less than 1 acre and either female led or with 6 or more dependents) who are most at risk from poverty and malnutrition. FoU tree nurseries are rich in stock of fruits trees of different kinds. FoU provides subsistence farmers with fruit and nut trees to plant in Agroforestry, which is a popular way that local farmers can improve the productivity of their land to grow more food, improve family nutrition, and earn more money.
FoU is stretching its activities to the East Usambara Mountains and now is helping people of Muheza Districts through the Fruits for Livelihoods project. FoU providesfarmers with agricultural techniques as well as supplying them with fruit trees.FoU plans to establishing tree nurseries in the East Usambaras and train participants to graft their own high-quality fruit trees. The project will focus on four crops (Mango, Oranges, Avocado, and Macadamia nut), which have high nutritional value and sell for a good price in local markets. These trees can be sold for a profit or planted to enhance the small farms.