Isn’t adding compost enough?
Adding compost to your garden or farmland is a good thing, especially if your soil needs organic matter. A basic soil test will reveal the percent organic matter in your soil. Anywhere from five to ten percent is adequate and more will be required in warm and rainy areas. Compost alone will produce Nitrogen and Potassium, which are powerful growth stimulators, but the vegetables you grow will be lacking in flavor and nutrition. Nutrient density, sweetness, and flavor come from the minerals in the soil: Calcium, Magnesium, Potassium, Sodium, Sulfur, Phosphorous, Boron, Iron, Manganese, Copper, and Zinc. When these are present in optimum quantities, you will experience a miracle of nature. Since compost doesn’t contain all the required minerals, it just isn’t enough.
How is this different than NPK fertilizers on the market today?
Nitrogen, Phosphorous, and Potassium are only a small part of the picture. They are powerful growth stimulants and produce high yields of big and tall plants. However, the nutritive value of such plants is severely lacking. Overuse of synthetic NPK and Potassium chloride fertilizers are destructive to soil, the life and minerals it contains, and detrimental to our environment. We use organic forms of nitrogen, naturally chelated Phosphorous and Potassium along with nine other mineral nutrients plus trace minerals. This balances the soil for optimum fertility, yield, and nutrition. It builds the soil and is not destructive to our environment.
What time of the year is best for testing my soil?
Actually, a soil test can be taken anytime of the year, even when the ground is frozen. If you have crops in the garden or field, it is best to wait until the end of the growing season or after harvest. Once your soil is brought into balance, we recommend a soil test in the fall to add amendments that will incorporate over the winter, and one in the early spring for anything the crops may need for the growing season to maintain the soil at optimum fertility. See the STEP ONE: Taking a Soil Sample or the Area Description Form for instructions on how to take the soil sample.
Do you ship the minerals called for in the soil prescription?
Yes. We can supply the amendments in the form of a custom blend for your soil and ship it to you. See the Payment and Shipping section for rates. For large projects such as farms, it may be more cost effective to work with a local fertilizer dealer.
What can I expect in the first growing season after balancing my soil?
You can expect to experience improvement in plant health, disease and pest resistance, nutrient density (affects taste), and yield. You may also notice more robust growth. The improvements will increase with each growing season as the soil biology gets to work making nutrients increasingly available to the plants.
What differences might I see in my livestock?
Mineral imbalances and deficiencies in the soil result in forage that is nutrient deficient and not reaching its full potential. When animals don’t have all the mineral nutrients they need through their natural food sources, they are more susceptible to diseases. With soil in optimum mineral balance the nutrient density of forage vastly increases. The forage reaches its full nutritive potential and provides the animal with all the materials it needs to naturally make the enzymes, proteins, and vitamins required for a strong immune system. The animal’s body then moves toward homeostasis or balance on its own. You should see a substantial improvement in livestock health and disease resistance that will most likely result in reduced veterinary expenses. The animal’s milk, cheese, and meat will have a far better flavor and a higher nutrient density. You will be sending a premium product to your customers.
Will I have to amend the soil every year?
You will only have to bring the soil to optimum mineral balance once. Any adjustments in subsequent years will be comparatively minor to maintain the soil in ideal balance. Sulfur and Boron will most likely be needed each year in high production soils. Free Boron in the soil is highly water soluble and subject to leaching. It is also readily taken up by plants. We recommend a soil test in the fall to add amendments that will settle in over the winter, and one in the early spring for anything the crops may need for the growing season.
Does this really work and how do you know?
The Albrecht method has been proven safe and effective on small and large-scale farms, gardens, pastures, orchards, vineyards, and tree farms. Coffee growers, rice farmers, and fruit and vegetable growers around the world have utilized it. It has been practiced successfully in the United States, Canada, Ireland, New Zealand, Australia, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Venezuela, Columbia, Costa Rica, Panama, Nicaragua, Mexico, the United Kingdom, and in all parts of Europe.