Students in middle school have unique needs and require special attention during their transitional years. These students vary in physical, intellectual, psychological and emotional development.
To meet these needs, middle schools strive to provide high academic expectations for all students, to develop positive attitudes toward learning and future readiness and to transition successfully between elementary and high school.
With this in mind, the middle school curriculum includes core areas of instruction including reading, writing, speaking, listening, math, science, social studies, health and physical education. Additionally, students are able to explore a variety of elective offerings including music, technology and the arts and are encouraged to learn, explore and create.
The middle school core curriculum focuses on the basics of reading, speaking, listening, language, writing, math, science, social studies, physical education and health. Additionally, students in middle school have the opportunity to take a variety of elective offerings that expand creativity, critical thinking, collaboration and communication experiences.
Our schools follow the Common Core State Standards for math and English Language Arts.
Social Studies Standards - Oregon Department of Education adopted new social studies standards, which will be implemented in 2019-20.
All of our schools have developed School Design Plans to establish goals and help our students achieve academic excellence, become thriving citizens and develop future ready skills. Each school has a unique plan tailored to its community, culture and story.
Contact local schools to learn more about their stories and School Design Plans.
Our middle schools offer the Positive Behavioral Interventions and Supports (PBIS) to establish positive school cultures. This is a framework that schools can tailor to meet the needs of their communities and to help create safe, positive and caring school cultures.
Contact schools for specifics about the programs offered.
Many of our schools offer rigorous, comprehensive academic options to middle school age students, including La Pine Middle School, Pacific Crest Middle School and Sky View Middle School. Several of our middle schools offer different education programs for students. These include:
REALMS is a grade 6-8 magnet school focuses on Expeditionary Learning (EL Education). Students are admitted through a lottery process each spring.
Pilot Butte Middle School is an International Baccalaureate World School offering the IB Middle Years Programme. All students attending the school are part of the IB offerings.
Beginning in the 2016-17 school year, High Desert Middle School will offer a Dual Immersion Spanish Language program as a strand within the school. The program is a continuation of the Bear Creek Elementary School DI program.
Cascade Middle School houses the district's Talented and Gifted program as a strand within the school. Students must be identified as TAG to join the program.
Students in middle school have unique needs and require special attention during their transitional years.