Weakened Teeth are Vulnerable to Breaking
Whilst most people probably keep regular dental appointments to make sure that their teeth are in a good healthy condition, there are a significant number of people who do not. In some cases, this is down to fear of visiting the dentist but for others, there is a feeling that their teeth are fine and healthy without having to bother … thank you very much!
Whilst it may be true that some people have stronger ‘dental genes’, the fact is that no one is invulnerable to dental problems such as tooth decay or gum disease however well they look after their teeth. Even regular brushing and flossing, whilst highly important and effective, may not reach some parts of the teeth where decay may set in. One example area is at the back of the rear teeth; these can be very difficult to reach and if not regularly checked by a professional dentist, may well lead to tooth decay and a weakened tooth.
Do you want to improve your appearance in just a single day?
Most of us, as we get older, will suffer a deterioration in our teeth. Whilst the lucky few who have strong dental genes may escape the worst of it, most of us will suffer some form of decay resulting in fillings or even extractions. Even those lucky few may be unfortunate enough to lose teeth in an accident….
Options for replacing missing teeth at 77 Harley Street
Losing a tooth is something that we all try to avoid but sometimes, with the best will in the world, we lose one or have to have one extracted. Sometimes, this is the result of an accident which no amount of preventative care would avoid.
A missing tooth can affect both the function of our teeth overall and also the way that we look and therefore often too, our confidence. Accordingly, most people will look to have the tooth replaced rather than live with a gap in their teeth.
There are currently three main options to replace a missing tooth, one of which we find particularly popular with patients at our Harley Street dental clinic.
Getting the basics of oral health care right
Although primitive forms of the toothbrush have been in existence since around 3000 BC, the toothbrush as we know it now was not invented until 1938 but has, since, become a must have item in every household and certainly across the developed world.
This basic piece of plastic and bristles is an essential tool in making sure that we keep our oral health in good shape. Despite this though, many of us make a number of errors both in the way that we use them and look after them.
Making an appointment with our Harley Street dentist may prevent future problems.
It is thought that around a third of people in the UK are afraid, to some extent, of visiting the dentist. Whilst most do generally keep their appointments, some do not and almost never go apart from when they are in so much pain that nothing could be worse. In some cases, sadly, it is likely that this pattern will continue for life and lead to major dental procedures each time and eventually the loss of most of their teeth.
Our Harley Street Dental Team Answer Your Questions
We have many years of experience with fitting dental veneers for Harley Street patients and as you might imagine, a number of questions have come up time and again. We have attempted to answer most of these here and we hope you find our guidance useful.
First, a very brief introduction to dental veneers. Essentially, in layman terms, these can be thought of in a similar manner to false fingernails in that they are a very fine layer of tooth shaped porcelain which is placed on the front of a prepared tooth. This restores the whiteness and generally, the aesthetics of teeth in the front of our mouth.
Why Might I need Dental Veneers?
How a Harley Street Dentist Can Brighten Your Smile
We would all love to have white teeth and many of us can probably recall the time when our teeth were much whiter than they currently are. There is no point in living in the past however, but, whatever age we are, there are still methods available to ensure that we can have fantastic looking white teeth to bring out the best in our smile.
Essentially, there are three key ways to have whiter teeth and we will take a look at those here.
Why Taking Good Care of Your Teeth Pays Off
Whilst thousands of pounds are spent each year on dental procedures, many of these cosmetic, the need for many of these may well have been prevented by just a little knowledge and application of good oral health care.
Naturally, at 77 Harley Street, we do recognise that many people will have to have dental procedures carried out for reasons such as accidental tooth damage, side effects of medications or even for cosmetic reasons that are critical to a person’s career, for example an actor or news reader. For most people though, taking good care of their teeth means that many of the more invasive dental procedures can be avoided altogether. Continue reading
Weak and Broken Teeth Can Spoil the Enjoyment of Eating
Every day that we turn on our TV, you can almost guarantee that at least one channel will be showing a cookery programme hosted by a celebrity chef. The range of food now available is extraordinary and there is little doubt that our palettes in the West have expanded more than our parents could ever have envisaged.
For some people though, watching these programmes can be very frustrating, especially when a food is mentioned that is described as ‘chewy’ or ‘crunchy’; these are words which are likely to be a source of concern for anyone whose teeth are not in the best of shape.
A less well known but still important smile enhancement
A gummy smile occurs when the front teeth are partially hidden by excess gum growing over them, leaving less of the teeth visible than is usually the case.
Because this problem partially hides the teeth, it results in an unappealing smile, often causing the sufferer social embarrassment. However, this problem can be rectified by our cosmetic dentists in Harley Street in Central London by a procedure known as gum contouring. This enables the shape of the gums to be corrected so as to give a regular appearance.
What Causes a Gummy Smile?