The first flying machine from Yugoslavia
The first in the area of Serbia, (then Austro-Hungaria), flying machine, heavier then air, designed, made and flew the citizen of Subotica, Ivan Saric, (born 27th June 1876, died 23rd August 1966), taking example of Louis Bleriot plane, which he had opportunity to see visiting Paris in June 1909, but adding more own original ideas. Newly built aircraft firstly was exposed mid June 1910 at the lobby of city’s hotel, and then transferred to the hippodrome, where by the end the month he performed first flights. During time Saric mastered pilot’s technique so that in September the same year, on altitude of 30 meters, he flew distance of 3 kilometers, making also turns. Generaly, he was typical represent of the that time aviation pioneers, being simultaneously designer, constructer, mechanic and own flying teacher. Besides, he was universal sportsman, and in a number of occasions participated in sport event in the Kingdom of Serbia.
Acquiring a certain pilot’s skill and self-confidence, Saric on 16th October 1910 organized an air show at the hippodrome at Subotica, attended beside local audience by visitors from Budapest and journalists. In presence of 7.000 spectators, in spite of a rather strong wind, he made a flight, during which one of engine pistons broke, but he managed to land safely, greeted by thundering applause of present audience.
Dissatisfied by flying characteristics of his first plane, he reconstructed 1911 the №1, into №2, by installing seven piston rotative 44 kW (60 KS) engine, made by German manufacturer Delphos, at Köln. It is not known did he succeeded to take off by this plane.
Early 1914 Saric designed and made a model, study of a biplane, his №3 design, saved and kept in the Air Museum, Beograd. He also developed a fourteen pistons radial rotative engine, so-called "double star” type, of 59 kW (80 KS), intended to be power unit for mentioned biplane №3. He also designed a ten pistons radial rotative engine of 74 kW (100 KS), non of these project ever realized.
During the W.W.I, Saric was sent to the Austrian aircraft factory at Wiener Neustadt, where he designed a model of helicopter, which was 1915 successfully tested at Budapest.
Exhibited (Exposed) aircraft represents the replica of the Saric’s first variant plane (№1), built 1959 on the basis of saved plans by members of the Aero club Subotica, assisted by Ivan Saric himself. Some parts built in are authentic originals.