Bitcoin is a digital currency (also called crypto-currency) that is not backed by any country's central bank or government. Bitcoins can be traded for goods or services with vendors who accept Bitcoins as payment. The first bitcoin was conceptualized in 2008 by an anonymous group, Satoshi Nakamoto which was then implemented in 2009 as a core component supporting Bitcoin, where it served as the public ledger for all transactions. Back then, Bitcoin prices were around $0.008 each. The invention of the blockchain for the Bitcoin made it the first digital currency to solve the double spending problem without the need of a trusted authority or central server. Bitcoin-to-Bitcoin transactions are made by digitally exchanging anonymous, heavily encrypted hash codes across a peer-to-peer (P2P) network. The P2P network monitors and verifies the transfer of Bitcoins between users. It was originally described as an electronic cash from peer to peer, but the technology has evolved to emphasize being a layer of settlement rather than a payment network. Each user's Bitcoins are stored in a program called a digital wallet, which also holds each address the user sends and receives Bitcoins from, as well as a private key known only to the user. Bitcoins are much like other conventional assets such as gold and silver, that have their own market price and value. And like these assets, the price of Bitcoins varies as a result of supply and demand. As demand for bitcoins rise, the “price Bitcoins” (as searched on Google) may rise as well. As demand declines, BTC price may also decline. In addition to that, this digital currency has also become a hot commodity for traders in the market. The current price of Bitcoin roughly falls around $10,000. Most notably, Bitcoin price now fluctuates notoriously, which is why it becomes extremely important to keep an eye on Bitcoin current price. This is where our bitcoin price chart kicks in where we provide Bitcoin live price indications. We gather data from the market and provide you with the latest Bitcoin stock prices so you can start following the price of Bitcoin today. If you are a trader or looking to invest in bitcoins, our platform provides current bitcoin price along with “Bitcoin price live” analysis where you can understand trends of Bitcoin price today before anyone else does. This can help you predict Bitcoin price in the future and help you strategize your trade timely so you can turn your bitcoin investment into profits.