2 page essay “How does Motion and Forces help your everyday life? ” All your life, forces has been acting on you even though you probably didn’t notice it. When you use your pencil, type, walk, or even when your doing something your using force. Those were a few examples of everyday life because, that’s what a force is “everyday life”. Everyday you use force to make your life easier. The correct definition of “Force” is a push or a pull. I’ve always remembered that.
For an example, when your doing homework you use a force on your pen or pencil because you push and pull it across the paper. Sometime two forces act on something at the same time, that’s called net force. If two people were pushing a shopping cart and they were pushing in the same direction, you would add the two forces together. Net force is an unbalanced force, an unbalanced force is a force that changes the object’s motion or causes it to accelerate. Something else can happen if two forces move in one direction.
If one force is more powerful then the other, they will not balance out to zero net force because , one force is stronger than the other, so the weak force is not strong enough to completely balance out the stronger force. In the examples I mentioned earlier suppose there is a person in the front of a shopping cart and one on the other end, they are pushing with a much greater force. Since the forces are not balanced, the shopping cart is moving in the direction that the person with the stronger force is pushing.
Once you think about everyday life, and you think about “Motion and Force” you’ll see and realize it does makes life easier. Thinking of examples of force is very easy once you get the hang of it. Sports have a lot to do with force, and so does moving things around the house. Force is everywhere. Say if a girl is playing tennis and she exerts a force on the ball with her racket causing it to accelerate. That was another example of force.
As I wrote this I thought about the time I was cleaning up and had to move big boxes around. Some of the boxes were heavy so I had to push them around to there destination. When I pushed the box I applied force but, I caused static friction. Static friction is the frictional force that prevents two surfaces from sliding past each other. Enough of Force, I haven’t talked about Motion yet. Motion is being moved or it’s the process of moving. There’s more then one definition of Motion, I’ve always remembered “Power of movement “.