The Indianapolis Zoo is the presenter of the Indianapolis Prizean award for animal conservation.
But the idea of a zoo as an effective educational tool applies equally well to all non-formal educational settings, such as art museums, science museums, nature parks or natural areas.
Teachers who have access to any of these should definitely include them in their toolbox. A zoo exists to educate. Research happens, recreation happens, but above all is the intent to educate.
The educational potential is at its greatest with a professional educator designing a learning activity to use at the zoo. In addition to a zoo being a fun and safe place to learn, there are at least five reasons zoos are effective educational tools for formal learning: The animals are real!
Animals have a universal draw. Zoos are the ultimate in interdisciplinarianism. The learning is active, outside the confines of four walls.
Different learning styles can easily be accommodated. There is nothing better than an actual elephant to teach the concept of elephantness. What is a trunk? What is an elephant? That can all be taught instantly by viewing a living, breathing elephant.
No video, no Web site, no book can do that as effectively. Not only do you see real elephants, but you can cover much of the world in your three-hour tour. After elephants, head over to the Arctic for a close look at polar bears. Then cruise through the tropics to study the primates of your choosing.
You definitely lose A LOT when you take a ten-foot tall, 14,pound animal and squeeze it into a twelve-inch glass square.
Seeing the actual elephant is far more engaging and inspiring than the six-inch electronic facsimile, no matter how dense the dots per inch.
When kids are watching intently and saying: There is just no competition for the real thing. A connection with the real thing is even more important for us urbanites, who find ourselves increasingly severed from contact with nature.
Zoos offer a safe bridge between the familiar urban setting and the often anxiety-inducing natural world. Television shows and movies create a challenge for zoos. Time is compressed, and only the most exciting moments are seen. A zoo is the true reality show where learners can get a look at animals without the over-exaggeration and misrepresentation so often displayed in modern media.
Exotic animals from other parts of the world always seem to be the big feature. Zoos today are featuring more local animals, recognizing that the critters right here at home are just as amazing as their counterparts on the other side of the planet.
This also helps build the understanding that conservation efforts are needed, and are happening, right here.Writing Topics. Do you want to inspire your students to write great narratives, essays, and reports?
Check out these grade-specific writing topics organized by mode (explanatory, creative, and so on). Creativity is a phenomenon whereby something new and somehow valuable is formed. The created item may be intangible (such as an idea, a scientific theory, a musical composition, or a joke) or a physical object (such as an invention, a literary work, or a painting)..
Scholarly interest in creativity is found in a number of disciplines: . Second, you will find general writing prompts that you can use all year long with your students.
I have divided these general creative writing prompts into the following categories: school, favorites things, friendship, memories, personal and feelings, famous people, animals, create or invent, what if, and story starters.
Dotdash's brands help over million users each month find answers, solve problems, and get inspired. Dotdash is among the fastest-growing publishers online. Nov 06, · Zoo Jobs is the vacancy section of Zoo News Digest. Vacancies are posted here with frequency.
Keep checking back. Erth’s DINOSAUR ZOO LIVE guides your family on a breathtaking tour through pre-historic Australia. You’ll observe, meet and interact with an eye-popping collection of amazingly life-like dinosaurs and other creatures presented in a theatrical performance that will thrill and entertain kids while stimulating their imaginations in ways that will .