Monthly Archives: March 2018
Most children start losing their baby teeth around 5-6 years old, making room for the adult teeth growing behind them. Three or four of their teeth fall out each year, until all 20 baby teeth are gone by age 12.
Is it okay to yank a very loose tooth?
When child has loose teeth, should you pull it? Generally, answer is NO. Parents that pull a tooth which may be less than ready to come out face the risk of damage to sensitive tissue, possibility of infection, bleeding and pain. The best policy is patience and to let the child play and wiggle the tooth out. Most kids are fascinated with wiggling a loose tooth and that’s okay, but be certain their hands are clean
Is it dangerous to swallow a tooth?
Sometimes parents are afraid that child may swallow the loose tooth if its been ready to come out. If it happens child wont choke and its very unlikely that the problems can occur. It passes through the body. Reassure your kid the Tooth Fairy will come if he leaves a note!
When will he get permanent teeth?
It often takes a few weeks to see the ridges of the new tooth, and a few months before it’s fully grown. But sometimes permanent teeth start growing in behind baby teeth. If they’re more than halfway in, consult a dentist if the baby tooth needs to be pulled. Also check with the dentist if the new tooth is crooked or discolored.
Are you a soda drinker? The fizzy, refreshing nature of soda is very appealing – especially on a hot day. Unfortunately, despite the pleasant nature of these drinks, their ingredients are actually dangerous to oral health. Drinking soda regularly can increase your risk for developing tooth decay. Soda drinkers also are at risk for developing weakened teeth due to damaged tooth enamel. If you drink soda frequently, it is important that you understand the need to reduce your soda intake and visit our practice regularly for cleanings and checkups with our dentist so that you can protect your oral health.
Sugar and Soda
Unless it’s a diet variety, sodas contain sugar. Whether this sugar is in the form of corn syrup or cane sugar does not matter to bacteria in your mouth. Bacteria will feed on anything that contains sugar and sugar derivatives. The reason bacteria love sugar so much is due to the fact that sugar is the natural food source for bacteria. When we drink a soda, the sugar compounds left behind on our teeth, tongue, and roof of our mouth will send bacteria into a feeding frenzy. Well-fed bacteria will colonize, too. Once bacteria colonize, patients are at risk for developing plaque and tartar accumulation, especially if they do not practice proper oral hygiene.
Acid and Soda
The other harmful aspect of soda is the presence of acid. Soda makers utilize different acidic compounds as preservatives, formula stabilizers, and flavoring agents. Unfortunately, our teeth cannot handle consistent exposure to strong acid. The outer coating of our teeth, tooth enamel, is comprised of minerals. These minerals protect teeth from cavity-causing bacteria. Once tooth enamel breaks down, teeth are left vulnerable to decay.
Alternatives to Soda
Since soda can negatively affect our teeth, it is important that patients know there are abundant alternatives to this popular beverage. For instance, carbonated water, fruit-infused water, and unsweetened drinks like tea and coffee are suitable alternatives to soda. Lastly, the best thing a person can drink is plain water. Drinking water helps rinse away food and debris. It also dilutes acid.
If it’s time for a cleaning or checkup with our dentist, call us today to reserve an appointment.
our office hours
10:00am - 7:00pm
10:00am - 6:00pm
10:00am - 7:00pm
10:00am - 6:00pm
10:00am - 2:00pm
Enjoy your Dental Visit!
- Dental Care for Whole family
- Insurance friendly and payment plans
- No insurance! No problem!
- TV's in treatment rooms
- Nitrous Oxide
- Emergencies handled promptly
- Evening and weekend hours
- Full and Partial Dentures
- Porcelain veneers