Although, many risk factors for breast cancer are out of our control, such as the genetic factors (like having the BRCA1 or 2 genes), there is evidence to support that a healthy lifestyle that includes exercise and a nutrient-dense diet may reduce your risk of cancer.
Certain compounds found in food, such as ellagic acid, phytosterols, antioxidants (lycopene and beta-carotene), and even fibre, help regulate oestrogen and inhibit cancer cell formation.
A carotenoid antioxidant found in tomatoes, known as lycopene, is particularly effective at helping women with the harder-to-treat version of breast cancer (oestrogen receptor (ER)–negative tumours).
Besides tomatoes, lycopene is found in orange, fruits and vegetables, such as pomegranates, pumpkins and sweet potatoes and carrots (carotenoids help to regulate cell growth, defence, and repair).
Eating a serving of fungi a day might help protect you from breast cancer. Mushroom intake lowers risk of breast cancers for premenopausal women.
Mushrooms are one of the very few foods that inhibit aromatase (pomegranate is another). Several varieties of mushrooms, including the commonly eaten white button and portobello mushrooms, have strong anti-aromatase activity. But consumption of mushrooms protects against more than hormone-dependent cancers.
natural remedy for shrinking and eliminating uterine fibroid without surgery in Nigeria
In addition to button mushrooms, white, crimini, shitake, oyster, portabella, maitake, turkey tail, and reishi mushrooms all contain bioactive compounds with the potential for potent anti-cancer activity.
These mushroom phytochemicals have anti-angiogenic, anti-proliferative, and other anti-cancer effects, which have been studied so far in relation to stomach, colorectal, breast, and prostate cancers.
Walnuts will help you reduces cancer risks in two ways.
The heart-shaped nut contains a vitamin called gamma tocopherol that stops the activation of Akt—an enzyme.
This is essential for cancer cell survival—without harming healthy cells.
Walnuts also contain cholesterol-like molecules called phytosterols that can help regulate oestrogen levels in men and women.
And even slow the growth of breast cancer cells by blocking oestrogen receptors.
Green tea, is packed with polyphenols and a sub-group called catechin with immense health benefits.
One of those benefits includes anti-breast cancer properties.
The primary polyphenol in green tea limits the growth of cancer cells.
Cruciferous vegetables like brocolli, Cauliflower, cabbage, garden cress, bok choy, broccoli, brussels sprouts and other similar green vegetables.
Can help beat breast cancer.