If you’re anything like us, Maine lobster is one of your favorite foods. Healthy, versatile and delicious, lobster is truly one of nature’s best gifts.
So if you love lobster, you’ll enjoy learning some fun facts about this amazing crustacean!
Lobster wasn’t always appreciated the way it is today
In Colonial times, lobster was considered a poor man’s food, only eaten by paupers and animals. My, how things have changed! Now, lobster is widely considered a delicacy.
Lobsters can regenerate parts of their body
Lobsters that lose a claw or an eye can usually grow another, although the replacement appendage will likely be smaller than the original. In fact, lobsters can amputate their own claws to escape danger!
Lobsters can get really big (though they usually don’t)
The largest lobster caught in Maine measured 36 inches from nose to tail. In Nova Scotia, an even larger one was caught in 1977 – it was 3.5 feet long and weighed 44 pounds. Just think of all the lobster rolls you could make with that!
Lobster fishing is critical to Maine’s economy
The Maine lobster fishery dates to the 1600s, and now contributes over $1 billion to Maine’s economy each year.
Lobsters range in color
While many of us think lobsters are red, this color only appears when they are cooked! Lobsters sometimes range in color, from brown to yellow and even blue. Odd-colored crustaceans are one in 30 million or so and are often caused by genetic defects and mutations.
There are two types of Maine lobster
Hard-shell lobsters, typically caught from December to June, have a briny taste and are meat-dense. From July to November, New Shell lobsters are more prevalent. These have a sweet flavor and tender texture.
Now that you’ve learned some interesting facts about Maine lobster, we’re sure you’re hungry. Cape Porpoise Lobster Co. offers fresh, delectable Maine lobster, with free overnight shipping for every order. We’ve also got lobster dinner kits and samplers for any occasion. Call 1-800-967-4268 today to place your order!