How is Air pollution and Asthma inter-related?
According to experts air pollution is defines as “presence of any visible or invisible particle or gas found in the air that is not part of the natural composition of air is referred to as Air pollution. Air pollution is caused by gases, smoke from fires, volcanic ash, dust particles and many more.
Air pollution is a serious issue in the country like India, which daily raises to the polluted air and moves in the polluted environment. According to the recent survey, India is also one of the country having high pollution index. Pollutants in the environment are contributing to various diseases like general breathing difficulties, bronchitis, Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), Cardiovascular Problems and till asthma. Higher the pollutants in the weather will lead to lung cancer too.
Bangalore being one of the top metropolitan city is high with pollution rate where more than 50% of children suffer from asthma. Asthma is an inflammatory disease that badly affects the passageway of the lungs. Asthma is usually caused by the allergens and irritants found in the environment. Allergens might be atmosphere particles, dust mites, pollen, animal fur, hair and feather. Lack of ventilation in the home also adds up 10 times more pollution in homes. Dampness and moistures, damps, leakages accumulated in the home also contribute to the
People suffering from asthma usually use artificial ease to breathe devices like rescue inhalers and nebulizers to escape the pollution temporarily. To safeguard from the air pollution, people are using home air purifiers that use effective passive air filtration technology to deliver the pure air.
Here is the time to stop all the artificial air purifiers, rescue inhalers and nebulizers permanently. It is time to live in an untouched environment, which lets you breathe the uninterrupted fresh air, wake up to the pollution-free environment for the most blissful stay. Godrej Reserve is one such residential property planned on the forest themed based area amidst 60,000 trees to be completely away from the city’s pollution.
Godrej Reserve in the serene locality
The plots located in the prominent locations of Devanahalli are available in multiple configurations and can be customized as per your requirement. Plots are in the dimension of 1200, 1500, 1800 and 2400 and give a chance for the buyers to choose as per their requirement and affordability. Godrej Reserve Plots is surrounded by best schools, banks, colleges, post offices, religious centres ATMs, hospitals, and super markets for all your convenience.
The project is just a few kilometre drives to Kempegowda International Airport for all your global travels. Property value is sky-rocketing in Devanahalli and Godrej Reserve Plots are sure to fetch you higher returns than you expect. Many prominent builders target Devanahalli to have their residential or commercial project because of its excellent infrastructure, amenities and connectivity.
Godrej Reserve Plots is a RERA ACK/KA/RERA/1250/303/PR/181023/002738 project for the best investment with good appreciation. The property encompasses 2 state-of-art clubhouses with various amenities like a well-equipped gymnasium for your morning routine exercises along with a vibrant swimming pool to relax and refresh. The Godrej Reserve property is planned with multiple parks to let residents have a relaxed leisure time. Sports facilities like Tennis court and Badminton court are planned on the premises to spend your sports time efficiently. The project features a dedicated children’s foyer for the safe play time of your kids. This township is planned with Pedestrian-friendly walkways to connect various location of the project effortlessly. For the Nature-friendly living Rainwater harvesting facility and organic waste disposal procedures are planned in the premises. Round the clock manned security personnel are present in the premises to guard the property along with CCTV surveillance for the enhanced safety. All-time power back-up facility is provided for the uninterrupted power for the distress living of the inhabitants.
Reserve your plots in Godrej Reserve Devanahalli today!!Download Brouchure