Water Quality Month might be coming to a close, but there’s still plenty of time to do something good — both at home and beyond. Here are a few tips to get you started.
1. Check your pollution contribution.
Despite the efforts of waste disposal and water treatment plants, there’s a decent chance that at least some of what leaves your home — be it through the trash or down the drain — is going to make its way into the natural water system. That means those potentially harmful phosphate detergents, antibacterial cleaners, microbeads, single-use wipes and plastics, and old vitamins and medications aren’t necessarily as “taken care of” once they’re gone as you may have thought.
Luckily, it’s easy to make a few small changes in your everyday life that’ll help. For soaps, cleaners, and single-use items, try swapping them out for more environmentally responsible alternatives. (Some will probably even save you money in the long run!) The same goes for disposing of old medications or other pills you don’t need anymore. Instead of flushing them down the toilet, check to find a drop-off point near you.
2. Check your water footprint.
Being conscious about your home water consumption is hopefully something that you’re already practicing — especially if you live in an area prone to drought. However, some people don’t realize that their water footprint stretches far beyond what’s coming out of the tap.
To get an idea about just how much of a mark you and your household are making, try a handy calculator like the one on watercalculator.org. The site also offers some great information on topics like virtual water use and what you can do to make your footprint smaller.
3. Help your town.
Now, if you were fortunate enough that the first two items on this list directly and easily applied to you, pay it forward to those in your community. Especially on the West Coast, homelessness is on the rise once again, and with it, lack of access to clean water for the individuals experiencing it. In honor of Water Quality Month, consider helping out those in need by donating water and/or reusable water bottles (which you can get at basically any dollar store) either directly or to a shelter. Or, consider donating water in other ways: Depending on where you live, there’s a good chance there’s an organization that provides showers and laundry facilities to the homeless. Regardless of what you have to give, donations of both time and money are always incredibly helpful.
4. Help your country.
Unfortunately, as we’re all well aware, lack of access to potable water in this country isn’t limited to people without homes. Lest it needs to be said once more: Flint, Michigan still doesn’t have clean water. While the situation there has gotten better, there’s still work that needs to be done. The overall lead levels are now testing at below the 15 ppb threshold for what is legally considered safe — or at least actionable — but many residents still rely on bottled water. If you’d like to help pick up where the state left off, consider donating to United Way of Genesee County. Since September of 2015, the organization has been working to help the residents of Flint through the water crisis and are now dedicating 100% of funds raised to supplying bottled water to the people who still need it. (And, as always, show your support for Mari Copeny, a.k.a. Little Miss Flint, who continues to do amazing work for her community.)
Of course, Flint isn’t the only part of the US that needs help with their water quality. Despite it being nearly a year since Hurricane Maria devastated Puerto Rico, more rural parts of the island are still having issues with both water service and quality. There are some amazing organizations out there, like Water for Puerto Rico, that are working hard to take on the challenge, but they could really use your help. Check out their Facebook page to donate and keep up to date on the great things they’re achieving.
5. Help the world.
Did you know there are currently more than 800 million people in the world without access to safe water? Or that nearly a third of our population is without decent sanitation?
From climate change to gender inequality, there are an abundance of reasons why this is the case that are worth taking the time to educate yourself on, though it won’t take much digging to make you want to help. As for how to do it, it’s really up to you. You can shop through organizations that give back, donate directly to the aspects that matter to you most, or even volunteer your own time.
6. Go vote.
While you aren’t necessarily going to have water quality propositions to contend with every time you vote, that doesn’t mean you should forget about it when you hit the ballot box. As with anything else that’s important to you, it’s worth it to include this issue when you do your candidate and measure research. Of course, there are dozens of factors that go into making the choice that’s right for you, but why not add it to the list?
7. Keep it going.
It’s true: August will be over (very) soon. Luckily, you can still take everything you’ve learned during Water Quality Month and continue to practice it throughout the year. Maybe make a new change in your water usage every month, and/or swap out soaps and other chemicals with healthier options as they run out. Consider making monthly recurring donations of water bottles, showers, or filters, or try to make purchases through businesses that give back where you can. And, finally, speak up and stay involved. Things may seem bleak at the moment, but the only way to create change is to make your voice heard — whether or not it’s voting day.
Originally from Illinois, Sarah Militello is a Los Angeles-based freelance writer and founder of women’s lifestyle and travel website Milk & Flowers.
Get Shondaland directly in your inbox: Subscribe Today