If you are environmentally conscious and worried about the toxic effects of chemicals, organic horticulture may be for you. Organic gardeners eschew the harsh chemicals and fertilizers used by large corporate farms. A lot of techniques for organic gardening actually don’t cost a lot of money. These tips will get you right into the swing of organic horticulture and improve your skill in no time.
Clay soil can be a real pain to work with as it often sticks to the end of the shovel. To make working in clay easier, rub the shovel with floor or car wax and then buff it with a cloth. This will make your task easier because the clay won’t stick to the shovel. It will also keep your garden tool from rusting.
Use climbers to cover walls and fences. These versatile plants can grow over fences to enhance the fence’s appearance. Often, climbers grow quickly, so you’ll get the effect you want by the time the season changes. Climbers can also be trained to grow and cover an arbour, and they will grow through or around existing trees and shrubs. Some of these plants must have support, and some can attach themselves to something using their stems and tendrils. Honeysuckle and jasmine are very beautiful varieties of such climbers.
Before you begin to plant your garden you will need to check the soil. You can actually get an analysis of soil for a little fee, and with the report, you get back you can figure out how to create a vibrant garden by enriching it properly. A lot of cooperative extension offices can provide this service to you and it is worth knowing what you need to do in order to avoid ruining your plants.
If you are going to be doing some horticulture, watch out for stink bugs, especially in the fall! Stink bugs like to reside in tomatoes, beans, and pepper plants, as well as many fruits. If they are left in the garden, they can do great damage to your plants, so you should do whatever you can to eliminate them.
Sometimes the soil you want to use for your garden has a high alkaline content. Combine coffee grounds with the soil to reduce this. The coffee grounds are a very inexpensive way to add acid back into the dirt. When you can eliminate excess alkaline from the soil, it makes what you are growing much healthier. This means your veggies will taste better, and your flowers will be more vibrant than ever.
Try and maintain daily aerated and dried plants. Moisture can be a magnet for disease and parasites on your plants. Fungi are very common. Fungi can be controlled with fungicide sprays, but it is important to treat your area with the spray before you see any problems.
By implementing the advice that is in this article, you can expect to have a healthy, toxin-free, productive garden in the very near future. You might actually notice more wildlife in and around your garden due to your natural horticulture methods.