By now, most homeowners have heard of the term “pH balance.” Most even understand that the pH balance refers to something in their drinking water. You’d be forgiven, however, if that was the extent of your education on the subject. If you’re curious about the quality of your drinking water, though, then your quest for knowledge should begin with a quick study of pH balance.
For anyone wondering, “What is the impact of the pH balance in my water in Pisgah Forest, NC?”, here is your answer.
What is pH balance?
At its most basic, pH balance is a measure of whether your water is acidic or alkaline. The pH balance is measured on a scale of 0 to 14. The lower the pH balance, the more acidic the water; the higher the pH balance, the more alkaline.
Regardless of their background in organic chemistry, most people probably understand that drinking highly acidic water is a bad idea. After all, no one wants to guzzle down a glass full of battery acid (which has a pH balance of 0). So, the lower the pH balance of a water sample, the more acidic it is and the less safe it is to drink.
On the opposite end of the spectrum, alkaline (or basic) water isn’t necessarily harmful… up to a point. By the time you reach a 14 measure on a sample of water, you’re dealing with a pH balance on the same level as lye.
Dead in the center, at a pH balance of 7, is pure water.
What is a safe pH balance?
For most water drinkers, a pH balance that falls in the range of 6.5 to 8.5 is the ideal measurement. If the pH balance of your water falls below that range, you should have it treated immediately because it could be unsafe to drink.
When it comes to alkaline water, things are a bit murkier. For example, some studies have suggested that alkaline substances can be advantageous. Though research is still scarce, there is some evidence to suggest that water with a pH balance of just about 9 can provide moderate relief from acid reflux, high blood pressure, diabetes and high cholesterol.
That said, more alkaline water starts to taste and smell bad, and it can wreak havoc on your pipes. At this point, it’s only reasonable to ask yourself, “How can I adjust the pH balance in my water in Pisgah Forest, NC?”
Your pH balance solution
If you’re worried about the overall quality of your water, contact Royal Water Works, Inc. We have years of experience testing all manner of water for residential and commercial customers alike.
Once we’ve tested your water in our state-of-the-art laboratory, we’ll provide an extensive profile of your water. Not only will you be able to say, “I know the pH balance in my water,” but you’ll be supplied with a host of ways to fix any problems.
That’s just the beginning of the ways that Royal Water Works, Inc. can help you with your water needs. Contact us today, and let’s work together to help you!
Categorised in: Water Testing