I hope, you guys enjoyed “Martian” movie in the theatre. Are you planning to move from earth to Mars? It’s better keep this in the mind. A recent research suggests, NASA spotted liquid on the planet Mars. Unfortunately, water contains 99% of salt particle called as perchlorates. Wikipedia reports, perchlorates or Perchloric acid is a salty particles that cannot be used for the drinking purpose. These substances are highly used in the rocket propellants, fireworks and explosives. Not all, some perchlorates comes with colors order, so it can be easily dissolved in normal water (H2O). Potassium perchlorates contains alkali metal, which has the lowest point of dissolving rate.
Due to its high effects and colorless order, it has been issued a limits to use in some part of the country. Study says, A small amount of perchlorates is highly dangerous for skin, thyroid, breast tissues and placenta. Some researchers also came into conclusion that medical care is very hard in planet like Mars, which may turn into a big problem.
The scientist says, liquid found in the Mars (perchlorates) is 10 times saltier than a saltiest particle found on Earth. If this liquid is unsuitable for the drinking purpose, how we are going to end our thirsts? These kind of questions arise in our mind. On the other end, importing water from earth to the planet Mars is very expensive and that can’t work in our long-term life journey.
Chris McKay (NASA planetologist) says, “Nothing can live in the brine of Don Jaun Pond”
Mars atmosphere is as thick as Earth and there might be plenty of resource hidden. Some researchers suggest, humidifier process will work to get water in red planet. The soil contains ice crystals, which can be heated to start vaporizing and turns into liquid form.
The best way to keep us alive with only fresh water. Researcher team also found a large amount of dust covered glacier on the polar caps. The northern caps alone has 621 miles of ice, which is very huge and source of H2O. Stay connected to get latest update on Planet Mars, don’t for to share your opinion in the comment section below.