The olive leaf is known as a traditional herbal remedy that provides the body with natural polyphenols. In addition, the olive tree is also called the “tree of life”. According to several recent studies, one of the main ingredients of olive leaf is known as oleuropein. It offers antifungal, antiviral and antibacterial properties. Olive Used as a medicinal remedy in ancient Egypt, the olive leaves represented a symbol of the healing power. Many recent studies have shown that olive leaves are a powerful medicine with benefits for cardiovascular health and the immune system. But not many people know the positive effects of olive leaf tea.
Lower Cholesterol Level
The olive leaves help lower blood cholesterol and prevent the formation of the atheroma plaque on the walls of the blood vessels. Consumed regularly, olive leaves decrease the risk of cardiovascular disease or infection.
For Heart Health
Leaves have been used since ancient times in the form of a tonic to maintain the health of the cardiovascular system. Australian scientists have come to the conclusion that the olive leaf extract applied to a patient that helps to reduce the inflammation that causes the heart disease.
Natural Treatment for Diabetics
Olive leaf extract has the effect of reducing blood glucose, one of the main factors leading to diabetes. It is also used to cure diabetes, atherosclerosis, arthritis, irradiance, cancer, leukemia.
Reduce the risk of Cancer
Olive leaves play an important role in preventing the appearance of cancerous tumors because they are a powerful antioxidant that inhibits the growth of malignant cells.
Because olive leaves have anti-inflammatory properties, they act as a natural remedy against inflammation of the joints, i.e against arthritis.
Heals the Infections
Candida, meningitis, pneumonia, hepatitis B, malaria or tuberculosis are all conditions that can be cured with extracts of olive leaves. The extract is equally beneficial for the treatment of ear infections, dental infections and urinary tract infections.