Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Greenhouse Gas Emissions
Content - Res - Environment - Climate Change - Greenhouse Gas
In 2004, the City of Kingston joined the Federation of Canadian Municipalities' (FCM) Partners for Climate Protection (PCP) program. This program is based on a five-milestone framework used to guide Canadian municipalities to pledge to protect our climate and follow a common process to achieve positive action.
As part of reaching PCP Milestones 1 and 2, the City set an initial community and corporate (municipal operations) carbon reduction target, and completed community and corporate greenhouse gas (GHG) emission inventories for 2000, and 2006 to 2011. Inventories were also completed for the years 2014 to 2017.
To achieve Milestone 3:
- The Kingston Climate Action Plan (KCAP) was adopted in June 2014. It includes new carbon emission reduction goals for the community of 15 per cent below 2011 baseline levels by 2020 and 30 per cent by 2030.
The City adopted a Corporate Climate Action Plan (CCAP) in November 2015. It seeks to reduce the carbon footprint of municipal operations and demonstrates leadership in helping the community achieve its carbon reduction target. The CCAP offers an approach focused on reducing carbon emissions by 8 per cent below a 2011 baseline by 2020 (This target does not include gains made by decarbonization of the provincial electricity supply).
In June 2017, the City reached Milestones 4 and 5 for both corporate and community greenhouse gas emissions by demonstrating that many initiatives from these Action Plans have been implemented, and progress toward our emission reduction targets has been measured and reported.
The City continues to complete and assist in initiatives that reduce our community's carbon footprint and the measurement of annual greenhouse gas emissions is reported every two years. The next report will be issued in 2018.
- Energy Conservation and Demand Management Plan for Municipal Buildings 2019-2024
- Energy Consumption and GHG Emissions Reporting - 2017
- Energy Consumption and GHG Emissions Reporting - 2016
Greenhouse Gas Emission Inventories
The City has created inventories of greenhouse gases (GHG) emitted by the entire community and by municipal operations for several reporting years. Previous years reports are available under the Related Documents.
Do you operate a business or organization?
If you want to reduce the carbon footprint of your business or organization and need help, take advantage of Sustainable Kingston's Green Economy Program. They have the tools you need to measure your carbon footprint, set reduction targets, create your plans and access resources.