Organizational Education in a World of Risks
To survive in a world at risk, organizations learn. Global and social risks cause organizational risks. How do organizations deal with the so called VUCA world (volatile, uncertain, complex and ambiguous) and sustain an organizational identity? How do they secure cooperation among their members and multiple and diverse stakeholders? How do they deal with digitization, virtualization, and globalization as drivers of change, innovation and newness?
Organizational Education researches organizational behavior, organizational learning and its support, as well as organizational innovation from an educational perspective. Interested colleagues are cordially invited to submit papers for sessions of NW 32 Organizational Education.
Given the velocity of technologic development, the globalization, the transculturalization, the needs for work-life-balance and other aspects of societal change, organizations today – schools, universities, adult education institutions, as well as companies, public authorities, social services, hospitals, etcetera – are more than ever confronted with risk and uncertainty. On the other hand, these risks and uncertainties imply possibilities for the organizations’ construction of future. Organizations as actors become addressees of reforms and actors of developmental processes. Organizational Education researches such organizational behavior, organizational learning and its support from an educational perspective.
Interested colleagues are cordially invited to submit papers for sessions of NW 32 Organizational Education at ECER 2019. The following topics may be used to orientate submissions:
- Organizational Learning in a World at Risk
Organizations exist within a transforming environment, where societies, sectors, regional settings are in often turbulent change. Organization may have existed in their environments like fish in the water. As the world is at risk in many ways, organization may be at threat. In order to survive, organizations will have to learn and unlearn. How do organizations address the VUCA world of risks? Does organizational change by (un)learning lead to societal change, too?
- Organizational Identity in a cross-border World of Risks
While some societies actually tend to revive their territorial borders, many organizations of today act in inter- and transnational ways. While the trend towards right wing politics and societal discourses tend to exclude migrants, many organizations actively practice diversity management and intercultural opening. Organizations need human resources, expertise, motivation and identification of staff. How do organizations address the challenges of a world of risk and how do they involve human resources to become identifying members of an organization? How do organizations deal with the topic of corporate identity in a world of risks and plurality? How can organizations attract and bind individuals with diverse backgrounds?
- Organizational Socialization within a multicultural World of plural norms and values
In the pluralist world(s) of norms and values of today, organizations are confronted with individuals who have experience(d) different worlds of socialization in families, peer groups, their milieus, thereby carrying a diversity of normative orientations and culturally bound value sets. How do organizations (schools, universities, companies, public authorities, and other organized workplaces) deal with onboarding, with involving their members and partners, to socialize them into membership in and belonging to an organization? What is the role of organizational socialization here and how does it work?
- Organizational responses to a VUCA World of Risks
How do organizations deal with the volatile, uncertain, complex and ambiguous VUCA world of today? How do those global trends play out in organizing? Will organizations address necessary adaptions and changes in social, technological, economical or ecological ways? What are the paths taken within a world of risks and challenges? How do organizations deal with the velocity of change and digitalization, virtualization, or globalization as drivers of newness?
- Organizations as actors of Organizational Futures and Innovations
Organizations are always in process – but speed rapidly is changing in the acceleration society. Organizations respond to risks and challenges by innovating. Within their innovation strategies they transform practice patterns of time and space, they produce new chances and new risks, deal with hopes and fears. Organizations bring about their special (aesthetic) practices, their specific styles of doing change, newness, future and innovation. Organizational work on time and space in innovation processes can also lead to solving social challenges and social transformation.
Network 32 “Organizational Education” encourages researchers from all over the fields of educational sciences and organization sciences to submit proposals for presentations, symposia, workshops or posters that deal with the above-mentioned topics.
Prof. Dr. Michael Göhlich (link convenor) (michael.goehlich(at)fau.de)
Prof. Dr. Bente Elkjaer (elkjaer(at)edu.au.dk)
Ass.Prof. Dr. Petr Novotny (novotny(at)phil.muni.cz)
Ass.Prof. Dr. Line Revsbaek (revsbaek(at)learning.aau.dk)
Prof. Dr. Andreas Schröer (schroeer(at)uni-trier.de)
Prof. Dr. Susanne Maria Weber (susanne.maria.weber(at)staff.uni-marburg.de)
Prof. Dr. Byung Jun Yi (yibyungjun(at)pusan.ac.kr)
Prof. Dr. Gunnar Augustsson (gunnar.augustsson(at)miun.se)
Prof. Dr. Maria Grazia Riva (mariagrazia.riva(at)unimib.it)