Proven health benefits of green corn are diverse and very important for health. Green corn is one of the most popular cereals in the world because of its flavor, texture, taste, variety and ease of portability. green corn is one of the most popular cereals in the world and constitutes the staple food in many countries. In addition, Corn Green not only provides the calories necessary for healthy metabolism daily, but is also a rich source of vitamins A, B, E and many minerals.
Its high fiber content ensures that it plays an important role in preventing digestive diseases such as constipation and hemorrhoids as well as colorectal cancer. Antioxidants present in corn also act as anti-cancer agents and prevent Alzheimer’s disease. So let’s check out now The Benefits of Green Corn For Health:
Benefits of Corn is Rich in Antioxidants: All Corn varieties provide phyto-nutrients Antioxidants that bring different benefits of Green Corn to health. The exact combination of phyto-nutrients, however, depends on the variety. Yellow-grain corn is richer in lutein and taraxanthin. Blue maize has unique concentrations of anthocyanins and purple maize provides unusual amounts of protocatecuic acid.
Antioxidants are substances that can protect our body cells from damage caused by free radicals that can occur as a normal consequence of some metabolic processes, or even from exposure to certain chemicals, smoking, pollution and radiation. Consuming foods rich in Antioxidants serves to ensure heart health and may also help reduce the risk of infections and some forms of cancer.
Benefits of Green Corn Represents Good Source of Protein: One serving of a glass of Green Corn provides 5 grams of protein, which represents about 10% of the daily allowance recommended by nutritionists. Proteins obtained from Green Corn consumption contain practically all the amino acids essential to our daily health, with the exception of lysine, which can be solved by adding beans, eggs, poultry or lean meat to the meal.
Our body needs complete proteins at each meal so we can get the recommended daily allowance and thus ensure the health of our cells and organs, our muscles, our connective tissue and our bones. Women should consume 46 grams of protein a day, while men need 56 grams.
Benefits of Green Corn Contains Fibers in Abundance: Insoluble fibers are beneficial because they help in the formation of fecal cake and prevent constipation in the intestine. Soluble type binds to cholesterol molecules and helps to draw them out of the body, which helps reduce blood fat levels and reduces the risk of cardiovascular disease.
Corn contains a good amount of fiber, most of which is insoluble. In about 100 grams of the beloved movie popcorn there are about 20 grams of fiber. This amount is about half of the daily intake adequate for men and women. Research has established recommended fiber intake based on the total needed to protect heart health. In a glass of Green Corn cooked there are about 4 grams of fiber, which is about 15% of the total we should ingest daily.
Benefits of Corn Green Contains Folic Acid: Our body relies on folic acid to metabolize DNA (Deoxyribonucleic Acid) and proteins. This acid is a vitamin B complex and needs to be present in our body, especially in women of childbearing age because it prevents any birth defects in the fetus that may occur in the first weeks after conception.
It also helps protect the heart as it converts an amino acid called homocysteine whose high levels can damage blood vessels. In addition, it is vital to other metabolic processes like the production of brain neurotransmitters. A glass of cooked Corn contains 34 micrograms of folic acid, nine percent of the daily dose recommended by experts.
Benefits of Corn is a Rich Source of Calories: Corn is a rich source of calories and therefore is the food base of many populations and plays a vital role in the survival of dozens of farm-based countries. Each 100 grams baked Green Corn contains 90 calories, one of the highest values among cereals. Its high calorie content ensures satiety, but can be a villain for quick weight gain when ingested in excess.
Benefits of Green Corn Contain Many Vitamins and Minerals: Green Corn is the source of many vitamins and minerals, which gives it unique nutritional properties. The amount of these nutrients varies according to the type of grain. Corn Popcorn tends to have larger amounts of minerals, while Corn Green tends to be richer in vitamins.
Benefits of Corn to Prevent Diabetes: Vitamin B present in Corn Green regulates the metabolism of proteins, lipids and carbohydrates, and the phytochemicals present regulate the release of insulin. Corn has a glycemic index of 58, making it a super food for those who are diabetic. Together, these help in the control of diabetes, in a similar way the phenolic phytochemicals present in Corn Green also control hypertension.
Benefits of Corn To Have a Clean Skin: With the regular massage of Corn Green oil, there is a considerable improvement in the texture of the skin. A series of essential minerals and vitamins, the regular consumption of Corn ensures radiant skin and good vision.
Benefits of Corn to Treat Acne: Due to its high vitamin E content, a paste made with Corn Green can do wonders to remove facial acne scars.
Benefits of Corn for Eye Health: Corn kernels contain beta-carotene, which produces vitamin A that promotes better vision. Carotenoids in Corn also reduce macular degeneration, which impairs vision in the center of the line of sight.
Benefits of Corn for Being Rich in Magnesium and Potassium: Help in the conduction of nerve impulses and consequently in everything related to these functions, as memory example. In addition, potassium helps prevent cramps and muscle fatigue, benefiting the health of muscles.
The corn can be consumed in natura, in morning cereals, porridges, pies, canjica, couscous, polenta, pamonha, curau, Cream of Corn, popcorn, etc. Cooked corn is rich in fiber, and in order not to raise the calorific value too much, it is advisable to consume with a little salt only.