Paper type: Essay Pages: 2 (313 words)
Many minority groups of the United States participated in the World War II from the side of the armed forces of the United States. World War II affected the life of the every person of the United States, but the impact of World War II on minorities groups such as African-Americans, Native Americans (Indians), Mexican Americans, and women was far greater than the others. Lots of men and women of minority groups first time got the job in the in the armed forces during the war.
Minority groups got the opportunity to work with majority group (white men). Black men donated blood during the war.
Not only black men, but many black women also actively took part in the war. A lot of men’s works were done by the women during the world war second. Therefore the world war second offered many new opening for the minority groups. This war terminated many old outlines. Several Indians and American Africans permanently left their traditional lives and they settled into the cities.
The world war second was a turning point for minority groups. This war created a great and different impact on the minority groups. Integration of minority groups in the main stream American society was a consequence of World War second.
A number of Indians first time came into the non-Indian society. After coming into this society they obtained the advantage of good education for their children, higher living standard, many job opportunities and better heath care system. Many acts such as Snyder Act, Selective Service Act, and Nationalities Act are passed during the world war second to take the minority groups equal to the whites. Thus it can be said that world war second started a “Double V” campaign in the United States. The meaning of the “Double V” campaign is- victory over Nazism abroad and victory over racism and inequality at home.
Cite this page
Impact of World War II on Minority Groups within the United States. (2016, Sep 24). Retrieved from https://studymoose.com/impact-of-world-war-ii-on-minority-groups-within-the-united-states-essay