Whether you or someone you love suffers from osteoporosis, there’s one thing you can do starting tomorrow to make things better. Sleep relief is one of the best health choices that you can make to help alleviate the pain and general discomfort associated with osteoporosis.
World Osteoporosis Day (WOD) is hosted by the International Osteoporosis Foundation (IOF) on the 20th of October every year. This year, the WOD movement goes global with a campaign that calls for the implementation of worldwide improvements for bone health and the prevention of fractures in those with osteoporosis – which often remain undiagnosed and untreated.
Osteoporosis is the unseen cause behind painful and even life-threatening fractures, often in the spine. These vertebral fractures lead to disability and loss of quality of life in many – which could be prevented with better treatment options. As much as 70% of these fractures go unnoticed, putting sufferers at high risk for additional fracturing of vertebra.
Signs of Fractures Caused by Osteoporosis
Are you or someone you know suffering from back pain, has begun to stoop or show changes in posture, or has lost height? These are all possible signs of vertebral fractures that you need to get tested immediately. If there is a family history of osteoporosis or even just broken bones, the risk of spine fractures is higher. Osteoporosis can attack anyone, regardless of age, and affects a quarter of people over the age of 50 – with women at higher risk than men.
Sleep Relief for Osteoporosis
Any of the signs above should be tested and treated immediately, but you should also implement self-care routines. Sleep relief is one of the best things you can do not only top alleviate pain but to help your body heal.
Sleep relief is getting not just enough sleep every night, but quality sleep that promotes physical healing. Pain is a sign that something is wrong in the body. And sleep is a major part of the body’s natural healing process. Listen to your body and give it the sleep relief it needs to recover. This is necessary to properly heal, regardless of other treatments and medications you may take, and also necessary to prevent further damage.
Quality sleep is possible when you give your body the support it needs. A poor quality sleep environment leads to poor quality sleep. Ensure that you have the following to promote sleep relief:
- Dark – the brain needs darkness to sleep properly. We are hard-wired by centuries of genetics to sleep when the sun no longer shines. Artificial light can confuse the brain into thinking that it’s still daytime. If you can’t darken your bedroom, use a sleep mask to block out ambient light.
- Quiet – the brain requires physical and also mental silence to properly shut down. Make sure that your sleeping area is quiet and that you practice stress-relieving techniques every evening before bedtime.
- Routine – your body needs a good sleep routine to attain sleep relief. Endeavour to maintain a before-sleep routine and go to bed at the same time every night. Take time to wind down, drink a naturally sleep-promoting beverage, and avoid stressful activities before sleep.
- Comfort – your body needs a comfortable place to rest to promote quality sleep. Especially if pain and discomfort make it difficult to sleep, a support pillow, ergonomic mattress and comfortable bedding are essential to promote sleep relief.
Advocate for Osteoporosis Awareness
IOF invites everyone to join them along with its 240 member societies to help raise awareness of bone health and call for action on fracture prevention and treatment.
Sign the IOF Global Patient Charter to call on healthcare providers worldwide to improve diagnosis, care and support for those suffering from osteoporosis. The world is suffering from a massive gap in osteoporosis care and treatment, and the suffering that it causes can be easily reduced.
Help those with osteoporosis to regain better quality of life through self-care. Promote sleep relief for healing and recovery in those with existing fractures and those at risk for them.