Faisalabad was once part of ancient district Jhang and Sandalbar, mainly consisting of thick forests and local tribes. The city of Lyallpur came into being in 1880 with the city center designed by Captain Poham Young, to imitate the Union Flag with eight roads radiating from a large clock tower (Ghenta Ghar) in the centre of eight separate bazaars. In 1895, the rail link between Wazirabad and Lyallpur was completed. As the progress of colonization stepped up, Lyallpur was given the status of a Tehsil of Jhang District and its administration carried on in tents on the old Theh (Mound) of Pucca Mari near Tariqabad. In 1943, Muhammad Ali Jinnah came to Lyallpur and addressed a gathering of over 2 million in Dhobi Ghat ground. The city grew into a strong industrial and agricultural centre and on independence of Pakistan it was a major urban area. In 1977, the name of the city was changed to “Faisalabad”, after the late King Faisal of Saudi Arabia to commemorate deep friendship which exists between the two great Islamic countries of the world. In 1985, Faisalabad was upgraded as a division with the districts of Faisalabad, Jhang and Toba Tek Singh.
Faisalabad is located in the northeast of Punjab. The city covers an area of approximately 1230 square kilometers, comprising largely of flat or rolling plains. It has a population of around 5 million. It is also the third largest city of Pakistan.
The climate of Faisalabad district is of extreme nature, reaching around 50 °C in summers and -1 °C in winters. The soil of the district is very fertile. The average rainfall is about 200 mm.
Faisalabad is twinned with Manchester, United Kingdom.
Faisalabad is linked via the M-3 Motorway which branches off at Faisalabad-Pindi Bhattian Interchange located on the Lahore-Islamabad motorway. There is also a dual carriageway from Lahore to Faisalabad via Sheikhupura. Health Sciences Wing of the University is located 2km off the toll plaza on Sargodha Road while travelling towards the city. Engineering Wing is situated on the West bank of Canal and is about 5km from Abdullahpur crossing or 3km from Gatwala Park located on the Sheikhupura Road.
Faisalabad International Airport is about 10km from the city center. Passenger flights are run by the national flag carrier as well as other domestic airlines.
An exclusive Daewoo Express coach service along with several other coach services originate from the city linking all major cities of the country.