Kids can make a big difference
Who said government officials don’t listen to their citizens who are too young to vote?
Avery Baker is not the first American to prove that assumption wrong. Avery is 9, lives in Clay Township, and wants to raise chickens. When she found that township zoning ordinances prevented her from keeping a flock of laying hens on her family’s property, she appealed to Clay Township Supervisor Artie Bryson to change the law.
Yes, she is 9 years old, but she did a very grown-up thing — something all of us, adults included, should try to emulate. She didn’t get mad. She didn’t ignore the law. She didn’t set something on fire or hire a lawyer.
She made a reasoned request that the law be changed because it was unfair and illogical. She reasoned that a few hens kept in a chicken coop would be just as comfortable on her family’s acre and a half as they would be on two acres, the minimum in the ordinance.
Bryson and the township agreed, and Avery will get her wish.
In America, if you don’t like the law, you work to change the law.
Thousands of other non-voting age Americans also did something to change the laws regulating how guns are bought and sold, one month after 17 people were killed by a gunman at a Florida high school.
Cynics have suggested those middle- and high-school students wasted their time, that their efforts can’t and won’t have any effect on their governments. They are wrong.
March 14, 2018, won’t be the first time students left their desks to right wrongs and make the United States a better place.
The history of student activism probably begins with what was called the March of the Mill Children in 1903. More than 10,000 children joined thousands of striking Philadelphia textile workers— then marched on Washington. Their demonstrations led to the Fair Labor Standards Act that protects all workers.
In 1957, the Little Rock Nine enrolled in all-white Little Rock Central High School. When federal troops escorted them to class, Jim Crow segregation laws began crumbling.
The 1963 Children’s Crusade marched against discrimination in Birmingham, Alabama. What Americans saw on the 6 o’clock news — police trying to turn them back with fire hoses and German shepherds — made national civil rights laws inevitable.
In 1965, 13-year-old Mary Beth Tinker took her protest to the Supreme Court — and won a ruling that protects everyone’s right to call for change.
“Old enough to fight, old enough to vote” protests in the 1960s gave 18-year-olds the right to vote.
We expect some of Wednesday’s marchers will exercise that right this year.