Recycling is the processes of taking an organic material such as glass, plastic, metal, or paper, and processing it so that it can be used all over again!
Have you ever heard the phrase Reduce, Reuse, Recycle?
Reduce, Reuse, Recycle – three great ways to be kind to the planet. But how can you do each?
Reduce: Only use things you really need. Reduce your waste by only using what you need. If you need one napkin, that’s good enough!
No need to take a whole handful!
Reduce your use of plastic water bottles by drinking water from a reusable sports bottle or glass at home.
Reuse: Have you ever used a shoe box to collect treasures? Good job! That means you reused it! When you reuse, you extend the life of a product, rather than buying a whole new one.
That’s good for our environment.
Using your own bags at the grocery store, rather than buying new ones every time, can save a ton of paper and plastic.
Don’t stop there, you can also reuse by donating old toys to charity!
Recycle: Recycling is easy! All you have to do is pay a little extra attention to putting certain materials in a recycling bin instead of a trash can.
It’s a little different depending on your city, but many cities offer blue recycling bins to be picked up on trash day.
This is called curbside recycling. You can also find your local recycle drop-off off centers and even buy back locations!
Top 5 Recyclable Objects!
1. Papers & Newspapers
Paper comes from trees. Each ton of recycled paper can save 17 trees!
Recycle all of your old homework papers, newspapers, etc. so that new paper can be made from recycling and not from new cut down trees!
2. Aluminium Cans
Aluminium cans like soda cans are easily recyclable! Recycling one aluminium can saves a lot of energy- enough to watch a TV for 3 hours!
3. Plastic Bottles
Did you know that Americans use about 4 million plastic bottles every day? Plastic bottles are easily reused and recycled.
This goes for water, juice, and sports drink bottles, even plastic bottles from the bathroom like shampoo bottles!
4. Glass Bottles
Glass bottles and jars – like the ones spaghetti sauce comes in, can be reused and recycled super easily.
Batteries are super cool. But did you know they contain a bunch of dangerous chemicals that are bad for us? That’s why it’s important to recycle batteries.
If they’re put in a landfill, they might be burned with the other trash, releasing chemicals into the air, or they might be left to decompose, letting chemicals into the soil.
Original post: https://www.coolkidfacts.com/recycling-facts-for-kids/