Burn Calories: Three Helpful Calculations
Burn calories, as used here, is a reference to exerting enough energy to compensate for the food that is being eaten. Many Americans don’t burn enough calories to lose or maintain a healthy weight.
It is reported in several sources that over two-third of the American adult population is overweight, and one third of the American adult population is considered obese. Additionally, we are seeing the rates of obesity rising 5% or more per year. There is a definite need to learn ways to lose weight and keep it off.
In this article, we will look at three calculations that will prove helpful for those trying to lose weight or maintain a healthy weight.
1. Remember how many calories it takes to gain and lose a pound. Some ask “why are calories so important?” Energy produced by food is a calorie. Calories also come from sources such as carbohydrates, fat, protein, and alcohol.
An interesting fact to know is a person must eat 3,500 calories in order to gain a pound. Therefore, if you want to lose a pound, you must burn 3,500 calories.
2. Learn to calculate how many calories you are eating. Sometimes people eat mindlessly. That is, they don’t know how many calories the food they are eating contains. Shape.com has an awesome tool that will help you count calories.
3. Learn to calculate how many calories you burn during activities. Remember that it takes eating calories to gain weight, and it takes burning calories to lose weight.
Click here for a simple exercise routine. Exercising or simply moving more will be very helpful in weight loss. If you are interested, take a look at Shape.com. This website has a calculator that will do the work for you.
If you want to lose or maintain your weight, try applying these facts to your life style.
Please click here to let us know, if this has been quality and helpful information for you (i.e., make sure you let us know the name of the article). Feel free to share your questions and comments about the article as well.
From Burn Calories to Christian Health
From Burn Calories to Home Page