by PAUL FASSA
Having fluoride in most drinking water and crop irrigation systems for decades means most people have fluoride accumulated in the tissues of their body, even if it’s in small daily doses that are considered “safe”. Accumulation is the key word.
Avoiding it and getting it out should be a priority, since fluoride creates serious health problems including DNA damage, cancer, thyroid disruption, Alzheimer’s disease, hormone disruption, and pineal gland dysfunction.
There are two types of fluorides that can contaminate water. Calcium fluoride is common in water from wells, sometimes even if fed by aquifers. It’s not as toxic as the waste material for phosphate mined fertilizer or aluminum plants that’s added into water supplies.
The most common form that is put into water supplies as a profitable way of complying with EPA toxic waste removal is hydrofluorosilicic acid, which can be used as rat poison. There are others as well, but for this article I’ll simply use sodium fluoride to distinguish the more toxic synthetic version from naturally occurring calcium fluoride.
There are other halogens that compete with thyroid receptors for needed iodine, which can mess up your overall thyroid function and overall metabolism. They are bromine (bromides) used in commercially produced bread, which can be avoided by getting breads from artisan bakeries that don’t us bromides. Even Whole Foods bakery creates some non-brominated bread.
Then there is chlorine, which is also used in potable water supplies. Finally we have fluorine or fluorides, whether natural or synthetic. This is another reason to supplement with food grade iodine to ensure those other halogens won’t block iodine in thyroid receptors. Iodine supplementation has demonstrated some ability to detox some existing fluorine or fluorides through urine.
An unsuspected source of fluorides is pharmaceutical drugs. Around one-third are fluorinated. This practice makes use of the reactivity of the fluorine molecule in several ways, enabling pharmaceutical companies to use less of the other components of the drugs as both an adjunct and a cost-saving measure. Fluorination facilitates the passage of certain drugs through the blood-brain barrier, ostensibly allowing, for instance, psychotropic drugs to become more effective.
Fluorination can also make possible the entry of certain drugs into otherwise impermeable cells making certain fluoroquinolone antibiotics, e.g. Cipro, Levaquen, Avelox, etc, extremely powerful but with very serious side effects, such as torn ligaments, paralysis, and death. Read more about that here.
Avoiding and Eliminating Fluoride Contamination
As always, the first step in detoxifying is to curb taking in toxins. Purifying water by reverse osmosis or distillation in communities where water is fluoridated is a good start to slowing down your fluoride contamination.
Reverse osmosis (RO) is considered by most to be 80 percent or so effective at removing fluorides from water. If you have the wherewithal to install your own system, great. But you can always use those water purifiers in health food and even conventional food stores.
They will usually have reverse osmosis and charcoal filtration. They should include a schedule of maintenance visits, and the last maintenance check should never be longer than one month as those RO filters do need to be changed fairly often.
Use the purified water for cooking as well. Boiling doesn’t get rid of fluorides. It actually makes it more concentrated and permeates your food. But it’s possible to distill fluoridated water to almost 100 percent free of flourine.
It’s wise to add minerals back into distilled or RO water or it may chelate minerals out of your body, and most of us are mineral deficient already. Minerals are even more important for the body than vitamins, which need minerals to be effective.
There are also trace mineral drops available in good health food stores. Even a pinch per pint of real unprocessed sea salt will help remineralize RO filtered or distilled waters.
Magnesium is a very important mineral that many are lacking. Besides being so important in the metabolism and synthesis of nutrients within your cells, it also inhibits the absorption of fluoride into your cells!
Along with magnesium, calcium seems to help attract fluoride away from bones and teeth, allowing the body to eliminate it. So during any effort to detox fluoride, it is essential that you include a healthy supplemental dose of absorbent calcium/magnesium as part of the protocol.
And you should also supplement with K-2 and make sure your vitamin D3 levels are high. The combination of K-2 (extracted from nattokinase), vitamin D3 from sunlight and/or cholecalciferol and magnesium orally or topically as magnesium oil helps ensure your calcium goes where it should and not into soft tissue such as inner arterial walls and the pineal gland, where the calcium can collect, calcify and create blockage and inflammation.
Speeding Up the Fluoride Detox
Boron was studied in other parts of the world with pronounced success for fluoride detoxification. You can get boron from eating organic apples. Some use a mild solution of borax without additives (if it has a detergent odor it’s impure) in distilled or fluoride free water.
But I think it’s best to get boron tablets sold as supplements. There are many from which to choose online. Some even come with magnesium and calcium included.
Dry Saunas combined with exercise help release sodium fluoride stored in fatty tissues. This method can be intense enough to cause side effects or an occasional healing crisis. So keep the pure fluoride-free water intake high and be sure to use calcium/magnesium supplements to replace minerals lost through sweating. Lecithin is useful here too.
Niacin, not niacinamide, taken to skin flush levels before saunas can be used as an adjunct for breaking up lipids containing toxins. This routine needs to be done consecutively and often, though not advised for medically diagnosed liver conditions.
Vitamin C in abundance is a helpful adjunct to fluoride detoxification. Take powdered ascorbic acid to bowel tolerance levels, maybe a teaspoon or so in juice. More C can be added by mixing in a half to full teaspoon of bicarbonate or baking soda as a buffer to pure water only, which also raises the pH to create alkalinity. Mix and wait until the fizz stops then drink.
Chinese ascorbic acid can be GMO corn free, but China has lots of heavy metal pollution. Here’s where I get my China and GMO free pharmaceutical grade vitamin C. It’s pricier but worth it.
Other chelating compounds such as bentonite clay, powdered zeolite, fulvic (not folic) acid or diatomaceous earth and detox techniques such as coffee enemas and gall bladder flushes are helpful because the toxic waste version of sodium fluoride is packaged with various heavy metals as well.
Paul Fassa is a contributing staff writer for REALfarmacy.com. His pet peeves are the Medical Mafia’s control over health and the food industry and government regulatory agencies’ corruption. Paul’s valiant contributions to the health movement and global paradigm shift are world renowned. Visit his blog by following this link and follow him on Twitter here.