Diabetes: Check the Sugar Level With The Best Glucometer In IndiaDiabetes is one word and sickness that makes a lot of people cringe in terror. A lot of people may know that Diabetes is linked to a high level of blood sugar, but what few know are the causes, and how to run a test using Glucometer strips at home.
Diabetes: Its CausesNo matter what the cause may be, it is certain that you don't have to wait before the symptoms become worse before you can run a home test using the best glucometer no matter where you are in India. You can use the glucometer strip to run the test yourself.
Causes of Diabetes are based on ethnicity, genetic makeup, health factors, family history, as well as environmental factors.
Different people with diabetes may have gotten it because of different reasons, as diabetes causes are different based on its type and the individual involved.
Let's use an example. A person with gestational diabetes most likely had it from a different cause when compared to the other patient with type 1 diabetes. The causes of diabetes type 1 are different from the causes of type 2 diabetes.
What are the causes of Type 1 diabetes?This type of diabetes has its causes from an individual's immune system deciding to launch an attack on the pancreas' cells that produce the insulin. Type 1 Diabetes then happens because there is no insulin to work well.
This act of the immune system fighting against the pancreas is called autoimmune cause or reaction.
There are a lot of things that may cause the autoimmune cause or reaction, and they include:
Bacterial or viral infection in the body,
Consuming food with chemical toxins,
Genetic composition of one can cause this too, as well as unidentified components that can affect one's body, causing autoimmune cause.
Type 2 diabetes causesThe type 2 diabetes causes are generally different from type 1 diabetes. The type 2 diabetes is caused by a lot of factors, and not just one. A major cause of this type 2 diabetes is family history.
Any of these factors, as well as a combination of these factors, can cause the Type 2 Diabetes.
Obesity: Obesity has been seen as a major cause of diabetes. As one increases in size, there is a high chance that one would have Type 2 Diabetes.
Living a sedentary lifestyle: Those whose lives are involved a lot in sedentary lifestyle have a chance of getting Type 2 Diabetes. If one spends his working hours seated, yet is not involved in exercises, there is a great chance of getting the Type 2 Diabetes.
Increasing age: As one advance in age, there is a great risk of the person getting Type 2 Diabetes, especially when the person is obese and lead a sedentary lifestyle.
Bad diet: One's diet has a say in whether the person may get Type 2 Diabetes or not. A person, spending his or her days gulping down junk food, while being sedentary and obese may have a higher chance of getting diabetes that one who doesn't.
There are many other causes of Type 2 Diabetes, like illness. There is a kind of illness that may besiege an individual, and the person may become susceptible to Type 2 Diabetes.
Pregnancy is said to increase the risk of Type 2 Diabetes, and when combined with the other causes, the risk may shoot through the roof. Those living in India or anywhere in the world can easily test for Diabetes using the best glucometers that will be listed below. Some glucometers make use of strips, while others do not.
This kind of diabetes usually occurs when a woman is pregnant. The main causes of this kind of diabetes are unknown but they can be tested with glucometer strips or other forms of best glucometers in India. A combination of risks can cause this kind of Diabetes.
GESTATIONAL DIABETES CAUSES
When the pregnant woman is obese, there is a great risk she may get the Gestational Diabetes.
When a pregnant woman comes from a family with a history of gestational diabetes, the woman may be at risk of having it. A lot of pregnant women in India are known to have such family history and are advised to always use the best glucometers in India to test for diabetes even at home.
For all these kinds of diabetes, the glucometer is used to test the glucose concentration in the blood, and they can be used at home. All you need is to buy the best glucometers available to Indians.
Glucometer can also come in the form of a glucometer strip that is dipped into a substance to test for glucose level in the blood. A lot of people with diabetes mellitus use the home glucometer to monitor their glucose level constantly. The symptoms may not be there yet, but it is advisable to get a home used glucometer, especially if you are living in India. Here, a drop of blood is dropped on the glucometer strip. The meter then reads it and calculates the level of glucose in the blood.
The best glucometers usually have the levels displayed in mmol/l or mg/dl.
Accuracy of GlucometersIf you are used to using glucometers, there is a great chance that you didn't get exactly the same result when you ran the test two or three times in a row. This doesn't mean your glucometer or glucometer strip is wrong. Most glucometers are built with variance into them. For a glucometer to be right, it should be within the 20% lab test result.
If the lab test result showed it as 110 mg/dL, it can vary to 90 mg/dL or to 130 mg/dL, it is accurate.
Home-used Glucometer measures the glucose level different from the lab.Every glucometer makes use of the whole blood to monitor the level of glucose. Whole blood is one sample of blood filled with red blood cells.
While for the test done in the lab usually makes use of the blood's plasma, while removing the red blood cells. Glucometer using whole blood may get a result that is 12 percent lower than the one done in the lab. A number of reasons can decide if a test will be accurate or not. They include blood sample's quality and size, the glucometer's calibration, the pressure used on the glucometer's strip while wiping it off, and the glucometer's strip rate of aging.
As an Indian, it is important to regularly run tests for diabetes, and this can be done from one's him using the Home Used Glucometer and Glucometer Strips.
Glucometers or Sugar Testing Monitor: Different Brands
1. Accu-Chek Active
This glucometer gives Fast and accurate results: The meter requires no more than 5 seconds to measure and deliver results. It is available to those living in India.
2. One Touch
OneTouch SelectSimple has an icon-driven interface with no coding, no setup or no buttons. Just insert the strip to start, apply blood, and results can be obtained in a matter of seconds.
3. SD Check Codefree Plus
SD Codefree Plus features a large screen, the meter is easy to use and it has memory capacity to store up to 500 readings.