Posted on April 3rd, at 5: This was an awesome article, and a lot of good, insightful comments as well.
This article reads like a press release or a news article or is largely based on routine coverage or sensationalism. Please expand this article with properly sourced content to meet Wikipedia's quality standardsevent notability guidelineor encyclopedic content policy.
June Social media has a range of uses in political processes and activities. Social media have been championed as allowing anyone with an Internet connection to become a content creator  and empowering their users.
Online media audience members are largely passive consumers, while content creation is dominated by a small number of users who post comments and write new content. Due to the heavier use of social media among younger generations, they are exposed to politics more frequently, and in a way that is integrated into their online social lives.
Social media was influential in the widespread attention given to the revolutionary outbreaks in the Middle East and North Africa during Social media use in hiring If a college applicant has posted photos of engaging in activities that are contrary to college rules or values, it could adversely affect their chances of getting in.
Some employers examine job applicants' social media profiles as part of the hiring assessment. This issue raises many ethical questions that some consider an employer's right and others consider discrimination.
Many Western European countries have already implemented laws that restrict the regulation of social media in the workplace. States including Arkansas, California, Colorado, Illinois, Maryland, Michigan, Nevada, New Jersey, New Mexico, Utah, Washington, and Wisconsin have passed legislation that protects potential employees and current employees from employers that demand them to give forth their username or password for a social media account.
A survey of 17, young people in six countries in found that 1 in 10 people aged 16 to 34 have been rejected for a job because of online comments they made on social media websites.
There have been situations where students have been forced to give up their social media passwords to school administrators. They urge students who are pressured to give up their account information to tell the administrators to contact a parent or lawyer before they take the matter any further.
Although they are students, they still have the right to keep their password-protected information private. In the s, while colleges and universities still use these traditional methods to evaluate applicants, these institutions are increasingly accessing applicants' social media profiles to learn about their character and activities.
Use by law enforcement agencies[ edit ] Social media have been used to assist in searches for missing persons. When a University of Cincinnati student disappeared inhis friends and family used social media to organize and fund a search effort. Dulle's body was eventually found in a building next door to his apartment.
It is a way for the police force to show their progress to the community on issues they are dealing with. After an Apple employee criticized his employer on Facebook, he was fired.
When the former employee sued Apple for unfair dismissal, the court, after seeing the man's Facebook posts, found in favour of Apple, as the man's social media comments breached Apple's policies. The court found him guilty and he was sentenced to jail.
For example, Facebook currently has 2. Users of social media are then able to like, share and comment on the advert, becoming message senders as they can keep passing the advert's message on to their friends and onwards.
Research shows that digital endorsements seem to be successfully targeting social media users,  especially younger consumers who have grown up in the digital age. Use by individuals[ edit ] Main article: Rainie and Wellman have argued that media making now has become a participation work,  which changes communication systems.
In many ways, mainstream journalists have maintained an authoritative voice as the storytellers of the American past. Their documentary style narratives, detailed exposes, and their positions in the present make them prime sources for public memory.May 27, · AUSTIN, Minn.
--Hormel has recalled spam and chicken nationwidesecretarial.com than , pounds of the Minnesota-based Hormel canned meats were recalled after four consumers complained about metal objects. SILVERTON, Colo. (AP) — A truck hauling waste from a Colorado mine — the source of a spill that polluted rivers in three states — .
COLORADO SPRINGS — For some Democrats here in one of the more conservative areas of Colorado, a decision between two top candidates for governor . northern credit union knows the north It’s also how we know what it takes to help our Northern members save—by combining local insights, flexible financial products, great rates, and keeping every dollar in the North.
Gmail is email that's intuitive, efficient, and useful. 15 GB of storage, less spam, and mobile access. The latest Tweets from Report Spam (@ReportSpamBAH). Bahrain Defines Group to Report Spam Traitors Account's and CLOSE them. Bahrain - Al khalifa Land. Find the latest business news on Wall Street, jobs and the economy, the housing market, personal finance and money investments and much more on ABC News.
Ashford University is an accredited online university offering programs across many industries & fields including business, education, health & liberal arts. The latest travel information, deals, guides and reviews from USA TODAY Travel.