Moss is the small flowerless spore-producing plant. The spores of these plants look like small capsules. Moss plants typically form dense green mats or clumps which grows in shady areas. The individual plants of this species are made up of simple leaves of one cell thick that is attached to the stem. It may be branched or unbranched with less content of water and nutrients. Mosses will usually grow up to 0.2–10 cm tall but some species may grow taller. For instance, Dawsonia is the tallest plant of the Moss family, and it can grow up to 50 cm in height. Earlier, moss plants were sorted with hornworts and liverworts as non-vascular plants under the division of bryophytes. Now, mosses are classified on its own division Bryophyta, and it has approximately 12,000 species. Traditionally, mosses are used as insulation, and it can absorb liquids up to 20 times its weight.
Scientific name: Bryophyta
Eaten by: Stegosaurus
Higher Classification: Embryophyte
Division: Bryophyta; Schimp. sensu stricto
Species of Moss Plant
Under the Bryophyta division, Mosses has classified into nearly 12,000 species. All those species were categorised under eight main classes, and each class of the plant has several subspecies. Here we have listed the main eight classes of this species.
- class Takakiopsida
- class Sphagnopsida
- class Andreaeopsida
- class Andreaeobryopsida
- class Oedipodiopsida
- class Polytrichopsida
- class Tetraphidopsida
- class Bryopsida
Cost of Moss Plants
The major commercial significant of these species is decorative purposes and florist trading. The cost of mosses may vary according to their species. White preserved Moss plants can cost around Rs 4,000/ Square Feet, Green Mosses for wall costs Rs 2,500/ Square Feet and more. In the US, it costs around $4 to $10 per square foot.
Interesting Facts about Moss
- Moss plants can be purchased in flora shops and dollar stores, but the plants will be preserved with some chemicals. Instead of buying preserved moss, buy a fresh living one which will be useful for projects like terrariums and kokedama.
- Mosses are harmful to dogs as it causes skin problems. Those people having iron in their house may cause iron poisoning.
- Moss plants are usually bright green in color. But some species are pale green, yellowish-green, bluish-green or velvety black-green.
- Mosses do not have vascular tissue like other normal plants so it cannot produce flowers, stem and root. Instead, it has rhizoids which attach them to the ground.
- Moss plants produce its energy by using the photosynthesis process. These species are evolved from algae and the first plant that exists in solid ground.
- These plants are the huge absorber of water from the ground, which prevents soil erosion. During the first World War, Moss plants are used as bandages to avoid blood loss. The antibacterial property of the plant are used to settle the infection.
- Animals like reindeer eat mosses, the chemical content of the plant will help them to keep the blood warm. It is also an indicator of pollution as it grows only in a clean environment.
- Sporophyte and gametophyte are the two generations of Mosses. The generation of Sporophyte produces spores which spread through the wind. Then the spores flourish into the gametophyte generation that produces male and female sex organs which ensures sexual reproduction.
- The lifespan of moss varies according to their species, and approximately it can survive up to 10 years.
Moss Plant Images
Thanks for visiting newsbugz.com.
Shubh Mangal Zyada Saavdhan Hindi Movie (2020) | Cast | Teaser | Trailer | Release Date
Preethi Nedumaran Wiki, Biography, Age, Movies, Family, Images & More
Pon Manickavel Tamil Movie (2020) | Cast | Songs | Teaser | Trailer | Review
How to hire a coach charter Melbourne. 3 steps for bus rental Melbourne
Preethi Kumar Wiki, Biography, Age, Serials, Family, Images & More
John Blom (Umpire) Wiki, Biography, Age, Family, Images & More
A Married Woman Web Series (ALT Balaji & ZEE5) 2020: Episodes | Cast | Trailer
Ann Alexia Anra Wiki, Biography, Age, Family, Movies, Images & More
Sharmiela Mandre Wiki, Biography, Age, Movies, Images
Ravi Teja’s Disco Raja Songs, Lyrics, Themes, BGM | Thaman S Musical
Watch Mansara Sollu Song ft Teejay and Nanditha Swetha
Jhund Hindi Movie (2020) | Cast | Teaser | Trailer | Songs Release Date
Bigg Boss3 months ago
Bigg Boss Telugu Vote 2019 | Season 3 | Contestants List | Winners | Star Maa
Entertainment3 months ago
Super Singer Vote Senior Season 7 | Online Voting | Contestants | Results | Vijay TV
Bigg Boss4 months ago
Bigg Boss Tamil Vote Online Season 3 | Contestants | Eliminations | Winner
Bollywood2 months ago
Todaypk Movies Download 2019: Bollywood, Telugu, Tamil, Hollywood Movies HD Free Download
Entertainment6 months ago
Kurukshetra (2019) Full Kannada Movie Download Leaked Online by Tamilrockers & Movierulz
Latest News2 months ago
Jio Rockers Movies Download HD 2019: New Telugu, Tamil, Hindi Movies List | Alternatives
Entertainment2 months ago
Movierulz Movies Download HD 2020: New Telugu, Malayalam, Tamil, Hindi Movies | Alternatives
Latest News10 months ago
Khatrimaza Movies HD Download 2019: KhatrimazaFull New Bollywood, Hollywood and South Movies