Now the kids are back at school we thought we'd touch on a subject of concern to both parents and kids and something that can affect the kids for their whole lives - bullying ...
As there is a lot to this subject this blog post will be run over 2 weeks with Part 1 this week covering the introduction then -
The victim: signs and symptoms
A child who is a victim of bullying may display one or more of the following behaviours, particularly when at home:
What can parents of the victim do?
If you know or suspect your child is being bullied, but his school hasn't communicated with you about the situation, you should contact your child's teacher(s) right away. Keep in mind that your primary goal should be to get the school's cooperation to get the bullying to stop. Knowing your own child is being victimized can evoke strong feelings, but you'll get much more cooperation from school personnel if you can stick to the facts without becoming overly emotional. While you may want assurance that everyone involved is punished severely, try to focus on putting an end to the bullying!
Your Attitude and Actions
When should the victim's parents contact school authorities?
If the bullying occurs at school, then the main responsibility for achieving this goal lies with the school officials. It's important, however, that the parents of the victim collaborate with the school to implement an agreed-upon plan for solving the problem.
If your child has been the victim of bullying at school, here are some suggestions for reporting the problem to school authorities:
There are many benefits in your children attending different after school classes. Not only the obvious of course where they can enjoy activities they are keen to be part of but also as well as the physical and mental stimulation but there are also great benefits for development of your child’s social skills with both other children and adults.
Whatever type of activity or programme your child is offered an opportunity to interact with their peers in an environment different from the school or home set up.
A well run programme or activity will promote support, respect and cooperation between the participants. This can help your child grow in confidence and feel more secure about joining in a game, asking a question or starting a conversation.
Particularly if the class isn’t too large your child should get a certain degree of one on one attention.
If the activity is a physical one, eg soccer, touch, swimming, dance, etc this not only helps them keep fit and healthy but they will learn teamwork and fair play as well as good coordination skills!
If the activity is more creative based, eg theatre, music, arts and crafts, etc this will not only develop your child’s creative skills but also teach them problem solving skills.
Not only that spending time in an environment that shouldn’t offer your child any pressure is a great stress release – yes, nowadays, even our kids can feel stressed!
Encourage your child to try a variety of after school activities. If your child loves sport encourage music or art classes as well for variety or the creative child may just discover that dancing is a wonderful way for them to express that creativity.
This also encourages your child to discover new interests and develop a wide variety of talents and skills!
They come around four times a year and next thing you know holidays are here again! We keep you up to date on great holiday activities, school holiday programmes, different ways to keep the whole family entertained, also term time topics, and educational advice and support!