Process of Image Registration Accelerated by a New Algorithm from MIT Researchers
The algorithm is able to perfectly register brain scans within two minutes using a traditional central processing unit, and in less than a second using a graphics processing unit
Researchers from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology are utilizing a machine learning algorithm that is able to massively speed up the process of overlapping medical images to enable radiologists study the differences between them.
It usually takes radiologists as much as two hours using imaging systems to align millions of pixels in scans that they wish to compare through medical imaging registration. The technique is crucial for taking two MRI scans to analyze differences. For example, if a patient has a brain tumor, image registration enables clinicians to put one image from several months ago on top of a recent scan to determine the growth of the disease.
But the work of the MIT researchers has resulted in an algorithm that can line up brain scans and other 3-D images more than 1,000 times faster using new learning techniques. It works by “learning” while registering thousands of pairs of images, which enables it gain information on how best to align images, as well as estimate optical alignment parameters. After going through this learning process, it uses those parameters to map all the pixels of one image to another instantaneously.
Guha Balakrishnan, a graduate student in MIT’s Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory and Department of Engineering and Computer Science, and who also co-author both papers says that the tasks of aligning a brain MRI shouldn’t be that different from when you’re aligning a pair of brain MRIs.
The researchers’ algorithm, known as “VoxelMorph,” is powered by a convolutional neural network, a machine-learning approach commonly used for image processing. They trained their algorithm on 7,000 publicly available MRI brain scans and then tested it on 250 additional scans.
The researchers discovered that the algorithm could perfectly register all of their 250 test brain scans, those registered after the training set within two minutes using a traditional central processing unit, and in under one second using a graphics processing unit.
The researchers believe that the new algorithm has a wide range of potential applications in addition to analyzing brain scans. MIT colleagues, for instance, are currently running the algorithm on lung images. It could also enable image registration during operations, helping surgeons who may need comparisons during brain resections to ensure they’ve removed all of a tumor during brain surgery.