Universal Energies Ltd The Renewable Energy Efficiency Specialists
The relevant section of the building regulations states that in new dwellings, “a reasonable proportion of the energy consumption to meet the energy performance of a dwelling is provided by renewable energy sources”. This reasonable proportion of the energy consumption is quantified as the following:
10 kWh/m2/annum contributing to energy use for domestic hot water heating, space heating or cooling.
Or 4 kWh/m2/annum of electrical energy; or A combination of these which would have equivalent effect.
Those already familiar with the SEAI grant procedures will recognize the 10kwh/m2/annum figure. This requires a renewable energy system (int this case a thermal solar panel system) which produces heat to provide 10kWh of thermal energy per m2 of the house to be built per annum. i.e. a 120m2 house requires 1200kWh of energy to be produced by the system. It should be noted here that the sliding scale that SEAI apply to the allocation of grants when the house size gets bigger than 170m2 does not apply in new build scenarios. Just a quick hint, it’s often easier to gain compliance using flat plate solar panels than an evacuated tube solar panel, this is because of the limited nature of the calculation used in Part L which favours flat plates a little.
On bigger houses or in housing developments or apartment blocks it can be more cost effective to use Solar PV panels to produce electrical energy than to use Solar Thermal panels to gain compliance. As mentioned in the second option above only 4kWh of electricity has to be produced per m2 of floor area. For example a 200m2 house requires 800kWh of electrical energy to be produced to gain compliance – this can be supplied by a small 1KWp PV solar array which comes at a better price.
The calculation for a Solar PV system is different to Solar Thermal and the formula assigned by Part L of the Building Regulations has to be used to calculate the energy yield of the system. The formula to be used is as follows: 0.80 x kWp x S x ZPV (Where S = irradiance, ZPV = overshading)
The kWp figure is the maximum output of the solar PV panel array in kW – e.g. if you want to install 4 x 250W PV panels your maximum output is 1 kW so your kWp figure is 1. Overshading and irradiance figures used are the same as those used for solar thermal. If you have a house of 120m2 then the total you need from this calculation would be 480 kWh. When using DEAP to calculate compliance the output figure of this calculation is entered into the ‘energy produced or saved’ section in the energy requirements Tab as renewable electrical energy.
Once you have all of this information you can design a system that is sure to be compliant with Part L of the building regulations but please feel free to give us a call at 087 908 7543 or email us: at firstname.lastname@example.org and we can do this calculation for you and give you your pricing options.
We are always happy to help you make your solar business work so don’t hesitate to give us a callif you want to discuss any solar projects you may have.
Part L compliance with Thermodynamic Solar
THERMODYNAMIC SOLAR SYSTEM
What is required?
1/ A hybrid system of Thermodynamic Solar / Photovoltaic Solar can pass Part L for most houses quite easliy
2/ This hybrid System is a popular choice as you get all your hot water 365 days and the FREE electricity generated from your PV solar can run the Thermodynamic unit for Free as well as other appliances in the home
3/ How to enter Hybrid system into DEAP software for passing Part L
A Universal Energies Ltd single Thermodynamic Solar panel can produce up to 700 kwh/yr
A Universal Energies Ltd Green E pack heat pump can produce up to 500 kwh/yr
A 4 panel PV solar array can produce up to 1050 kwh/yr
These figures are all calculated in the DEAP software using the information from SEAI Harp database
Call us on: +353 87 908 7543
Co. Monaghan, Ireland
Phone: +353 87 908 7543
9am – 5:30pm Mon to Fri
Universal Energies is an electrical and renewable energy focused company. We are an Irish, family run business which was established in 2011 based at Annahaia, Ballybay, Co.Monaghan.