August is upon us, and in early August Australia recognises Dental Health Week. This year, the week runs from August 5th to August 11th.
In the past, Dental Health Week has addressed various themes including, oral health and sugar, diet and oral hygiene, women’s oral health, and even how sports and dental health interact with each other.
This year the theme is, “How’s Your Oral Health Tracking.” The phrase has two meanings.
The first meaning is “How is it going?” But, the second, equally important, sense is, “How are we certain that we are doing all we should – how do we track our oral hygiene?”
These are essential questions, obviously, for the busiest among us. But they are also important questions for those among us who are youngest and oldest; for in the young and old, it can be challenging to keep track of dental hygiene and health.
At EK Dental Surgery, we want to make sure that all of us, busy, old, and young alike, are where we should be in terms of dental health, and that we are attentive to what we need to do to support our dental health.
Dental Health Week and Children
Children, unfortunately, are not both with good oral hygiene; we have to introduce the idea to them.
Dental Health Week is a great way to introduce your children to the importance of dental health. Look on the web to see if any events are being held in your neighbourhood.
Or, take advantage of the ADA’s Dental Health Week website and download any of the colourful, printable posters that have particular relevance to children.
Topics include dental health for children and two posters focusing on the dangers of drinks like soda pop that contain high levels of acid and sugar.
Three-quarters of young adults consume too much sugar, and the earlier they learn the threat of it, the better.
The information also contains helpful hints for parents:
- Begin oral hygiene by brushing the gums
- Don’t swallow excess toothpaste or rinse your mouth with water
- Control toothpaste amount – a small ‘pea-sized’ dollop is all you need.
- Make brushing into entertainment with a song or relevant smartphone app.
- Visit EK Dental Surgery before the first birthday or when the first tooth erupts.
- At the dentist’s office, always stay positive, praising their listening skills and how they follow instructions.
- If your child has their ‘pen licence’ they are likely old enough to brush their own teeth.
Most importantly, be sure your children build good dental habits as soon as possible.
Planning and tracking your children’s oral hygiene can set them on the path to better health in the future.
If you plan and keep track of your own dental health, children will likely pick this habit up, as they grow older.
Dental Health Week and Seniors
As the years go by, it is easier to lose control of oral hygiene, and this can lead to unfortunate results:
Dry mouth can be a natural part of the aging process. But older people also tend to be on more medications that inhibit the production of saliva. Saliva protects against tooth decay and controls bacteria.
Gum disease has been scientifically linked to heart disease, while an increase in bacteria has been linked to diabetes and a higher risk of pneumonia.
Oral cancer rates increase with age. If seniors do not receive regular dental check-ups, they increase the chance of cancers going undetected early. Even seniors with no teeth should get regular check-ups!
Regular hygiene habits may decrease. As we age, our habits change and we may lose the dexterity required for brushing and flossing.
In some cases, we no longer remember to take care of ourselves quite as well due to memory problems associated with aging.
Inability to drive or lack of access to transportation may reduce access to the dental office. Finally, the loss of wages or insurance may create an inability to afford dental treatment.
So, track on down the road!
Dental Health Week is an opportunity for all of us to take stock of our oral health, ensuring that we all have a big, attractive smile, and teeth (or restorations) that allow us to eat a healthy diet and live happily.
EK Dental Surgery is happy to help you “stay on track”!
Reasons To Smile At EK Dental Surgery!
We are dedicated dentists and staff working to provide the best care possible. At EK Dental Surgery, we can help you achieve tip-top dental health and a movie-star smile!
Our team of five dentists has dealt with nearly every conceivable dental issue, and our supporting staff is well-trained and experienced.
EK Dental Surgery is conveniently situated on Springvale Road in Glen Waverley, and we offer free parking for our patients!
Special Offer For New Patients
Pay No Gap for Exam, Scale and Clean, and Fluoride Treatment for Medibank, Bupa and HCF.
Child Dental Benefits Schedule
Bulk bill for Commonwealth Child Dental Benefit Scheme for up to $1,000.
We are located at 230 Springvale Road in Glen Waverley.