Washington County is seeing cases of RSV. Here's how to protect your child.
Intermountain Healthcare's GermWatch shows rates of the respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) have been rising in Utah over the last several weeks, with high activity in Washington County.
More than 100 cases were reported across the state during the first week of 2020, with higher-than-average rates reported in southwestern Utah.
And parents whose infants are coughing and sneezing may wonder: Common cold, or RSV?
Gary Bosshardt, a pediatric doctor with Intermountain Healthcare, said RSV is one of hundreds of different types of viruses that, in most people, just cause common cold symptoms.
But RSV is "the bad neighbor," Bosshardt said, because of its propensity for causing complications in "medically frail" patients, such as infants under a year, children with cardiovascular or lung conditions and the elderly.
Symptoms of RSV in children can include rapid breathing or difficulty breathing due to mucus buildup, lack of desire to eat or drink, and significantly decreasing energy.
It may be difficult to know when or if to see a doctor for common cold symptoms, but Bosshardt said if parents are worried for any reason, they should seek medical care for their child, especially because RSV has the potential of working its way down deeper into the lung tree.
However, "an ounce of prevention is worth ten thousand pounds of cure," he said.
This means practicing good hand hygiene and receiving immunizations. Bosshardt said people sometimes have a false idea that immunizations have "turbo-consequences" and if they do get sick, they'll just take antibiotics.
But Bosshardt said immunizations teach a body how to fight off the illness itself.
"Antibiotics are calling your insurance investor after the car wreck instead of just wearing your seat belt," he said.
If a child does get RSV, Bosshardt said the best thing to do at home is "very aggressive" suctioning of the nose and mouth to get the mucus out. It's also important that children stay hydrated, usually in the form of some kind of electrolyte fluid like Gatorade.
If kids are still struggling to breathe after suctioning, Bosshardt said the respitary outpatience clinic on the third floor of the Dixie Regional Medical Center has a respiratory therapist on site 24/7. The therapist can deeply suction out mucus beyond just the nose and mouth.
Kaitlyn Bancroft reports on faith, health, education and under-served communities for The Spectrum & Daily News, a USA TODAY Network newsroom in St. George, Utah. You can reach her at KBancroft@thespectrum.com, or follow her on Twitter @katbancroft.