[permalink] [id link]
We recognize something akin to Norns, spirits who decide destinies of men ; to the seeresses, who could protect men in battle with their spells ; to the powerful female guardian spirits attached to certain families, bringing luck to youth under their protection ; even to certain women who armed themselves and fought like men, for whom there is some historical evidence from the regions round the Black Sea.
Some Related Sentences
We and recognize
We may also recognize cases in which the poets have influenced the philosophers and even indirectly the scientists.
We should first recognize our tendency to develop a hierarchy of values, locating brief treatment at the bottom and long-term intensive service at the top, instead of seeing the services as part of a continuum, each important in its own right.
We recognize that young people through imaginative mind and body training can become athletes, acrobats, dancers, musicians and artists, developing many potentialities.
" When Robert B. Anderson, Eisenhower's first Secretary of the Navy argued that the Navy must recognize the " customs and usages prevailing in certain geographic areas of our country which the Navy had no part in creating ", Eisenhower overruled him: " We have not taken and we shall not take a single backward step.
We further recognize that the number of bad films is so enormous and the competition for the very worst is so intense, that all decisions reached here are subject to considerable second-guessing.
In March 2000 CCAR issued a new resolution stating that " We do hereby resolve that, that the relationship of a Jewish, same gender couple is worthy of affirmation through appropriate Jewish ritual, and further resolved, that we recognize the diversity of opinions within our ranks on this issue.
We recognize it thanks to its dark spots, and the ' stripes ' which are due to the friction of marine rocks.
The CJLS felt that an argument potentially undermining the value of community and clergy was unconvincing: " We should not be afraid to recognize that the function of clergy is to help our people connect with the holy.
According to Mills, " It ’ s time for the Academy to recognize this genius ," adding that " We applauded when the great Chaplin finally had his hour.
We recognize that Jesus is telling a story to illustrate a moral point, and that such stories often don't claim to correspond to actual events.
In the Meditation each of the heads casts about for the sense of its situation, considers the nature of the light, probes for certainties amid the darkness and then makes an attempt to imagine what has happened to the other two corners of this particular Eternal Triangle … We can now see that the heads are not chained exclusively to their ‘ past ’, their narration ( s ): they are victims of the light, certainly, but not only victims, for they can recognize themselves as such and can speak of the light when forced to speak by the light.
Von Bulow says, " We can recognize in these four measures the original germ of the entire romanticism of Schumann ".
We recognize that WTO Members with insufficient or no manufacturing capacities in the pharmaceutical sector could face difficulties in making effective use of compulsory licensing under the TRIPS Agreement.
John Rutledge of South Carolina, delegate to the Constitutional Convention, is said to have read lengthy tracts of Iroquoian law to the other framers, beginning with the words " We, the people, to form a union, to establish peace, equity, and order ..." In October 1988, the US Congress passed Concurrent Resolution 331 to recognize the influence of the Iroquois Constitution upon the US Constitution and Bill of Rights.
" We will make informal friendly noises as soon as we can find out whom to talk with, and ought to recognize as soon as we ’ re sure these guys are firmly in the saddle.
Heather Kere, RSU's Vice-President of Education, said, " We definitely recognize there was some criticism of his views " and that " we were endorsing the campaign's goals and not the individual speaker.
We recognize the first term in this final expression as the non-relativistic expression derived above, while the last term is a relativistic correction factor.
We recognize that there are no sins in the metaphysical sense ; but, in the same sense, neither are there any virtues ; we recognize that this entire realm of moral ideas is in a continual state of fluctuation, that there are higher and deeper concepts of good and evil, moral and immoral.
* Wynn Schwartz: We recognize others as empathic when we feel that they have accurately acted on or somehow acknowledged in stated or unstated fashion our values or motivations, our knowledge, and our skills or competence, but especially as they appear to recognize the significance of our actions in a manner that we can tolerate their being recognized.
We and something
We cannot regard foreign policy as something left over after defense policy or trade policy or fiscal policy has been extracted.
We have come to you to experience something of your way of life while also attempting to acquaint you with that of ours.
We are looking inside the atom and seeing there a universe which is not material but something beyond the material, a universe that in a word is not matter but music.
We say we want to see put on the statute book something which will make our people citizens of the world before they are citizens of this country ".
We deliberately use the phrase " with the addition of other means " because we also want to make it clear that war in itself does not suspend political intercourse or change it into something entirely different.
Desmond Tutu, the former Anglican Archbishop of Cape Town and a Nobel Peace Prize winner, has described homophobia as a " crime against humanity " and " every bit as unjust " as apartheid: " We struggled against apartheid in South Africa, supported by people the world over, because black people were being blamed and made to suffer for something we could do nothing about ; our very skins.
We cannot define a point except as ' something with no parts ', nor blindness except as ' the absence of sight in a creature that is normally sighted '.
We see this as diminishing of pressure on the outer shell ( which is used in the ideal gas law ), so we write ( something ) instead of.
We are dealing with this: Would a stable mind depart from the opinion handed down by so many men famous for holiness and miracles, depart from the decisions of the Church, and commit our souls to the faith of someone like you who has sprung up just now with a few followers, although the leading men of your flock do not agree either with you or among themselves – indeed though you do not even agree with yourself, since in this same Assertion you say one thing in the beginning and something else later on, recanting what you said before.
We will not be troubled at any loss, but will say to ourselves on such an occasion: " I have lost nothing that belongs to me ; it was not something of mine that was torn from me, but something that was not in my power has left me.
Describing his intention, Capa said ' We named this unknown generation, The Generation X, and even in our first enthusiasm we realised that we had something far bigger than our talents and pockets could cope with '.
Siege's goal was maximum velocity: " We would listen to the fastest punk and hardcore bands we could find and say, ' Okay, we're gonna deliberately write something that is faster than them '", drummer Robert Williams recalled.
" He had earlier written to Stalin in 1937, " For the sake of Gorky I am asking you for mercy, even if he may be guilty of something ," to which Stalin noted: " We must not respond.
Moore recalled that " we wanted to aim high, do something different and big ... We knew we had to have a strong Picard story arc, so what are the profound things in a man's life he has to face?
" We were actually trying to build something complicated and discovered, serendipitously, that we had accidentally designed something that met all our goals but was much simpler than we had intended .... we realized that the lambda calculus — a small, simple formalism — could serve as the core of a powerful and expressive programming language.
" Lane said of the day, " We love our corporate sponsors and we love their money, but there's something sacred about naming a theatre, and there's something about this that is right and just.
Ethan said, " We wanted something that would generate a certain narrative feeling – like a modern Raymond Chandler story, and that's why it had to be set in Los Angeles ... We wanted to have a narrative flow, a story that moves like a Chandler book through different parts of town and different social classes ".