Sofia Adamson, Staff
Our bodies are constantly under attack from the skies. Chemtrails are known to release dozens of killer toxins and heavy metals into the air – from nanoparticles to heavy metals like arsenic, aluminum and mercury.
Here are 5 easy ways to detox from the damaging effects of chemtrails, heavy metals, nanoparticles and other toxins you encounter when you head outside.
Selenium is a trace mineral that your body naturally needs to function.
Scientists have found that selenium can specifically bind to mercury and pull it from your tissues so it can be excreted. In this way, it acts like zeolite. The only difference being that selenium detoxifies mercury, whereas zeolite detoxifies a massive variety of toxins.
Selenium also acts as an anti-oxidant so it can protect the body from the damaging effects of chemtrails and pesticides.
Chlorella is a single-celled microalgae that can also help keep you safe from the world’s toxins.
When supplemented, chlorella can bind to heavy metals in the digestive tract, which comes from breathing contaminated air and drinking unfiltered water.
Spirulina is one of the oldest life forms on Earth. It’s a blue-green microalgae that detoxifies the digestive system much like chlorella. The only difference is that spirulina also alkalizes your body which is helpful because environmental toxins can cause you to become more acidic, which can lead to disease.
4. Milk Thistle
Milk thistle contains a compound called silybin. This incredible compound supports the function of your liver—the organ that detoxifies your body.
Supporting healthy liver function is absolutely essential when you’re exposed to such a large amount of harmful substances on a daily basis. Otherwise, the liver can get overwhelmed and sluggish. If this happens when you’re exposed to a toxin, it’s more likely to freely roam your body and cause a tremendous amount of damage.
5. Liquid Zeolite
Liquid zeolite is a natural chelator mineral. When you ingest it, the tiny minerals seek out toxins and heavy metals and bind to them. They act like a toxin magnet.
Once bound to a toxin, it transports it out of the body so that it can no longer cause harm. Liquid zeolite does this with radioactive particles as well.
Routinely detoxifying your body with zeolite is necessary because when you’re exposed to toxins, your body stores them in your cells. Over time, toxins and radiation can build up to dangerous levels—leading to disease, chronic fatigue, brain fog, and even cancer.
So if you’re looking to protect yourself, it’s imperative that you use a liquid zeolite supplement to prevent toxin buildup.
There is one particular liquid zeolite supplement that is recommended by experts to be the most effective supplement out there for detoxifying the body. It’s called Pure Body and is produced by Touchstone Essentials.
Pure Body undergoes a proprietary cleansing process so that it is highly effective for detoxification, and is sized so that it is absorbed for a whole-body detox. It undergoes independent laboratory analysis that confirms its purity.
Ready to detox chemtrail toxins? Pick up a bottle of the liquid zeolite supplement, Pure Body, before too much damage is done. For a limited time, you can save 10% off your first order with code WICKED10.
This article (5 Ways to Detox Chemtrail Toxins) was originally created and published by Waking Times. Copyright 2019 Waking Media LLC.
Disclaimer: This article is not intended to provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. Views expressed here do not necessarily reflect those of Waking Times or its staff.