Keto is short for ketogenic. It came from the word “ketones” which are our body’s tiny fuel molecules. The body uses this as an alternate fuel when your blood sugar or the glucose runs low. When you eat foods that are less in carbohydrates and have an average intake of proteins, your body produces ketones. The part of our bodies that produces this is the liver.
How Does a Ketogenic Diet Work?
With this diet, your body consumes energy provided by a fuel supply coming entirely from fats. As your glucose or blood sugar levels lower down, the body switches to fats as its fuel supply to produce energy.
For this diet, your carbohydrate intake should be equal to or lower than 100 grams. The diet will also be effective if you avoid any food that is rich in sugar or very starchy. Examples of these foods are potatoes, bread, rice, and pasta.
Instead, your diet should contain foods that are high in fats such as nuts, butter, and cream. As for protein, it has to be moderate. The keto diet must compose 75% fat and about 15 to 25% protein. The fewer carbs on your diet, the better. When it comes to fluid intake, any drink is okay for as long as there is no sugar.
What Are Its Benefits?
Its primary use is to treat seizures among those who have epilepsy but research has proven it can also be an effective way to lose weight. The proven benefits include feeling less hungry and a constant energy supply to keep you up all throughout the day. Having enough energy to sustain you help you stay focused and alert. The keto diet also gives the same benefits when you fast without fasting.
What Are Its Disadvantages?
There are no specific disadvantages except your body’s craving for carbs and lowered stamina. Experts explain this as the “keto flu” which is normal since the body is adjusting to lowered carb intake which is our quick source of energy. There are also certain groups of people who are not allowed to have this diet and they are the ff:
- Those taking medications for diabetes
- Those who are breastfeeding
- Those who are taking blood pressure medications
There is no easy road to staying fit except having proper exercises and a healthy diet. Also, your body might take awhile before it undergoes “ketosis” as it needs to burn the glucose or sugar first before it can start using the fats. The keto diet might not be your superman who saves you instantly from gaining weight but it can be your best diet buddy.
Have you tried going on a keto diet? Do share to us your experiences about it in the comments section.