However while most of us know when we need termite control, we do not tend to know much about termites themselves. As they say in Sun Tsu’s ‘Art of War’ it’s important to ‘know thy enemy’ so here we will look at termites and what they actually are.
Termites are insects that are ‘eusocial’ and ispotera. Like ants, bees and wasps they have a complex social system and will divide their labour throughout their genders, produce lots of overlapping generations (like humans) and will look after their young as a collective. This means then that the enemy is organised and that they come in large numbers, meaning you rarely get just one termite and will often need termite control in Mesa.
Termites feed on dead plant material. This means that you can lessen your chances of an infestation by not keeping dead plants in your premises and disposing of them as soon as they perish.
Dead plant material obviously also includes vegetables and compost.
Amazingly there are over 4,000 species of termites, and about 10% of these (400) are significant risks as infestations. This is why termite control is so regularly necessary. Once you get a termite infestation it is highly important to get termite control as they can have many bad effects on your property. For instance they can cause structural damage to your buildings (and particularly sheds and log cabins), can kill crops and plantation forests, and can cause other problems. They are major detrivores and it is important to recycle wood and other plant matter.
Termites live in colonies and in maturity these colonies will be made up of several hundred or even several million individual termites. It is very easy then to see that termites spread incredibly quickly and why termite control is so important for any business or home.
Termites understand the value of having strength in numbers. Their colonies will include nymphs (which are semi-mature young termites), soldiers, workers and those designated for reproduction of termites (male and female) and sometimes egg laying queens. Termites are sometimes known as white ants though this is something of a misnomer as they are not very closely related to ants.
Termites will also build and look after nests which houses their colonies. These structures are formed of soil, mud, wood, saliva and faeces and again it is something that would not be possible for a single termite. This has multiple functions and provides living space, collects water, provides reproductive ‘chambers’, gardens and more. Their maze like tunnels are designed that they also provide air conditioning and maintain the temperature of the colony.
As you can see then termites are a highly organised and intelligent enemy, and it is important to use termite control in order to fight them with a service that truly understands them.
Let us Call you
Guy that came out for my termite problem was very knowledgeable, explained everything thoroughly and did a great job. Would definitely recommend them to others for termite control in the Mesa area.-Terry J. in Mesa, AZ
5 star workmanship and customer service. I haven’t had termites in years since first calling Varsity for my termite inspection and treatment. Their termite prevention package has made my life worry free!-Elizabeth L. in Gilbert, AZ
Tony called me within 5 minutes of my hitting the submit button for a scorpion quote. I never heard from the other two competitors. The job was done the next day and he even directed me to the $100 discount coupon. The scorpions are gone and my kids are safe again. I will be calling Varsity again and telling my friends about them.-Britney R. in Chandler, AZ
Great experience.-Monica S. in Mesa, AZ
I wanted a family owned business and got one, I was very pleased everyone was so pleasant and friendly. I plan on signing up for more service.-Theresa C. in Mesa, AZ
Tony was great and worked with my hectic schedule. So far I haven’t seen any creepy crawlers!-Kayla D. in Queen Creek, AZ
Varsity responded quickly and took care of the problem. I now have them set up to come once a month at a reasonable price. There were lots of dead bugs, including scorpions, which showed me that their treatments are very effective.-Jodi M. in Gilbert, AZ
Arrived on time, high quality, quick, and efficient work done by them. Very customer friendly, professional, and very honest and informative. Price was great. I would recommend them to anyone.-Sarah R. in Apache Junction, AZ
Called back within minutes of my request , set up an inspection asap, price was fair, showed up right on time did the work even having to move some shelving I failed to have ready, also moved them back when done. Work was done as said and cleaned up everything when done, the individual doing the work was prompt, professional and very courteous. I highly recommend Varsity and as I am entering into flipping houses they will be the Pest Control people on my team.-ST. in Apache Junction, AZ
He is very straight forward, very honest, very business like. He really tries to make the customer happy.-Frank B.
I wanted to let you know that yesterday’s service with Robert and Jared was better than expected! They were obviously well-trained and knew their jobs very well. The work was quick, efficient and thorough with virtually no disruption to my day. Your inspection of my property and their treatment was top notch and I look forward to referring Varsity to all who are looking for professional and trustworthy service.-Judy R.