May 16, 2018
While Maine is somewhat famous for their "black fly season" mosquitoes can (and do) become a major issue as temperatures warm up in spring. And, in today's world, mosquito bites are not only uncomfortable, they can be dangerous. At best, these bites produce itchy, red, bumps that can plague us for weeks. At worse, a mosquito bite can transmit diseases such as West Nile, dengue, chikungunya, yellow fever, malaria, and several forms of encephalitis.
Why Mosquitoes Increase As Temperatures Rise
All insects are cold-blooded creatures. This means that their bodies stay the same temperature as the air around them. When temperatures drop too low, they either slow down, stop, or die. Many mosquitoes die off when temperatures drop low enough. But some find shelter and go dormant for the winter. And most species of mosquito survive by laying winter-hardy eggs which hatch when the weather gets warm enough.
Factors That Contribute To More Mosquitoes On Your Property
Items that hold water. It only takes a half cup of water for mosquitoes to breed in.
Clogged gutters. Gutters that are clogged or broken also provide breeding sites.
Leaky spigots or hoses. Leaks can cause water to pool on the ground, which provides breeding sites and provides water sources for other pests.
Shaded moist areas. Mosquitoes hide in shady spots during the hot hours of the day.
Air stagnation. The more of a breeze you have, the more flying insects are kept away. Still air promotes more mosquito activity.
Helpful Steps To Reduce Mosquito Dangers
Remove toys, tarps, bird baths, or anything else that traps rainwater to reduce breeding sites for mosquitoes.
Control mosquitoes around your home by removing or reducing mosquito hiding areas by trimming back bushes and other vegetation. This will help dry things out and reduce shade.
Apply insect repellent. Use a product that has DEET or, if you want to go a more natural route, something with lemon eucalyptus. If you do not want to apply these directly to your skin, it is helpful to at least apply these repellents to clothing.
The Best Step To Reduce Mosquito Dangers
By far, the most effective course of action that will reduce mosquitoes is investing in mosquito control and abatement service. While it is not possible to fully eliminate mosquito activity on your property, it is possible to greatly reduce mosquito populations by eliminating potential breeding sites and providing safe, effective treatment to areas where mosquitoes are known to hide.
To learn more, or to schedule service, reach out to Pine State Pest Solutions Today. We are the best pest control expert in Maine and Portland area. Don't wait for winter to get relief from mosquitoes, take action today.