Knowing how to pass the ACCUPLACER test can be important for high school or college students. The exam is used to ensure correct placement within the educational institution. It assesses the knowledge level of students in a number of areas: reading comprehension, sentence skills, arithmetic, elementary algebra, college-level mathematics, and even writing. There are a total of 90 questions on the test. The administration of the ACCUPLACER test is determined independently by each school, so there are no standard fees, time limits, and disability allowances. To take the ACCUPLACER test, see your school’s guidance or advisory counselor.
The ACCUPLACER test is used by more than 1,300 American educational institutions including high schools, colleges, universities, as well as adult education courses and GED programs. It was developed and is administered by the College Board. The ACCUPLACER test will assess your level of knowledge in reading, writing, and math. This test does not have a pass/fail grade. Your scores will help your potential school determine the best course levels for your particular educational needs. Schools also use the ACCUPLACER test scores to determine overall student body weaknesses and to adapt their curriculum to address these particular issues.
The ACCUPLACER test is a comprehensive, web-based assessment tool used to determine your skills in reading, writing and math. It is untimed, but most students complete it in less than 90 minutes. All questions must be answered, and you cannot go back to a previous question once you have answered it. Test scores are available as soon as you have completed the exam. The test is adaptive, which means the questions get more difficult as you give more right answers. It also means for every wrong answer, the questions get easier.
How to Pass the ACCUPLACER Exam
Mometrix can help you study and strengthen your skills in math, reading and writing. Visit Mometrix.com where you can find many different tools to help you practice for your ACCUPLACER test. These tools include an ACCUPLACER study guide, an ACCUPLACER practice test, and ACCUPLACER flashcards. You can also visit the Mometrix Academy for free ACCUPLACER video tutorials.
The ACCUPLACER test is multiple-choice, except for the WritePlacer written essay section. Below is an outline of the six sections of the ACCUPLACER test and Mometrix can help you study for each of these sections so you are better prepared on test day.
The Arithmetic section has 17 questions to test your skill in high-school level basic operations (addition, subtraction, multiplication and division) and problem-solving using whole numbers, fractions and decimals. You will also be tested on estimating, percentages, measurement and geometry.
The College-Level Math portion of the test has 20 questions that will test you on problem-solving at a college level. You will answer questions on algebraic expressions, factoring, expanding polynomials, and manipulating roots and exponents. You will also be solving linear and quadratic equations and inequalities. Geometry questions will test you on plane geometry, straight lines, conics, and graphs using algebra. Your trigonometry skills will also be tested, including polynomials, as well as algebraic, exponential, and logarithmic and trigonometric functions.
The Elementary Algebra test section has 12 questions and will also test your ability to perform algebraic operations and to problem solve but at an elementary level. During this test, you will perform operations with integers and rational numbers, as well as basic adding subtracting, multiplying and dividing of algebraic expressions.
The Reading Comprehension section has 20 questions and will test you on your ability to understand the meaning of a written passage. You will answer questions pertaining to a given paragraph. The questions will include identifying the paragraph’s main idea and supportive information.
The Sentence Skills section is made up of 20 questions as well and will test you on sentence structure and grammar. For example, you will be given four versions of a sentence and you will be asked to choose the version that uses proper sentence structure and grammar.
The Written Essay portion of the ACCUPLACER test is called the WritePlacer test. This portion of the test is non-adaptive. You will provide a writing sample and the computer will use an automated assessment tool to grade your essay. You will be tested on your ability to use critical thinking to create a passage with purpose and focus, to organize and structure a clear message, and to use proper mechanical conventions.
ESL (English as a Second Language)
For students whose first language is not English, the ACCUPLACER test offers an ESL (English as a Second Language) section so your potential educational institution can evaluate your level of English skill and understanding. Your ESL test results can then allow the school to set you on a path to help you strengthen any weak areas in your English language comprehension.
If necessary, you can be tested on your English language usage, listening and reading skills, and your understanding of sentence meaning. For non-native English speakers, there are four ESL (English as a Second Language) tests. Each test is comprised of 20 questions.
- The Language Usage test measures your ability to use proper English grammar.
- The Listening test will offer different conversations in different venues and situations with a varying number of people for you to show your ability to understand spoken English.
- The Reading Skills portion will test you on your ability to read and understand short passages written in English.
- The Sentence Meaning section will ask you to show your understanding of the meaning of several individual English language sentences.
The College Board provides information on the ACCUPLACER test and is a helpful study resource for students interested in taking the ACCUPLACER test. There is also a free web-based APP that will quiz you using questions similar to those you will find on the test.
Mometrix will help you study to pass the ACCUPLACER test using Mometrix ACCUPLACER study guide, ACCUPLACER practice test, ACCUPLACER flashcards and ACCUPLACER video tutorials will help you study for your ACCUPLACER test and get you closer to your educational goals.