Innovative smoking technology offers 50 percent wood savings
Protecting resources is not only beneficial for the environment and future generations, but already has a direct impact on consumers today through price. This also applies, or particularly applies, to the food sector. According to the latest survey by the trade journal “Fleischwirtschaft”, 68 percent of consumers would like to see agricultural resources used sparingly. This includes the consumption of wood for smoking food such as meat, fish or cheese. However, sustainable management of global timber resources is also called for by the United Nations’ Agenda 2030 for Sustainable Development, the UN Convention on Forests and the EU Forest Strategy.
Remnants of wood are used for CleanSmoke
Protecting resources with CleanSmoke: Large quantities of wood can be saved compared to conventional smoking processes – namely around 50 percent. CleanSmoke smokes with so-called purified primary smoke condensates, which are produced from remnants of wood from the wood processing industry. These are usually sawdust or crown and branch wood from sawmills and furniture production.
According to calculations by the German Institute of Food Technology (DIL), wood consumption in Germany alone could be reduced by around 3,400 tonnes per year through the use of CleanSmoke. According to DIL, conventional smoking (friction or smouldering smoke) requires approx. 3.75 kg of wood per ton of smoked meat. In contrast, the primary smoke product for CleanSmoke could be produced from 1.9 kg of wood.
Overall, the consumption of wood for conventional smoking is almost twice the amo tonnes of residual wood for the production of primary smoke condensates is offset by around 6.800 tonnes of wood for smouldering and friction smoking. According to the DIL Life Cycle Assessment, the potential wood savings through the use of CleanSmoke amounts to around 3,400 tonnes. That would be enough to build more than 100 timber houses. Not least for this reason, the CleanSmoke Coalition (CSC) demands that products smoked with CleanSmoke also be labelled as resource-saving.
Find more information here.