The locavore movement is about eating locally grown food. Aside from better tasting food, being a locavore offers myriad ways to improve your brain health …
The average carrot travels 1,838 miles to get to your dinner plate.
Pretty crazy, huh?
A lot of people realize that our current mass produced food system is not healthy for the planet — or for people.
This has led to the “locavore movement” which promotes eating locally grown food as much as possible.
The widely accepted locavore definition is eating food grown within 100 miles.
Sometimes you’ll hear it called the “100 mile diet.”
Here in the US, a broader definition of locavore includes food grown anywhere in your state. (1)
Eating locally grown food is healthier for your body.
It’s better for your brain in some surprising ways, as well.
Here are nine reasons eating locally grown food is a smart idea for your brain and mental well-being.
1. Local produce provides your brain with more nutrition.
Your brain is the most complex structure on the planet.
It uses a disproportionate amount of energy, oxygen, water, and nutrients.
It needs a lot of nutrients to function at its best — vitamins, minerals, and phytochemicals.
Locally grown food contains more nutrition than food found at your supermarket.
The moment a fruit or vegetable is picked, whether conventionally grown or organic, it starts to lose its nutritional value.
On average, produce travels 1,500 miles from harvest to plate and a lot of nutrition is lost along the way. (2)
By the time you get the average bunch of broccoli home, it’s lost 80% of its nutrients.
Spinach loses almost half its nutrition after just eight days. (3)
Most commercial fruit and some vegetables are intentionally picked unripe.
Then they’re shipped, stored and artificially ripened in warehouses with ethylene gas before being sent to your local supermarket.
Ethylene is a naturally occurring gas that fruits and vegetables produce themselves during ripening.
But the ethylene used to artificially ripen produce is a man-made version that’s classified as a class 3 carcinogen. (6)
2. Locally raised animals are a better source of brain-essential omega-3 fats.
Omega-3 essential fatty acids are essential for good health.
They’re also critical for your brain.
But omega-3 fats are largely missing from the modern diet and deficiency is rampant. (8)
If you’re lucky enough to live near water, you may be able to find locally caught seafood.
Wild caught fish (especially cold water varieties) is an excellent source of omega-3.
Shockingly, some seafood you’ll find at your supermarket travels 8,000 miles to China and back for processing. (10)
You don’t want your seafood to be better traveled than you are.
3. Eating locally grown food gives your brain a greater variety of nutrients.
Over 50,000 species of edible plants have been identified, yet today a paltry 15 species provide 90% of the world’s food supply. (11)
Food diversity is important for health since every food item brings its own unique set phytonutrients to the table.
Yet just four vegetables — iceberg lettuce, potatoes, onions, and tomatoes — make up half the vegetables we eat. (12)
So following the lead of locavores can greatly expand your culinary horizons and the nutritional power of your diet.
Small local farmers often grow specialty items that aren’t widely known or don’t ship well.
When you buy local produce from your farmer’s market or CSA (Community Support Agriculture), you’ll find produce you’ve never seen before, heirloom varieties of your favorite vegetables, local honey, artisan breads and cheeses, and more.
For example, my local farmer’s market in Tucson carries cow peas, tepary beans, mesquite bean flour, prickly pear pads and fruit, saguaro cactus syrup, peacock (!) eggs, Navajo tea, and more pepper varieties than I knew existed.
Finding locally grown food here has been easy, so I was surprised to learn that Arizona is the 3rd worst state for being a locavore. (13)
So chances are very good that you’ll have an easy time finding local produce.
4. Locally grown food contains fewer toxins.
Farms that produce food for local markets are more likely to use organic and natural methods. (14)
And that’s good news for your brain.
The brain is especially sensitive to pesticides, many of which are known neurotoxins.
Even a low level of organophosphate exposure can cause confusion, difficulty concentrating, headache, dizziness, nausea, and vomiting.
5. Wild foods are nutritional powerhouses.
Wild foods contain more nutrients than the best organic produce money can buy.
Over the past 12,000 years we’ve bred plants to taste better, to be more productive, and to be easier to harvest, store, and transport.
But nutrition has not been a consideration.
Native plants contain significantly more nutrients than comparable domesticated plants.
According to Jo Robinson, author of Eating on the Wild Side, wild tomatoes contain 15 times more lycopene than supermarket tomatoes.
And wild apples in Nepal contain 100 times more phytonutrients than apple varieties we normally eat.
Depending on where you live, you might find healthy wild plants like dandelion greens, fiddleheads, purslane, nettles, wild onions, or chickweed — all which grow like weeds.
Besides extra nutrition, foraging for wild foods offers other bonuses for your brain.
Being outdoors and getting exercise is good for your brain … and it’s fun!
See reason #9 to learn why.
WARNING: Do NOT eat wild plants if you aren’t 100% certain of their identity.
Some plants that look similar to edible plants can be toxic.
Make sure you get a good identification book or, better yet, take a local food foraging class with an expert.
6. Enjoying delicious locally grown food can make you happy.
Being a locavore isn’t just about health.
A good reason to eat local produce is because it just tastes better.
An important principle of the locavore movement is enhancing enjoyment of food by eating the most delicious food available.
Anyone who has eaten a sweet, ripe, juicy peach straight off the tree can attest that it leaves store-bought peaches in the dust.
Commercial tomatoes which are almost always picked unripe can’t compare to a tomato from your garden.
Our hectic modern lifestyle has largely taken the pleasure out of eating.
Either we’re scarfing down fast food, nuking prepackaged meals, or feeling guilty about what we’ve eaten.
But enjoyment should be an important part of the eating experience.
The French are known for taking pleasure from their food.
At least part of the answer is that they savor and truly enjoy their food.
7. Shopping for local foods is “neurobic” exercise for your brain.
Until recently, acquiring food was humans’ main activity.
Our ancestors had to use their brains to find and remember the best places to hunt, fish, and forage.
They had to forecast the weather and learn the optimal times to plant and harvest crops.
They had to figure out how to store extra food for the lean times.
The modern supermarket with canned, prepackaged, and frozen foods has separated our senses from most food acquisition.
Dr. Lawrence Katz, an internationally recognized neurobiologist, coined the phrase “neurobics” to describe brain exercises that enhance brain performance by using all five senses in new and novel ways.
He devoted an entire chapter on food shopping “neurobically” in his groundbreaking book Keep Your Brain Alive: 83 Neurobic Exercises to Help Prevent Memory Loss and Increase Mental Fitness.
He recommends shopping from farmer’s markets where you can use all of your senses to look, touch, sniff, and taste the local produce.
He encourages talking with the farmers as a social activity that builds neural connections.
Getting to know the people who actually grow your food helps build stronger communities as well.
8. Finding local food is a brain-boosting adventure.
Buying locally grown food from a farm or farmer’s market is a completely different experience than shopping at a chain grocery store.
And that is a great thing for your brain!
Routines simplify life and limit brain-draining decision making.
But routines are deadly to the brain since they provide no mental stimulation.
Your brain thrives on activities that are “complex and novel.” (18)
Going to the same stores and buying the same products is brain-dead easy. But it’s not very adventurous or mentally stimulating.
Here are some ways to acquire locally grown food that are guaranteed to shake up your routine.
- Shop at farmer’s markets.
- Visit local farms.
- Visit “pick your own” farms.
- Join a food co-op or CSA.
- Grow your own food.
- Forage for wild plants.
- Go fishing.
- Learn to prepare foods you’ve never had before.
9. Growing your own food can improve your memory, mood, and reduce your risk of dementia.
One of the easiest ways to join the locavore movement is to grow your own food.
Gardening is one of the best overall physical exercises. (19)
And exercise is one of the most important things you can do to keep your brain working as it should. It’s even more important than thinking! (20)
Compared with indoor exercise, exercising outdoors increases vitality, enthusiasm, pleasure, and self-esteem while lowering tension, depression, and fatigue. (21)
Memory performance and attention span improves by 20% after spending an hour outside with nature. (22)
While you are gardening, you can replenish your much needed stores of vitamin D.
Eager to get started?
Here are some of my favorite places for learning more about the locavore movement and where to find locally grown food.
Eat Local Grown, Local Harvest and Eat Well Guide are excellent resources where you can find farms, farmer’s markets, CSAs, artisan foods, and even locavore restaurants in your area.
If you’d like to start growing your own food but aren’t sure what you can plant in your area or when, TheVegetableGarden.com has planting schedules for the entire US.
If you’d love to grow your own food but have no space, there’s a system for growing produce in reusable grocery store bags.
Some gardeners’ results have been amazing!
Learn how to do this step-by-step in this post I wrote for EatLocalGrown.com — The Easiest Way Ever to Grow Your Own Food – Garden Not Required.
If you want to learn more about the background and benefits of the locavore movement and how to put it into practice, here are my three favorite books on the topic:
This bestseller put the locavore movement on the map.
In Defense of Food: An Eater’s Manifesto by Michael Pollan
Another groundbreaking book by Pollan that championed the idea that organic and local food can be far more nutritious than commercially produced food.
Plenty: Eating Locally on the 100-Mile Diet by Alisa Smith and J.B. Mackinnon
This Canadian couple ate exclusively local for one year. Their bestselling book chronicles how they did it and how it changed their relationship with food.
(This book was originally published under the title The 100-Mile Diet: A Year of Local Eating.)
Editors note: Click here to Find a Local Farmer
FREE BOOK DOWNLOAD (Limited Offer)
Do You Know Your Body’s Most Important Weight Loss Secret?
By J. Davis III
Tags: HEALING | HEALTHY FATS | REMEDIES
Recently, Doctor of Naturopathy, weight-loss expert and best-selling Amazon author Liz Swann Miller, creator of the Red Smoothie Detox Factor, revealed 2 of the secrets to easy, steady weight loss. Secrets the big food corporations do their best to hide from us.
Secret #1: Enjoy real food. Don’t fall for the lie that you have to deprive yourself to lose weight.
Secret #2: stop eating out. You will automatically eat less without even noticing.
Then start detoxing your body with tasty, nourishing smoothies that are just as easy on your wallet as they are easy to make.
Because a single day of enjoying Liz’ smoothies demonstrated the radical power of her superfood-packed red smoothies to make me feel incredibly good.
Now prepare yourself for one of the biggest weight loss secrets there is. A secret that, when you use it properly, can transform your body and your health.
You probably know most of us eat too much processed food. What you may not know is that it’s full of toxic chemicals and substandard, dirt-cheap ingredients designed to make you eat more…and force you to gain weight.
Here’s how it works...
“That stuff is just a lot of calories your body can’t use,” Liz told me, “Some are poison. And all these foods are stripped of the anti-oxidants and anti-inflammatories that help your body detox. The result? Your body expends huge amounts of calories to eliminate some toxins—the rest, it stores in your fat to protect you. This is why most people are hungry all the time. They’re not getting energy they need.”
“So… what’s going on with me? Why am I losing weight but not going hungry?”
Liz paused, then dropped the bombshell.
Your body is designed to burn fat. You just have to let it.
“What? I thought we were designed to store fat?!?” We were Skyping and I was practically shouting. Then I heard Liz say…
What good is a fat reserve if you can’t burn it?
Liz continued: “You’re drinking smoothies packed with phytonutrients, anti-oxidants and anti-inflammatories that pull toxins out of you like a tractor beam. Allowing your body to burn those toxin-filled fat stores… and releasing tremendous amounts of stored energy.”
So that’s why I’m losing weight without going hungry.
Watch Liz’ free presentation. It’s packed with revolutionary weight loss information—information that works. Because it’s based on how nature works.
Click the button below only if you want to wear smaller clothes, breathe easier, move more freely and just plain feel better.
Because when you click here to watch Liz’ life-changing presentation, you’ll learn
- Which calories help you lose weight…and which ones help you gain it…
- The “diet” foods…some of them vegetables…that lead to weight gain and diabetes…
- The “low-fat” foods that can dramatically increase your risk of cancer.
- And the superfoods that rescue your body from this assault by detoxing you…
Revitalizing your metabolism so you can
Shed pounds as well as toxins, renew your body and reset your internal clock by up to 7 years.
Because until now, the Red Smoothie Detox Factor has been available only to Liz’ private clients. But now that she’s perfected it to work for almost everyone, almost every time, Liz is sharing it with rest of us so we can feel better and look better.
Get Red Smoothie Detox Factor before the price goes back up.
Because Liz offers a ridiculously good guarantee. You have 60 days to decide you love the Red Smoothie Detox Factor. If you don’t love it—for any reason, or even no reason at all —Liz will refund your money. 100%. No questions asked.
Natural Diabetes Treatment Works Better Than Prescription Drugs *PROOF*
By Richard Neal
Tags: HEALING | REMEDIES | PREVENTION
According the latest statistics, diagnosed and undiagnosed diabetes in the United States is reaching epidemic levels:
Total: 29.1 million people or 9.3% of the population have diabetes.
Diagnosed: 21.0 million people.
Undiagnosed: 8.1 million people (27.8% of people with diabetes are undiagnosed).
Source: CDC Website
Drugs Treat Symptoms, Not Disease
Pharmaceutical companies have been trying to shut these doctors down simply for revealing the truth about diabetes.
Scientific studies have proven that type 2 diabetes can be reversed naturally - but this information has been hidden and suppressed for decades.
Diabetics can normalize blood sugar, and be taken off all medication and insulin injections completely naturally.
Doctors at the International Council for Truth in Medicine are revealing the truth about diabetes in a shocking new online presentation.
In 3 Weeks, 71% Type 2 Diabetics Were Taken off ALL Medication
96% of patients were able to stop all insulin injections and 81% achieved complete relief of painful neuropathy.
Groundbreaking research published by the University of Kentucky, University of California and Newscastle University prove that type 2 diabetes CAN be reversed.
Blood sugar normalizes... neuropathy pain goes away...
Doctors at the International Council for Truth in Medicine have perfected these techniques and helped tens of thousands of their patients end the need for medication and insulin injections 100% naturally.
You don't have to suffer anymore, Learn the truth about your diabetes and stop this disease dead in its tracks right now.
Groundbreaking New Research
Doctors at the International Council for Truth in Medicine are revealing the truth about diabetes that has been suppressed for over 21 years.
Last year they helped over 17,542 type 2 diabetics end the need for prescription drugs, insulin injections and blood sugar monitoring.
This year they're on track to help over 30,000.
In just a few weeks, 96% of their patients are able to stop ALL diabetes medication and insulin injections.
No more neuropathy pain, pricking your finger, or the need for expensive medication.
Learn about this groundbreaking new research here:
#1 muscle that eliminates joint and back pain, anxiety and looking fat
By J. Davis III
Tags: HEALING | PREVENTION
I bet you can’t guess which muscle in your body is the #1 muscle that eliminates joint and back pain, anxiety and looking fat.
This “hidden survival muscle” in your body will boost your energy levels, immune system, sexual function, strength and athletic performance when unlocked.
If this “hidden” most powerful primal muscle is healthy, we are healthy.
d) Hip Flexors
Take the quiz above and see if you got the correct answer!
P.S. Make sure you check out the next page to get to know the 10 simple moves that will bring vitality back into your life!
==> Click here to discover which “hidden survival muscle” will help you boost your energy levels, immune system, sexual function, strength and athletic performance permanently!
More Health Resources:
- "Red" Smoothie Helps Alabama Girl Shed 80lbs!
- Thе Fastest Wау Tо Lose Weight In 4 Weeks
- #1 muscle that eliminates joint and back pain, anxiety and looking fat
- Your Birth Date + Name - Free Report
- The "Instant Switch" Law Of Attraction
- The 3 reasons you should NEVER eat wheat -- Yes, even "whole wheat"
- [PROOF] Reverse Diabetes with a “Pancreas Jumpstart”
- Why Some People LOOK Fat that Aren't
- Diabetes Destroyer System
- His wife REFUSED to let them amputate his legs!
- Unlock Your Hip Flexors
- Doctors Reversed Diabetes in Three Weeks