Wood may seem more at home in log cabins than modern architecture, but a specially treated type of timber could be tomorrow’s trendy building material.
Today, scientists report a new kind of transparent wood that not only transmits light, but also absorbs and releases heat, potentially saving on energy costs. The material can bear heavy loads and is biodegradable, opening the door for its eventual use in eco-friendly homes and other buildings.
The researchers will present their results today at the American Chemical Society (ACS) Spring 2019 National Meeting & Exposition. ACS, the world’s largest scientific society, is holding the meeting here through Thursday. It features nearly 13,000 presentations on a wide range of science topics.
“Back in 2016, we showed that transparent wood has excellent thermal-insulating properties compared with glass, combined with high optical transmittance,” says Céline Montanari, a Ph.D. student who is presenting the research at the meeting. “In this work, we tried to reduce the building energy consumption even more by incorporating a material that can absorb, store and release heat.”
As economic development progresses worldwide, energy consumption has soared. Much of this energy is used to light, heat and cool homes, offices and other buildings. Glass windows can transmit light, helping to brighten and heat homes, but they don’t store energy for use when the sun goes down.
Three years ago, lead investigator Lars Berglund, Ph.D., and colleagues at KTH Royal Institute of Technology in Stockholm, Sweden, reported an optically transparent wood in the ACS journal Biomacromolecules. The researchers made the material by removing a light-absorbing component called lignin from the cell walls of balsa wood. To reduce light scattering, they incorporated acrylic into the porous wood scaffold. The team could see through the material, yet it was hazy enough to provide privacy if used as a major building material. The transparent wood also had favorable mechanical properties, enabling it to bear heavy loads.
Building on this work, Montanari and Berglund added a polymer called polyethylene glycol (PEG) to the de-lignified wood. “We chose PEG because of its ability to store heat, but also because of its high affinity for wood,” Montanari says. “In Stockholm, there’s a really old ship called Vasa, and the scientists used PEG to stabilize the wood. So we knew that PEG can go really deep into the wood cells.”
Known as a “phase-change material,” PEG is a solid that melts at a temperature of 80 F, storing energy in the process. The melting temperature can be adjusted by using different types of PEGs. “During a sunny day, the material will absorb heat before it reaches the indoor space, and the indoors will be cooler than outside,” Montanari explains. “And at night, the reverse occurs –– the PEG becomes solid and releases heat indoors so that you can maintain a constant temperature in the house.”
The team encapsulated PEG within the de-lignified wood scaffold, which prevented leakage of the polymer during phase transitions. They also incorporated acrylic into the material to protect it from humidity. Like their earlier version, the modified wood was transparent, though slightly hazy, and strong, but had the added bonus of storing heat.
The researchers point out that the transparent wood has the potential to be more environmentally friendly than other building materials such as plastic, concrete and glass. In addition to its thermal-storage capabilities, the transparent wood could be easier to dispose of after it has served its purpose. “The PEG and wood are both bio-based and biodegradable,” Berglund notes. “The only part that is not biodegradable is the acrylic, but this could be replaced by another bio-based polymer.”
Now, the focus turns to scaling up the production process to be industrially feasible. The researchers estimate that transparent wood could be available for niche applications in interior design in as little as five years. They are also trying to increase the storage capacity of the material to make it even more energy-efficient.
Learn more: Transparent wood can store and release heat
The Latest on: Transparent wood
via Google News
The Latest on: Transparent wood
- Transparent wood: the building material of the future?on November 27, 2019 at 9:12 am
This wood) is weather-proof, more fire resistant, three to five times stronger, and transparent," Boitouzet said. The optical properties of the polymer are matched to that of the wood so that light ...
- Transparent Wood: The Building Material of the Future?on November 26, 2019 at 10:07 pm
‘(This wood) is weather-proof, more fire resistant, three to five times stronger, and transparent,’ Boitouzet said. The optical properties of the polymer are matched to that of the wood so that light ...
- transparent woodon November 1, 2019 at 5:00 pm
We’ve talked about transparent wood before. However, the process can be difficult to get just right. [NileRed] recently posted a video with very detailed instructions on how he’s doing it. Aside from ...
- Could Transparent Wood Become The Way We Build And Heat Our Homes?on April 23, 2019 at 6:34 am
Though researchers at the KTH Royal Institute of Technology in Stockholm have developed a way to chemically treat wood so that it not only becomes opaque—even completely transparent at times—but also ...
- This Transparent Wood Could Be an Energy-Saver in Green Buildingson April 18, 2019 at 5:00 pm
There’s a reason humans have been building homes from wood for 10,000 years. It’s an excellent building material—durable, renewable, good at insulating. But since it’s opaque, we’re still in the habit ...
- Transparent wood can store and release heaton April 3, 2019 at 3:50 am
Wood may seem more at home in log cabins than modern architecture, but a specially treated type of timber could be tomorrow's trendy building material. Today, scientists report a new kind of ...
- Transparent Wood That Stores and Releases Heat Created by Scientistson April 3, 2019 at 3:38 am
Scientists have created transparent wood that can absorb and release heat. This wood could one day be used in the construction industry to make eco-friendly buildings, researchers presenting their ...
- Scientists invent 'transparent wood' in search for eco-friendly building materialon April 3, 2019 at 2:05 am
In an era of glass and steel construction, wood may seem old-school. But now researchers say they have given timber a makeover to produce a material that is not only sturdy, but also transparent and ...
- New research brings transparent wood closer to real-world applicationon March 28, 2019 at 11:27 am
COLLEGE PARK, MD. - New developments have been made in the study of transparent wood, which first made waves in March 2016 when Swedish researchers at KTH Royal Institute of Technology discovered that ...
via Bing News