What Happened When Schools Replaced Detention with Meditation?
Traditionally, when a kid acts out at school, the teacher gives them detention or suspension.
This means writing many lines or staring at the classroom walls for hours on end as punishment for misbehaving.
But, the question is can this type of punishment really improve students’ behavior? And, are kids really thinking about their mistakes while writing hundreds of lines in their notebooks?
Well, scientists say no. Roger Dickinson explains that those who have been expelled or suspended have 50% higher risk of dropping out of school. Also, the same kids have five times more chances of committing a crime.
The Introduction of Yoga and Meditation Instead of Detention
This program is part of many schools now. The idea is creating a warm, cozy environment where misbehaving students can calm their mind, reflect their deeds, gather their thoughts, and focus on improving their behavior.
The Robert W. Coleman Elementary School in Baltimore is one of the schools which started using this program. Their spokesperson reported that there hadn’t been a single suspension since the introduction of the program. What’s more, the students have so much better attitude now.
The space where students practiced yoga and meditation is called the Mindfulness Room. As soon as the program was introduced, there was a decrease in suspensions and absentee days. On the other hand, the attendance rates at school increased.
The U.S. Department of Education reports that as soon as the Mindfulness Room was introduced to schools, suspensions have reduced to incredible 20%. And, this is only for two years.
A lot of schools offer mediation, yoga, and guided breathing exercises to their students. Thanks to them, kids can calm their mind and re-center themselves. Also, kids are encouraged to talk through the behaviors that led them to be in the Mindfulness Room.
Mindfulness Room Has Even More Advantages
Erikson Institute reports that the program is especially beneficial for kids from minority, low-income households regarding academic achievement.
The study included 2,000 students. The results showed that mindful activities increased the teaching time within the classroom. What’s more, teachers say students were better at regaining their focus. Even some upset students calmed down more quickly.
They are even thought to be co-teachers and run the yoga sessions by themselves.
However, the goal is not using these mindful activities only in schools. Scientists hope these activities will help kids become healthy adults.
Some of them even take that mindfulness back home. Some parents say their kids teach them how to breathe after having a stressful day.