As teachers, it is important that we encourage students to become voters. Even more importantly, we shouldencourage them to become well-informed and conscientious citizens. With this belief, PLEA has substantially revised Our Government, Our Election to better engage students in government, politics, and the electoral process in a Saskatchewan-specific context.
This second edition of Our Government, Our Election helps teach about government, politics, and the law-making process, regardless if it is an election year. Designed with Saskatchewan’s high school Social Studies in mind, its lessons and materials include necessary background information, overheads, and student handouts. Answer keys are provided, but only when appropriate.
Our Government, Our Election is divided into three sections, each with a specific focus.
SECTION ONE: THE PURPOSE OF GOVERNMENT
Section One is designed for studying the foundational purpose of government in society. These lessons enable consideration of:
SECTION TWO: THE MECHANICS OF GOVERNMENT
Section Two considers how laws are made and how governments can be held to account. These lessons enable consideration of:
SECTION THREE: THE ELECTION OF GOVERNMENT
Section Three considers how we elect our governments. The first three lessons can be taught inside or outside election periods, while the last three lessons are more brief in nature and meant to be taught concurrently with the events of a provincial election. These lessons enable consideration of:
PLEA believes teachers are the professionals best-suited to facilitate student learning. Thus, these materials are not meant to be prescriptive nor holistic. Rather, they are suggestions for how to approach these topics. Because there are many other excellent resources on governance and elections, inclusion of multiple resources is encouraged.
Your feedback on this or any other learning resource from PLEA is always appreciated. As the professionals most closely connected to Saskatchewan’s students, teachers’ insights will only help improve further publications. Drop us a line at email@example.com.
The full resource in pdf.