We’re fortunate enough to have access to the most powerful computers to date, but what would you do if you lost everything on your computer? Crashes happen more often than you think, data recovery can cost you hundreds of dollars, and recovering everything you’ve stored on your computer is not guaranteed. We understand, life gets hectic and it’s easy to forget to back up your files. Join us on March 31st, as we celebrate World Backup Day.
World Backup Day Media Coverage
World Backup Day Activities
Copy your files to an external hard drive
Set aside 15 minutes to an hour to back up all of the existing files on your desktop, laptop or pc. Simply purchase a hard drive of your liking - we recommend 1TB drives or more - and copy your files to the drive.
Play in the clouds
Can't buy a hard drive in time? No worries! There are plenty of companies that specialize in storing your documents online. Do your research and figure out which service works best for you. We recommend the Google Cloud, WMware Storage or Barracuda Cloud Storage, but they are all great!
Back that thing up party
Invite all the employees on your team to back up their files with one of the methods above. This will create a safer culture among your staff and prevent any projects from slipping through the crack. The last thing you need is a client asking for a file that was wrongfully discarded.
Why We Love World Backup Day
Being prepared is half the battle
Wake up and smell the coffee. Crashes happen more often than not. Are you prepared to lose that project you have been working on all semester? What about those important documents you stored to help you get ready for tax season? Are they easily replaceable? We advise you to make copies if you haven't done so yet.
Peace of mind
As mentioned above, if your files are irreplaceable then we highly encourage you to back up your documents. Keep in mind that it is better to be safe, than be sorry. Duplicate your files on to as many storage devices as you like to make sure that you are clear from accidents that may occur.
An archive to dig through
Just like opening an old, untouched photo album, it can often be a trip down nostalgia lane to dig into old folders on long-forgotten hard drives.