CONSTRUCTION OF STEEL CUPBOARD
The project topic was constriction of steel cupboard which the primary aim was to enable students know how cupboard can be constructed using steel and the factors to be considered while choosing a particular material for construction.
The construction was carried out by drawing and sketching of the steel cupboard on a drawing paper or tracing paper with the aid of drawing board, T square, set-square, pencil to bring out the clear view of the cupboard. This was followed by the making out process on the metal sheet to achieve precision.
After the making out process, cutting of the material (mild steel) was followed by the size reduce dimensions as measured and marked out. The cutting was carried out by the use of hammer and guill share while the square pipes were act using hard saw.
After the cutting process, the material (mild steel) was bent and folded. This was done to achieve smooth and easy handling of the cupboard without sustaining injury. This was followed by joining of the various component together. This was achieved by electric arc welding. This type of welding was necessary to ascertain strongness and durability of the modern steel cupboard.
Finally, the rollers were also welded to the cupboard and spraying was done by using spraying machine and pant to bring out the retire of the steel cupboard produced.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1.1 Carbon Steel as Construction Material
1.2 Hydrogen Embitterment of Steel
1.3 Objective of the Project
2.0 Literature Review
2.1 Wooden Cupboard
2.2 Metal Cupboard
2.3 Description of Modern Steel Cupboard
2.4 Types of Steel
2.4.1 Low Carbon Steel
2.4.2 Medium Carbon Steel
2.4.3 High Carbon Steel
2.4.4 Classification of Steel
2.4.5 Carbon and Carbon Manganese
2.4.6 High Strength Low-Alloy Steels
2.4.7 Engineering Quenched and Temper Steel
2.4.8 Tool Steel
2.5.0 Transformation Stainless Steel
2.5.1 Stainless Steel
2.5.2 Ferritic Stainless Steel
2.5.3 Austenitic Stainless Steel
2.6 Heat Treatment of Steel
2.7 Properties of Steel
2.7.2 Chemical Resistance
2.8 Aduantacies of Steel
2.9 Steel Production
An office cupboard is a component designed and constructed with the aim of packing in books, stationeries of other office equipment after daily or weekly usage. This construction can be carried out by using different kinds of engineering materials like wood, polymer composite and metal.
The choice of material to be used for a particular construction depends on the quality and characteristics required in a finished components.
However, this project was constructed with a metal precisely mild steel. The mild steel was chosen because it is cheap, has good mechanical and physical properties. Above all, it is the most widely used engineering material. All these appreciable characteristics makes for a component of good service requirement. The metal used (mild steel) is not attached by insects or virals unlike wood when used to construct cupboard for domestic purposes.
Also the plastic(s) is not appropriate for this project because of it’s weak resistance to impacts or loads and hence can slag when packed tools are packed in it. A failure can also occur due to its expansion characteristics at high temperature, and pursue(s).
1.1 STEEL AS CONSTRUCTION MATERIAL
Carbon steel is the most common, cheapest and most versatile metal use in industry. It has excellent ductility, permitting may cold forming operations. Steel is also the most willable of all commercial metals. It is two-thirds the weight of lead, three times heavier than aluminum for annealed steel with low carbon (0.2%), tensile strength will be 100,000/b/sq. in cold working can boost strength up to 180,000/b/sq. In higher over the various types of carbon steel have been developed for example structural and pressure vessel steels (divided into flange and fire bar grades). There are only minor metallurgical differences between these types, the major differences are in quality tighter specifications some steels may be fully deoxidized semi killed.
There are a number of standards and specifications for carbon standards and specifications for carbon steel in various from such as bar, pipe and plate. The American society for testing and material publishers specification are many material of construction. The American 100n and steel institute also issues specifications on variety of carbon and alloy steels. The American society of mechanical engineers, the American national standards institute are also active in this area.
The corrosion resistance of steel depends on the formation of an oxide surface file. However, resistance to corrosion is somewhat limit carbon steel should not be used in contact with dilute acids. Between 90% – 98%. It is serviceable at room temperature. Usually steel is not used with hydrochloric, phosphoric or nitric acids when iron contamination is permissible, carbon steel can be used for handling caustic soda up to about 75% and 2120F stress relieving is sometimes necessary to reduces caustic embitterment. Brimnes and sea water corrode steel at a slow rate and the metal can be used where iron contamination is not objective. Also steel is little affected by neutral water or organic chemicals many large water tanks for organic solvents and similar chemicals.
Mild steel is susceptible to stress corrosion cracking in certain environments. The corrosion resistance of the low alloy steels less than 5% of alloying element where the alloying elements are added to improve the mechanical strength and not for corrosion resistance.
1.2 HYDROGEN EMBRITTLEMENT
Hydrogen embitterment is the name given to the loss of ductility caused by absorption and reaction of hydrogen in a metal. It is of particular importance when specifying steels for use in hydrogen reforming plant. Alloy steels have a greater resistance to hydrogen embitterment than the plan carbon steel.
1.3 OBJECTIVE OF THE PROJECT
The objective of this project cannot be over emphasizes, since by name steel cupboard, it’s uses are obvious. Nevertheless, the steel cupboard helps the user to pack in books in an orderly manner may be alphabetically or by faculties specifically when used in library. This helps to ensure orderliness. It also helps one to identify the particular book he/she wants. In other words, it serves as a storage unit.
With the availability of the cupboard, it is easy for the user or library attendant to take time to search for a particular book either in the office or library.
Also, the construction of steel cupboard as a project topic enables the students to know and study the properties of engineering materials precisely steel as a construction materials as the factors to be considered while choosing a particular material for specific constructions.