OSU compost pile.jpg
Compost is piled up at Oregon State University's student-run organic farm in Corvallis.
When there are no peas in the pods or flowers on the dahlias, get the answers you need with Ask an Expert, an online question-and-answer tool from Oregon State University's Extension Service. OSU Extension faculty and Master Gardeners reply to queries within two business days, usually less. To ask a question, simply go to the OSU Extension website and type in a question and the county where you live. Here are some questions asked by other gardeners. What's yours?
Q: I put my vegetable scraps in an airtight container waiting for a composter. The scraps have become moldy. Can I use it for composting or should I trash it? - Washington County
A: There are two general classes of microorganisms that do the work of composting: bacteria and fungi. Generally speaking, bacteria are faster, in part because they can swim in a film of fluid and more rapidly colonize the mass of materials to be composted. Fungi work more slowly because they have to grow to where they want to go. Mold is a term we use for a class of fungi. Go ahead and add moldy materials to your compost pile.
In warmer weather, I might store food scraps in the fridge until you're ready to incorporate. This is for aesthetic reasons only. Room temperature or chilled, they will break down just fine. -- Linda Brewer, OSU horticulturist
Q: Do you have any information on using lemon juice as a non-toxic herbicide. - Multnomah County
A: Citrus oils are commercially available as a contact herbicide for organic use. Lemon juice is an acid and, in theory, might work something like vinegar (acetic acid, also with formulations that are commercially available as herbicides) on small to slightly bigger weeds. Lemon juice could be tried straight with a small amount (1 teaspoon per quart) of liquid dishwashing soap to spread it out over the leaves.
There was one non-replicated report of combining vinegar and lemon juice in a 2-to-1 mixture, reportedly with better results.
Be aware that these mixes are not legally registered as herbicides and no verifiable personal or plant safety data has been collected. Keep off of skin, eyes, etc.
Both products are contact weed control materials and will not go down to roots of perennial weeds like morning glory and Canada thistle. So they are best used on young annual and biennial weeds. Timing for use is probably on a warm, dry day since the weed control effect comes from leaf desiccation. Hope this helps. -- Chip Bubl, OSU Extension horticulturist, Columbia County
-- Oregon State University Extension Service
Stay in the loop. Sign up to receive a free weekly Homes & Gardens of the Northwest newsletter and join the conversation at the Homes & Gardens of the Northwest on Facebook page.