The Physics of Acausal Energy
Part One: An Outline of the New Physics
Introduction: The Axioms of Acausal and Causal Space and Time
The Cosmos consists of: (1) the causal, phenomenal, universe – described by the three-dimensional causal geometry of causal Space and by one dimension of linear causal Time – and (2) the acausal universe, described by an acausal Space of n acausal dimensions, and an acausal, un-linear, Time of n dimensions, where n is currently unknown but is greater than three and less than or equal to infinity.
The causal universe is the realm of causal matter/energy, and the acausal universe is the realm of acausal matter/energy. (See Footnote 1)
The causal universe is currently described by causal sciences such as Physics, Chemistry and Astronomy. The acausal universe can be described by a new science based on the new Physics of acausal energy.
The acausal is currently only indirectly known to us from our observation of, and empathy with, life: with those causal-based living organisms and beings which dwell with us on this planet we have called Earth.
Causal science is based on the following foundations: (i) the causal, phenomenal, universe exists independently of us and our consciousness, and thus independent of our senses; (ii) our limited understanding of this causal ‘external world’ depends for the most part upon our senses – that is, on what we can see, hear or touch; that is, on what we can observe or come to know via our senses and by practical scientific experiments; (iii) logical argument, or reason, is the basic means to knowledge and understanding of and about this ‘external world’; (iv) the cosmos is, of itself, a reasoned order subject to rational laws; (v) that, in competing explanations of events or observations, the simplest and most logical explanation is to be preferred.
Understanding Acausal Energy
To understand the nature of acausal energy, the best way to begin is to observe living organisms, because each living organisms is a place, a region – a nexion – where acausal energy is manifest in, or presenced, in our ordinary causal Space and causal (or linear) Time.
That is, it is acausal energy – emanating from the acausal – which animates causal matter and makes it “alive”, and this acausal energy derives from, originates in, acausal Space and manifests the property of acausal Time. Hence, every nexion which is a living being is a region in the Cosmos where the acausal intrudes upon the causal, with it being assumed that the greater the complexity of a living organism, the more acausal energy it possesses, and the more complex, and larger, the nexion to the acausal.
This animation of physical matter occurs within physical matter to make that matter specialized and directed, and co-ordinated, with other physical matter. That is, it structures such matter in particular ways, often hierarchically, changing its nature from static to dynamic and symbiotic, and it is this ability of physical matter to interact in a symbiotic way with other physical matter (to grow, change and develope) – to make connexions to other physical matter and animate them – which marks the changes of living organisms from the changes of non-living matter, such as the growth of some crystals.
In addition, it is further assumed that – just like causal energy – acausal energy cannot be created or destroyed. Thus, when a living organism dies, the acausal energy that animated its physical, causal, atoms either remains, for a certain limited causal Time, in the causal, or returns to the acausal – so that the death of an living organism is simply the closure of the nexion – the connexion – between causal and acausal, and the loss/breakdown of causal form.
The life-span of a living organism is determined by the amount of acausal energy present – the amount which animates it – and whether or not the connexion to the causal: (1) remains opens (and thus possibly brings the transfer of more acausal energy to the organism); or (2) decreases (which restricts the further flow of acausal energy); or (3) closes.
An living organism – physical matter which possesses the attribute or mark of life – obeys the ordinary laws of Physics but is also subject to the laws which govern acausal matter. Ordinary matter, or a dead once living organism, does not obey the laws which govern such acausal matter.
Observing Acausal Energy in the Causal
Observation of living organisms reveals, for example, that they – in contrast to ordinary inert matter – do not require an external force for their movement. That is, their motion is already “inherent” in them by virtue of their nature as living organisms. Similarly, living organisms not only move without the application of any external physical force, but they also change without any external physical force being applied – for example, a young living organism, such as a human child, normally grows in a certain way over a certain period of causal Time. Such growth is limited, in causal Time and causal Space, and is followed after a period of causal Time, by a slow decline, and then, ultimately, by causal death. The more evolved, the more complicated, the physical organism, the more acausal energy it may be said to possess or be able to access.
For convenience, the acausal energy that we may detect in the causal will be considered to be manifest, to us, in our causal phenomenal universe, by means of what we may call acausal charge. That is, we shall refer to the acausal energy that manifests itself in the causal – within, for example, living causal beings – as possessing the property of propagating, or emitting, by its flux (change), acausal charge. That is, the movement of acausal energy in the causal gives rise to the emission of acausal charges. Hence, we can consider a living causal being as physical, causal, matter plus a certain acausal charge. (See Footnote 2) Thus, the observed total “loss” or dissipation of acausal charge within or by a certain living causal being would signify the causal death of that being.
Such observations – and deductions from them – lead to the following postulates regarding acausal energy, and regarding the properties of acausal objects (or “beings”) as those beings (such as living organisms) are known to or are observed by us, in the causal :
(1) An acausal object, or mass, can change without any external force acting upon it – that is, the change is implicit in that acausal matter, by virtue of its inherent acausal charge.
(2) The rate of change of an acausal object, or mass, is proportional to its acausal charge.
(3) The change of an acausal object can continue until all its acausal charge has been dissipated.
(4) Acausal charge is always conserved.
(5) An acausal object, or mass, is acted upon by all other acausal matter in the cosmos.
(6) Each acausal object in the physical cosmos acausally attracts or acausally repels every other acausal object in the physical cosmos with a magnitude which is proportional to the product of the acausal charges of those objects, and inversely proportional to the distance between them as measured in causal space. Here, a distinction is made between “acausal attraction/repulsion” and the causal attraction/repulsion we are familiar with from Physics, such as the attraction and repulsion of magnets. The nature of this acausal attraction/repulsion will be discussed in more detail later [See Part Two].
The properties of acausal matter, enumerated above, form the basis for the new Physics which describes acausal energy and its changes, and it is no coincidence that many of them express, for acausal energy/charge, what the ordinary Physics expresses for physical energy/matter and electric charge, since the Physics of causal matter/energy can be considered to be a limiting, or special, or particular, case of the Physics of acausal energy/matter.
Some further elucidations regarding (5) and (6) above may be required, since they may not be so evident as the other postulates.
Postulate (5) arises from the nature of the acausal itself – from the very structure of acausal Space and acausal Time. Thus, causal Space obviously does not exist, there, in the acausal – there is no causal metric and thus no causal separation between acausal objects. In the simplistic sense, all acausal objects are linked or connected – or, more precisely, they are different facets, in certain causal Times, of the one, the same, “thing” (the acausal itself): of that (causally) dimensionally-independent Unity which is the matrix of all such nexions, of all such connexions. We just – from our limited, causal, metrically-FourDimensional-dependant perceptive, perceive such objects as single, unrelated objects, whereas they are just the parts of the indivisible, “dimensionless, time-less”, acausal itself. Similarly, since there is no causal Time – no linear cause-and-effect – there is always, again from our limited causal FourDimensional-dependant perspective, a simultaneity, such that the acausal energy that flows through a particular causal nexion and thus animates one particular causal living being, may arise or have arisen from anywhere in the acausal universe – from what we might, again with our limited causal FourDimensional-dependant perspective, describe as another part of the physical universe, billions upon billions of light-years away. That is, there is no amount of causal Time involved in the travels of such acausal energy, and no limitation of velocity.
Thus, it is possible to theorize that we might, by somehow harnessing acausal energy, and by using and/or creating nexions to the acausal, be able to travel anywhere in the physical universe almost instantaneously.
Postulate (6) arises from the nature of acausal energy which is perceived as possessing three states – (1) when it is flowing from the acausal into the causal; (2) when it is flowing from the causal into the acausal; (3) when it is, momentarily and viewed from limited causal FourDimensional-dependant perspective, in stasis, or “neutral”. It is this flow and its direction (causally-observed or manifest) which manifests, in the physical causal universe, the properties of “acausal attraction/repulsion” between acausal objects. The type and magnitude and effects of this “acausal attraction/repulsion” cannot be determined or measured by instruments based on causal Physics; that is, they can only be determined or measured by that which itself possesses acausal energy, and which thus “reacts to” or interacts with, the acausal energy of an acausal object.
The Nature of Life
The acausal energy that animates a living organism may be said to “pattern”, or to causally “form” (make whole; animate) the physical matter it consists of, and this acausal energy by its very nature is not static, but is in a constant state of flux – of circulation/movement, between the causal and the acausal. Thus, when a living organism suffers trauma and dies or is killed what occurs is that this flux ceases because the connexion between causal and acausal is lost: outwardly, the organic wholeness, or acausal membrane or acausal “patterning” – that which cosmically distinguishes one living entity from another – disintegrates or is somehow disrupted/destroyed by some form of causal energy/matter. That is, every organism occupies a certain causal Space at a certain causal Time, while also occupying a certain acausal Space within acausal Time, with the causal energy of that being defining this acausal membrane: defining how the causal matter is patterned, or formed.
Thus, the physical form of a living causal being – such as its body – consisting as it does of causal mater occupying a certain causal Space, is a fragile container for the acausal energy that patterns, animates, and fluxes within, that body and which, while that organism lives in the causal, holds its physical matter together as one symbiotic, functioning, unit. Once so animated, formed or patterned by acausal energy, the physical matter has a certain causal life-span – or rather, its physical components do; and this because of the very matter of such dense (acausally-speaking) and often fragile causal matter.
In order to sustain itself, a living causal organism – by its very existence in the causal as a causal being composed of causal matter – must obtain causal energy in the form of, for example, carbohydrates. That is, it ingests sustenance – food – and extracts from this matter the type of causal energy required, in whatever form. However, it is possible to theorize that if a living organism could obtain and in some way use acausal energy itself, it might have no need of such causal matter as sustenance, just as, in theory, such an acquiring of acausal energy could change (that is, make more healthy, and extend) the causal life of such an organism.
Practical Acausal Physics
The basis for practical acausal Physics – and of the technology deriving from it – is five-fold:
(1) The detection and measurement of acausal charge by new devices which use or which are based – wholly or in part – upon acausal energy;
(2) Practical experimentation using detected acausal charges;
(3) The generating and harnessing of acausal energy by new devices and machines which use or which are based – wholly or in part – upon acausal energy;
(4) The development of a new mathematics to describe the nature of acausal Time and acausal Space, and thus of acausal energy and its changes, of which the propagation of acausal waves, in the causal continuum, is an important part;
(5) Creating/constructing physical nexions in causal Time and Space.
(1) and (3) above will most probably mean the development of a genuine organic – living technology – and thus the creation of living machines.
If the postulated acausal charges exist, then they should be capable of being detected and their “energy” measured. As mentioned above, such detection and measuring devices cannot be based solely upon causal Physics – that is, such charges will not be detected by devices which measure or detect or use such causal physical things as electrical resistance, or electrical charge, or magnetism, or the electromagnetic spectrum. Instead, new means of detection must be devised, and thus an important question is: what properties do we expect acausal energy (or more precisely, acausal charges) to possess?
We might begin with those things which we observe differentiate living causal organisms from ordinary causal matter. There are the following seven attributes: a living organism respires; it moves; it grows or changes; it excretes waste; it is sensitive to, or aware of, its environment; it can reproduce itself, and it can nourish itself. These, however, are all observable causal phenomena – the basis of the causal science of biology – which can be detected and measured by causal apparatus, even though these attributes may be attributed to, or actually be, some of the causal effects of acausal charge. That is, we need to try and directly observe one or more of the properties of acausal charge, not some of the causal effects, macroscopic or otherwise, that acausal charge has on living matter.
Thus it seems logical that we turn instead to consider the biological cells that are considered to be the basis of all currently known causal living organisms, for each individual cell – whatever the complexity of the organism of which it is a part – possesses the seven biological attributes of life. According to the theory of acausality, acausal energy and acausal charge – which we have been propounding – each individual cell, since it is alive and the basic unit of causal life, must be animated by, and somehow contain, acausal energy and thus acausal charge. Hence, observation of such an individual cell should reveal – with the appropriate apparatus – the presence of basic acausal charge, provided that such apparatus as we can construct is capable of detecting – sensitive enough to detect – the amount of acausal charge present in such a cell; which amount of acausal charge is most probably quite small.
This seems the best direct and causal experimental approach, rather than trying to initially deduce – based on various assumptions – what particular part, if any, of such an individual cell (such as the nucleus, or the DNA, or the cytoplasm) may be the source (a nexion) of acausal energy, and thus the emitter of acausal charge/acausal waves.
Therefore, what is required is to construct some experimental apparatus which can detect the acausal charge/acausal waves emanating from either one living cell, or some small living collocation of cells.
Which returns us to the basic question: what properties can we expect acausal charges to possess? Can we expect acausal charges to somehow alter in a detectable way the fabric of the causal continuum (other than the obvious one of animating causal matter making it thus alive)? To somehow interact with some aspect or aspects of our physical universe – causing some changes in, for example, causal energy or the very structure of acausal Space itself? If this is the case, then it should be possible to construct an experimental apparatus to detect such causal changes. Or is this, and would this be, an altogether fruitless pursuit because acausal charges by their very nature would not produce such causal effects, so that we would have to construct an apparatus capable of detecting the very acausal charges themselves; using for this apparatus something acausal? If this latter option, then what would this “something acausal” be? Would it be something living which, by virtue of being alive and thus possessed of acausal energy, would – in accord with postulates (5) and (6) above – be somehow “sensitive to”, or “aware of”, the nearby presence of other acausal energy, and if so, how might we quantitatively measure this “acausal affect”?
Both of these approaches have some merit. In the first instance, we might consider what, if any, causal changes – however minute – might be observed by conventional causal apparatus and methods when two living cells, or two small living collocation of cells, are brought together in close proximity. Such causal changes may be chemical, or physical, and the detection of such changes – if any – would involve long and very complex analysis. For instance, does the cytoskleton of a cell change in any detectable way?
However, given the complexity of the observations that would have to undertaken, their variety (because of the number of possibilities for such change), the sophisticated experimental laboratory equipment required, the smallness of probable changes, and the currently speculative nature of the theory of acausal energy, it seems highly unlikely that such experiments will be done in the near future.
Therefore, the best experimental approach might be the second one: that of constructing an entirely new apparatus capable of detecting the very acausal charges themselves and using, for this apparatus, something acausal. The base for one such scientific “apparatus” is outlined in Part Four. However, it is possible to speculate that we already have, available to us, a rudimentary and rather experimental detector of such acausal energy that requires some further development and significant refinement if it is going to be successfully employed in experiments which are subject to the criteria of scientific experiments. The basis for this already existing detector is that functioning, and (according to some criteria, at least) highly evolved, living organism which is the individual human being.
The functional part of this particular detector of acausal energy is the hitherto rather neglected and currently very underused and underdeveloped faculty of empathy. Thus, such a “detector” is an empath (a specialized, new, and still evolving type of human being), since empathy can be considered to be an awareness, by us, as individuals, of not only the acausal connexions that bind all causal life, but also of the “nature” of each individual connexion, each nexion to the acausal, each living causal organism. This is a new type of “knowing”: the knowing the acausal, and an awareness of the presence of acausal energy. To be useful, scientifically, this particular faculty has to be developed and refined. (See Footnote 3)
While this concept of using human detectors will undoubtedly seem implausible to many, the important considerations – the real criteria – are (1) whether such detectors actually work; and (2) whether they can provide experimental data according to scientific criteria. These acausal detectors already meet the first criteria, for the majority of human beings, never mind specialized empaths, are already aware, or can determine by various means, whether some-thing is “alive”, that is, possessed of acausal energy. The empath takes this basic, rudimentary and often quite unscientific awareness, much further so that it is, or becomes, a new, special, type of knowledge: the basis of a new science which may tentatively be called acausology – the study of the acausal. A few such empaths exist, and while their results regarding the detection and the classification of acausal energy are promising, they are not yet qualitative enough to be regarded as scientifically useful, accurate or acceptable. However, the science of acausology – and the training and refinement of the empathy of these empaths – is still at an early stage, and further progress is being made, and will undoubtedly continue to be made. Furthermore, this “apparatus” already involves both macroscopic and microscopic detection, and thus is not restricted to experiments relating to one living cell, or some small living collocation of cells, and has already provided some useful and usable data.
(Second, Revised, edition 2009 )
(1) For convenience, the causal universe – of causal Space and causal Time – will often be referred to as “the causal”; and the acausal universe – acausal Space and acausal Time – as “the acausal”.
Also, causal/acausal matter can be taken to refer to causal/acausal energy (and vice versa), the equivalency of matter and energy being accepted.
(2) The analogy here is with the concept of charged particles known to us from causal Physics, which charged particles, when in motion, form the elementary basis of understanding electricity.
Thus, acausal charges (or acausal waves) may be considered as a kind of acausal counterpart of electromagnetic waves, which acausal charges are produced by the movement of acausal energy in the causal. For convenience, we shall continue to mostly refer to acausal charge, although this term should be taken as implying acausal waves.
(3) Some details regarding how such development and refinement may be obtained are outlined in Appendix 3.
(Second, Revised, edition 2009)
The Physics of Acausal Energy
Part One: An Outline of the New Physics
Part Two: Acausal Energy and the Propagation of Acausal Waves in the Causal Continuum
Part Three: The New Mathematics of Acausal Time and Space
Part Four: Practical Experiments
Part Five: Acausal Technology – Generating and Harnessing Acausal Energy
Appendix 1: The Search for Acausal Charge
Appendix 2: Creating Physical Nexions in Causal Time and Space
Appendix 3: Developing and Refining the Faculty of Empathy