“Reduce inequality within and among countries” UN
First off I would like to say that I have used this particular Goal 10 image to show the scary reality of how overwhelming the size of world inequality and poverty is. I am not out to point fingers or hold those who are wealthy responsible for poverty. In fact I’ve just read a very interesting article about the Giving Pledge which consists of over 154 billionaires, including the very richest in the world, who have pledged to give more than half their wealth away, with some intending to give away all of it. To read it go to CNBC
However the sad fact is that those who live in poverty are more likely to die early (children under 5 living in the poorest 20% of developing countries are still up to three times more likely to die than under 5s in the developed world), or suffer from poor health care (women living in rural areas are three times more likely to die in labour than those living in cities) or have reduced chances of leaving poverty due to lack of education and job opportunities.
What is very positive though is that, even though income inequality grew by 11% between 1990 and 2010, more than 50 countries in the world have managed to achieve reduced or contained income inequality between 2007 and 2012. Which shows us that it is possible to bring about an end to income inequalities.
The achivement of other other SDG goals is very important to Goal 10 because to see inequalities within countries reduced the issues of poverty, gender inequality, social justice and improved education systems (to name just a few) need to be tackled effectively in order to reach the root cause of inequality.
“We cannot achieve sustainable development and make the planet better for all people if people are excluded from opportunities, services and the chance for a better life.” Reduced Inequalities-Why It Matters (PDF), UN Org
1. By 2030, progressively achieve and sustain income growth of the bottom 40 per cent of the population at a rate higher than the national average
2. By 2030, empower and promote the social, economic and political inclusion of all, irrespective of age, sex, disability, race, ethnicity, origin, religion or economic or other status
3. Ensure equal opportunity and reduce inequalities of outcome, including by eliminating discriminatory laws, policies and practices and promoting appropriate legislation, policies and action in this regard
4. Adopt policies, especially fiscal, wage and social protection policies, and progressively achieve greater equality
5. Improve the regulation and monitoring of global financial markets and institutions and strengthen the implementation of such regulations
6. Ensure enhanced representation and voice for developing countries in decision-making in global international economic and financial institutions in order to deliver more effective, credible, accountable and legitimate institutions
7. Facilitate orderly, safe, regular and responsible migration and mobility of people, including through the implementation of planned and well-managed migration policies
8. Implement the principle of special and differential treatment for developing countries, in particular least developed countries, in accordance with World Trade Organization agreements
9. Encourage official development assistance and financial flows, including foreign direct investment, to States where the need is greatest, in particular least developed countries, African countries, small island developing States and landlocked developing countries, in accordance with their national plans and programmes
10. By 2030, reduce to less than 3 per cent the transaction costs of migrant remittances and eliminate remittance corridors with costs higher than 5 per cent
If you would like to read more about Goal 10, it’s Targets and it’s progress so far then please go to UN Org