CBSE Class 6 Science Question Paper Set D. You can download the past year question papers in pdf format with solutions from the links below. The students should practice the question papers of last year which will help them to understand the pattern on the papers and will help them to practice for the exams. You can download the question papers for last 10 years free by clicking links below. Refer to the extract below and download the full pdf file of question papers below.
1 Which type of soil is most suitable for growing:
a) Jute fibre
b) Cotton fibre
2 Draw a labelled diagram to show regular reflection of light by a plane mirror.
3 What changes occur in muscles of the arm when it is bent?
4 Give a suitable method to separate the components of a mixture and state the principle behind the method used:
a) Iron fillings from sulphur.
b) Small pieces of stones from pulses.
5 What is a balanced diet? Write two factors on which balanced diet of a person depends upon.
6 What do you mean by multiple motion? Explain it with the help of an example.
7 “Water plays a vital role in our body”. Justify this statement by giving any three functions of water in our body.
8 Explain three adaptations found in birds that help it to fly easily in air.
9 a) Define a skeleton? Write its two functions.
b) Differentiate between tendons and ligament.
10 Give reasons for the following:
a) A snail secretes mucous while moving.
b) An earthworm is called a farmer’s friend.
c) Long bones of the human skeleton have bone marrow.
11 Mayank’s father never bothered to check the brand/contents of the salt he had purchased from the market. Mayank noticed that his sister had developed a swollen neck. He immediately took her to the doctor and doctor advised her to eat iodised salt and explained the importance of iodised salt in our diet. While returning home he purchased iodised salt for the whole family.
a) List two values possessed by Mayank.
b) Name the disease from which his sister suffered?
c) Why did the doctor advise her to eat iodised salt?
12 Draw a well labeled diagram showing the image formation by a pin hole camera and state two characteristics of the image formed by it.
13 Give the scientific terms associated with the following:
a) No change in the position of an object with respect to time or surroundings.
b) Type of motion along a straight line.
c) Motion in which the body moves about it’s own axis.
d) To and fro motion of a body.
e) Motion of body along a circular path
f) Repetitive movement which takes place at equal intervals of time.
Please click the link below to download the full pdf file for CBSE Class 6 Science Question Paper Set D.