What is holding you back from trying vitamins and minerals? Are you afraid that you don’t know enough about the topic to pick up the right products? If so, this article has the basic knowledge you seek. Reading it will ensure that you get a foundation in the topic you can truly build upon.
Never ignore the product warnings on vitamin levels. Vitamin and supplements can have serious side effects when taken with prescription and over the counter medicines. Ginseng can be very dangerous if you have high blood pressure or take heart medications. Lycopene can be deadly if you have a tomato allergy. Always read the warning labels or ask your pharmacist or doctor before taking any vitamins or supplements.
Many people who are in need of supplemental vitamins and minerals simply struggle physically with swallowing the pills as they can be large and, in all honesty, horrible tasting. Try drinking water that has vitamins and minerals includes with some sort of fruit taste added. This allows you to get some of the vitamins you require as well as adding to your daily water intake.
Milk and sun exposure are two great ways for you to get vitamin D. If you lack exposure to the dun, or avoid drinking milk, then it is important that you take a vitamin D supplement. This vitamin is good for keeping your bones from becoming brittle, so they don’t break as easily.
Track the number of vitamins and minerals you take. If you’re a person that takes a lot of supplements, you could be getting too much of certain vitamins or minerals. This is usually the case with fat-soluble vitamins like K, D, A, and E. If the risks worry you or if you take prescriptions, you should talk to a physician.
Some people believe they are able to get all the nutrients their body needs just by eating a healthy diet. This really is a good place to start, but it would be impossible to eat enough to get all the vitamins and minerals your body needs because most foods have been over-processed.
Many fruits and vegetables have lots of healthy nutrients; however, fresh is much better than canned. By eating a diet filled with healthy choices, you can receive the nutrients your body requires to function at peak levels.
If you are a smoker, you should avoid taking any supplements that contain carotene. There have been numerous studies done that show carotene can increase the risk of lung cancer. Since cigarettes can add to this risk, it would be best if you avoided taking carotene if you are planning to continue smoking.
Before you begin taking any supplements at all, you need to talk to your doctor about being tested for nutrient deficiencies. If you don’t do this first, you may be missing out on the key issues which are causing you to feel less than great. Get this done and then buy your supplements.
Now you know the basics when it comes to using vitamins and minerals to better your health. The next step is to figure out exactly what health issues you need to tackle and which supplements will do the job. Keep reading and learning and soon you’ll feel better than ever!