We try to keep our virtual exhibits accessible and use a minimum of jargon but it's hard to avoid!
Like all disciplines, there are certain terms unique to archives, and others that are used in a specific way. So, we've created this glossary of terms that you may come across in our virtual exhibits.
The good news is that these terms are standard in archives across Canada (and most of the world for that matter).
Records in the custody and control of the City of Edmonton Archives that have been identified as permanently valuable due to their administrative, legal, evidentiary, cultural and/or historic significance. These records are kept with the understanding that they will be saved and made accessible, as appropriate, in perpetuity.
- the collective term for the records at the City of Edmonton Archives
- a short term for the City of Edmonton Archives
(alternate spelling Artefact)
Usually a three dimensional object created, used by, or having an association with an historical person, period or place.
A set of records collected over time from several different sources, usually based on specific criteria (subject or media for example). They are accumulated by intent rather than as a by-product and are therefore considered more artificial than organic (see Fonds).
The individual, organization, or business that is the originator of a set of records that has been set aside for preservation (often by transferring to an archives). Note that creators set aside records that they have generated as well as records that they have received from others.
A guide produced by an archives to describe records to give contextual information and access points (names, titles and date ranges) to researchers. Finding aids explain the who, what, where, when and why of a set of records. They also capture rights information including restrictions on access and use (FOIP or copyright for example).
(pronounced fon, it is a shortening of the French term, Fonds d'Archives)
A set of records that have been accumulated (made or received) by an individual or organization through normal daily activity and then put aside and saved. Because the records are a by-product of regular activities, this type of aggregation is considered to be a more organic process than the gathering of a collection and therefore is more representative of the creator.
Archives really do mean that we will keep the records in our care accessible for all time. Sometimes this means making access copies and keeping the original in controlled conditions (for example, controlling temperature and humidity for paper records and having secure server vaults for digital records). However, archives do give access to the original record wherever possible.
Evidence, regardless of format, of an activity or decision. Depending on what they document, different records need to be kept for different amounts of time. Some are only needed in the short term and others are kept permanently (archives).
EA: Edmonton Archives
— signifies a photograph in digital, print or negative form
EAA: Edmonton Archives Artwork
— signifies artwork
EAM: Edmonton Archives Map
EB: - Edmonton Album
ET: Edmonton Transparencies
— signifies a transparency or slide
— signifies records created by a person or organization; a private record
RAD: Rules for Archival Description
— a descriptive standard used for finding aids in archives across Canada
RG: Record Group
— signifies records created by the City of Edmonton; a public record
For a complete glossary of archival terms we recommend:
The Society of American Archivists'