Caring for your child’s teeth promotes their oral and overall health. Primary teeth help your child to eat and speak, they give shape to the face, and they guide permanent teeth to grow into the correct position.
Primary teeth have a thinner outer enamel than permanent teeth, which puts them at risk for childhood tooth decay. Proper dental care from an early age helps to prevent dental problems and gets your child to form the habit of brushing and flossing their teeth every day. Our team of experienced professionals will review nutrition, brushing and flossing habits and homecare to help your child be set for success.
In addition to a daily dental care routine, your children should also visit the dentist regularly. The objective of these visits is to educate your child about the importance of dental hygiene. They will also receive a thorough dental examination and cleaning.
At Vellore Woods Dental, our team has all the necessary skills to provide your kids with a child-friendly dental service. We go to great lengths to help them understand how and why they should take care of their teeth.
Since children tend to be intimidated by sessions at the dentist, we take time to build trust and make the experience pleasant for them. If your kids enjoy the sessions at the dentist, they will be motivated to go regularly and care for their teeth every day.
Let’s take a look at some things you should do to ensure that your kids have healthy teeth.
The sugars in milk, soft drinks, and juice can be detrimental to the thin enamel layer around your child’s primary teeth. Regular intake of these fluids can be harmful to developing teeth and can even lead to cavities. It is a good idea to replace the content in your child’s bottle with water, especially before bed.
Schedule your baby’s first dental visit when they are one year old, and once every six months after that. Visiting the dentist twice a year will help to prevent cavities and tooth decay. The dentist will also remove all plaque that accumulated in places that are difficult to reach with a toothbrush and floss.
Clean your baby’s mouth twice a day by wiping their gums with a soft, damp cloth. When they get their first tooth, you can start the daily brushing routine with a soft-bristle toothbrush. To ensure the optimal dental health, avoid leaving your baby in bed with a bottle filled with milk or juice.
From the age of 3, you can start teaching your toddler to brush their teeth twice a day for two minutes. You can give them non- fluoride toothpaste, but the load on the brush should be no bigger than a green pea, and they should spit out the toothpaste and not swallow it. You can help them to make sure that all the tooth surfaces are clean. Once your child is constantly spitting and not swallowing toothpaste you can switch them to a fluoridated toothpaste.
If your child sucks their thumb during the development of their permanent teeth, schedule a dental appointment as soon as possible. We can offer many options and it is best to get the opinion of a dentist early.
Proper dental care from an early stage can benefit your child for the rest of their life. Regular dental visits will prevent tooth decay, a painful and unhealthy condition. Contact Vellore Woods Dental at 905-417-5550 to schedule an appointment. We always look forward to meeting your children and taking care of their precious smiles!