Access in and around forest areas is challenging. Traditional monitoring, mapping and surveillance has been time-consuming, extremely costly and often not effective. Drone technology is rapidly changing this. Drones are now being used to capture essential forest data from depth of snow in alpine regions, canopy attributes – such as canopy gaps – and even the extent of carbon storage in a forest area.
A global concern, drones are being used to do aerial surveys of rainforest areas to manage reduction and to determine where trees are being adversely impacted by human activities.
In line with this, communities and companies are using drones to fight deforestation. By using drones to actively monitor forested areas, they can secure images of people or activities that are undertaking illegal deforestation.
More remarkable, drones are now being used to plant trees! In vast and often inaccessible areas, drones can now distribute seedlings in a fast, nimble and efficient manner to ensure forest longevity.
How drones are sustaining forest areas
Precision Forest Management
Drones can now capture a wide range of vital forest information from canopy cover, trees numbers and overall volume estimation allowing for informed decisions on sustainability.
Restoring Burnt Out Land
Bushfires eliminate tens of thousands of forest acres each year in Australia. To speedtree restoration, drones are providing accurate and rapid land surveys to target areas for re-growth activities.
3D mapping for carbon storage
Measuring the extent of carbon storage in biomass has always been labour intensive and expensive. By using remote sensing via drone technology, 3D mapping can be undertaken quickly, accurately and cost effectively.
Drones in Forestry
With large areas and often difficult terrain, drone technology in forestry can capture and transmit high-definition imagery and data over 100’s of hectares in hours, not weeks
Bevan Lyons is lucky to be alive. He suffers from a rare respiratory disease and his doctors told him that he wouldn’t live past last Christmas. A year l...