We want justice! We want equal justice under the law. We want justice applied equally regardless to creed or class or color.
Justice is the birthright of every human being. Justice is a prerequisite to life. We cannot live without justice and where there is no justice there is no peace. Justice is one of the eternal principals that the Creator of the Heavens and the Earth has decreed that every creature should have the freedom to be what God created it to be. Freedom, Justice and Equality are not conferred on us by the Constitution, but the Creator confers Freedom, Justice and Equality on every human being.
The widespread death, rising racism, mob attacks and police brutality on Blacks coupled with economic deprivation and stark poverty, requires that something must be immediately done to address and correct the condition.
The failure of the U.S. Government to give justice to its former slaves require that we present ourselves in unity to make the demand for Justice or Else!
Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. said, that the moral arc of the universe is long but it bends toward justice. “Human progress is neither automatic nor inevitable … Every step toward the goal of justice requires sacrifice, suffering, and struggle; the tireless exertions and passionate concern of dedicated individuals,” said Dr. King.
The Honorable Elijah Muhammad gave us a few simple definitions for justice:
- “Justice is a principle of fair dealing one with another.”
- “Justice is the law that distinguishes between right and wrong”
- “ Justice is the weapon that Allah (God) will use in the Day of Judgment “
Justice should never look at your color. Justice should never look at your position or posture. Justice should have on one side of the scale the weight of facts and on the other side our actions in accord with those facts. When you have liberty but not justice then there is no joy in being free because the only reason that people are joyous in liberty is that there is justice coming to them in society. That is why we have courts. The purpose of the court system is that we may go to a court of law and express our grievance before an impartial jury; a jury of our peers, so that when a decision is rendered, our breast can be calm.
The institutions set up to adjudicate our grievances have not heard the cry of the pain of our people and in most instances have failed. The 13th, 14th, and 15th Amendments to the Constitution give us certain guarantees and rights, yet, we cry for justice because no amendment in our favor has actually been enforced.
Why do the Bible and Holy Quran teach us of a Day of Judgment?
If there were justice, there would be no need for a judgment. So, the only reason that the Bible and Qur’an talks about a Day of Judgment is because the wicked have denied the people that great principle of justice, fair dealing, in an equitable manner. Jesus said it perfectly, “God is not mocked. Whatsoever a man soweth, the same shall he also reap.” Obadiah the Prophet says, “As thou hast done, so shall it be done unto you.”
We are living in the day of Justice and Judgment and that’s why the cry everywhere is justice. All over our planet is complete dissatisfaction with government. The cry is not local or national but the cry for justice is universal! The pain is national and global and the forces of evil are not willing to change while the ball is yet in their court to give justice, simple justice to those who cry out.
If we are denied what rightfully belongs to us then there has to be unified action that we take that will force the justice that we seek.
We in the black community have a fight on two fronts and it’s very difficult to fight a war on two fronts, but we have to take on two struggles. The evil that is in our community produced by us cannot be overlooked as we challenge our government for justice. We cannot pass by the killings, abuse and rapes, robberies and crimes we commit on one another and focus on the government as though we have done what needs to be done in our own backyard. Our thrust toward the government is ever weakened by our lack of concern and adequate attention to what is going on in the inner cities.
We must end the violence and stop the killings and present ourselves as a united front before the Government of the United States of America. Fredrick Douglas said “ Power concedes nothing except by a demand” Our demand of government must be backed by the power of our unity and love of the brotherhood.
Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. in his last public message before he was assassinated talked about redistributing the pain through economic withdrawal. If those who cause the hurt are made to feel some of our pain then perhaps, just maybe, there can be fair treatment.
We have a purchasing power of over 1 trillion dollars but in our reckless and wasteful spending habits we have not been able to pool our resources in a collective manner to build institutions and create jobs for our people. By strategically engaging in economic withdrawal we can begin putting power behind our demands and build a new and better reality.
Let us start us start by not spending money we either don’t have or cannot afford during the Christmas season. Why should we make the merchants rich by their wicked manipulation and exploitation of the emotions of children, parents, families and those we love, with their pagan practices that have nothing to do with the celebration and observance of the righteous servant of God, Jesus? Let us take that day, the entire season to give thanks to God for the gift of Jesus and share that great gift of God and what he taught to our families.
“If my people who are called by my name humble themselves, and pray and seek my face and turn from their wicked ways, then I will hear from heaven and will forgive their sin and heal their land”. 2 Chronicles 7:14
WE want Justice for Blacks in America who have given America 460 years of sweat and blood to make her rich and powerful.
We want an immediate end to police brutality and mob attacks.
WE want Justice for the Native American Indians.
We want Justice for the Mexican and Latinos.
We want Justice for Women.
We want Justice for the Poor.
We want Justice for the Incarcerated.
We want Justice for Veterans.
We want Land
Justice or Else!
The longer justice is denied the more intense will be the cry. The anger that is in the breast of the people will continue and as the pain continues to intensify, if our cry for justice is not heard soon, then these demonstrations and protests in cities across the country and the world will produce a tsunami the results of which will bring about total chaos and destruction on all sides.
Join the Movement! 10-10-15
Justice Or Else!