Several members of the Matheson Optometrists team have recently returned from a trip to Germany to discover all about Zeiss Drivesafe lenses.
These staff members experienced a whole weekend driving cars and learning why Zeiss Drivesafe lenses provide motorists with more confidence and a greater all round motoring experience.
Many people feel insecure, uncomfortable and stressed when driving, especially in difficult light and weather conditions such as rain and mist, or at dusk or night. On average 83% of spectacle lens wearers also drive. Driving can be a real challenge for everybody – no matter how long the distance, and good vision is vital for safety.
Luminance Design® Technology by ZEISS.The pupil reacts to light intensity from its surroundings, specifically the light that directly strikes the eye. In daylight conditions, the pupil diameter is small, whereas it is large at night. In low light, so-called mesopic conditions, i.e. twilight, rainfall, dark days or night driving, the pupil diameter is in-between small and large. Space perception, as well as distance assessment, becomes more difficult for the driver.
After intensive research in the field of mesopic vision*, the rationale for the development of ZEISS Luminance Design™ Technology was identified and verified during wearer trials. In a nutshell: there is bright light (photopic vision), no light (scotopic vision) and in-between low light (mesopic vision). In mesopic conditions, the light intensity, and thus the pupil size changes: a challenge for visual performance.
DuraVision® DriveSafe Coating by ZEISS.Glare describes the difficulty of seeing in bright light, such as direct sunlight or artificial light. Especially when driving at night, the high luminance from car headlights with Xenon or LED technology is distracting. Glare can be a risk, as it reduces the visibility of objects and sensitivity of the eye to contrast.
Advised by the automotive lighting experts at L-LAB* who provided state-of-the-art lighting equipment, ZEISS vision science researchers carried out glare experiments. These formed the basis of internal studies** using different coating simulations. The blue light spectrum of car headlights (in particular in the 400–450 nm range) using Xenon H.I.D. (High Intensity Discharge) or LED technology produces a glare effect perceived by drivers.
Accurate vision of road, dashboard and mirrors
Driving demands a high level of concentration from drivers. Most of the time they need a broad view of the road in order to evaluate traffic conditions. The situation becomes challenging, especially for progressive lens wearers, when they need to switch their focus between the road, dashboard and mirrors. That is when dynamic vision becomes essential.