The Oklahoma 8th Grade Writing Test part of the Oklahoma Core Curriculum Test is an essay assignment that has students read two passages and then answer a prompt that incorporates both passages into a well developed and organized essay. The assessment standards for this writing test are designed in accord with the Common Core State Standards for writing at the eighth-grade level.
Plan Your Strategy
There isn't a strict time limit for this test, so take the time to make sure you understand the assignment. Reread the prompts and passages if you need to. Furthermore, two pages of planning space are included in the test packet; use the space to brainstorm ideas. Those pages are not scored. Write down your ideas and then examples from the passages that support those ideas. Then, fully outline your essay. Once you have, and you're sure you are answering the prompt in a logical and organized way, you can be confident that your essay will be effective.
Support Your Ideas
While you won't have access to outside reference materials, you will have the reading passages and your own sense of reason to rely upon as support for any claims you make. Make sure you back up each idea with the example you wrote down while pre-writing, which you can paraphrase or quote from one of the passages directly. If you do quote directly, however, make sure to introduce the quote by naming the passage from which it came.
Edit and Revise
Even with a well developed outline, you still need to revise and edit your essay once you've finished a draft. Read it to make sure it flows logically, that you've included reasons and examples for all of your ideas. Then, when you're certain the essay is structured logically, you can begin proofreading. Make sure you punctuation is correct and that you have used words correctly. This is when you want to double-check your spelling, and neaten any instances of sloppy handwriting. Use the Writer's Checklist to make sure you have satisfied all the elements of the test.
Take Practice Tests
Practice makes perfect, and you shouldn't wait until test day to apply your skills. The Oklahoma School Testing Program offers sample prompts and passages -- and even a section on tips -- in its "Parent, Student, and Teacher Guide." Taking practice tests will make you familiar with the types of passages and prompts the test uses, so you will know what to expect on test day, and you will feel more comfortable.
- Comstock/Comstock/Getty Images