Go on, bet the farm. That’s more or less what a company does when it forms teams to accomplish critical business objectives. Teams can squander or make good use of company resources, and team members can commit to common goals or antagonize one another to the point of near-riots. Consequently, forming teams whose members effectively work together can lead to amazing product quality, astounding levels of collaboration and incredible performance.
Team Support Boosts Productivity
Few individuals have all the skills needed to accomplish a complex task, such as the overhaul of an IT system. Consequently, a company forms a team consisting of individuals with complementary skills who are mutually accountable for accomplishing a particular goal. When the complementary skills of the collective are committed to attaining that team objective, the productivity of individual team members may increase.
Team Connections Improve Collaboration and Learning
Unless a company forms a team and team members collaborate and attack a project goal collectively, employees must respond to the challenge individually. Consequently, individual learning occurs, rather than group learning. Without shared learning, each team member may duplicate the efforts of every other team member before someone identifies and implements a solution. In the process, errors can multiply by a factor equal to the number of team members. In contrast, a team who collaborates and shares ideas and best practices, allows its members to select and test a set of proposed solutions and jointly learn from the process. As a result, the team may identify and implement a preferred solution more efficiently.
Teamwork Enhances Decision-making
Verbal and actual wars have been fought, rockets have been launched and financial systems have been brought to the brink of disaster due to bad decisions, some of which can be traced to one person. Giving one individual excessive responsibility or the freedom to make decisions can result in a waste of financial, operational and human resources. Doing so can result in slow decision-making and limited employee development. In contrast, decision-making is optimized and more balanced when it is the result of group consideration by team members with complementary skills and experience, and shared goals and incentives.
Teamwork Removes Barriers to Productivity
Departmental rivalries, personal jealousy and corporate politics can create barriers that slow productivity. But when employees are selected from different groups to form a team, these barriers can be eliminated and productivity increased for a variety of reasons. For example, team objectives and joint efforts replace individual goals and personal contributions. A commitment to mutual goals and a shared obligation to complete team activities replaces the commitment to stirring the pot of interdepartmental conflicts. In addition, mutual accountability replaces individual accountability.
- Ryan McVay/Photodisc/Getty Images