Coordinates of square vertices
I have coordinates of square vertices A / -3; 1/and B/1; 4 /. Find coordinates of vertices C and D, C 'and D'. Thanks Peter.
Thank you for submitting an example text correction or rephasing. We will review the example in a short time and work on the publish it.
Leave us a comment of this math problem and its solution (i.e. if it is still somewhat unclear...):
Showing 0 comments:
Be the first to comment!
Following knowledge from mathematics are needed to solve this word math problem:
Next similar math problems:
- Triangle IRT
In isosceles right triangle ABC with right angle at vertex C is coordinates: A (-1, 2); C (-5, -2) Calculate the length of segment AB.
- Unit vector 2D
Determine coordinates of unit vector to vector AB if A[-6; 8], B[-18; 10].
- Add vector
Given that P = (5, 8) and Q = (6, 9), find the component form and magnitude of vector PQ.
Find the equation of hyperbola that passes through the point M [30; 24] and has focal points at F1 [0; 4 sqrt 6], F2 [0; -4 sqrt 6].
- Vector 7
Given vector OA(12,16) and vector OB(4,1). Find vector AB and vector |A|.
In right triangle ABC with right angle at C is given side a=27 and height v=12. Calculate the perimeter of the triangle.
- ABS CN
Calculate the absolute value of complex number -15-29i.
- The fence
I'm building a fence. Late is rounded up in semicircle. The tops of late in the field between the columns are to copy an imaginary circle. The tip of the first and last lath in the field is a circle whose radius is unknown. The length of the circle chord i
Determine angles of the right triangle with the hypotenuse c and legs a, b, if: ?
- The ditch
Ditch with cross section of an isosceles trapezoid with bases 2m 6m are deep 1.5m. How long is the slope of the ditch?
Wha is the distance between the origin and the point (18; 22)?
Suppose that are three cards in the hats. One is red on both sides, one of which is black on both sides, and a third one side red and the second black. We are pulled out of a hat randomly one card and we see that one side of it is red. What is the probabi
- One side
One side is 36 long with a 15° incline. What is the height at the end of that side?
- Theorem prove
We want to prove the sentence: If the natural number n is divisible by six, then n is divisible by three. From what assumption we started?
- Angle between lines
Calculate the angle between these two lines: ? ?
Is true equality? ?
If the angle α is acute, and cotg α = 1/3. Determine the value of sin α, cos α, tg α.