Verse “T” in the ABC series for Bible memory for kids is 2 Corinthians 5:17. Each part in the series includes a free printable, a YouTube video, consistency, and a short lesson.
Memorizing 2 Corinthians 5:17 with Kids
Our “T” Bible memory verse is from 2 Corinthians 5:17
Therefore if anyone is in Christ he is a new creation; the old has passed away behold the new has come.
Meaning of 2 Corinthians 5:17 for Kids
It’s always helpful when memorizing if the kids understand the meaning of the verse. But finding explanations for children can be difficult.
This story that uses a caterpillar and butterfly is a great way to help your children understand the verse and memorize it. Children are amazed by the transformation that caterpillars make so it should make learning fun. (Note: if the link opens in Spanish, if you’re using Chome, click on “translate” to read it in English.)
Depending on the age of your children, just scrolling through some pictures of caterpillars and butterflies on your phone while talking through the lesson may be enough or go outside and look for caterpillars or butterflies and talk about how we become a new creation in Christ just like butterflies do.
Printable for 2 Corinthians 5:17
Remember to print your scripture verse out each week and hang it next to your child’s bed or wherever you are memorizing the verse and singing the song. Printables for all 26 ABC bible verses are available in the resource library.
For the T verse you can choose between two different versions.
Learning Through Song
Your kids will love it and you’ll be sure to catch on to the tune as a result. It is one you will both learn in no time. It is from The Rizers. They have a lot of kids worship songs based on scripture that is easy to help your kids memorize the Word.
If the past few weeks have been a little slow, this video will reignite the fun with your kids.
Full Series of ABC Bible Verses for Kids
This is Verse “T” in a whole series of Bible verses! Check out the index of posts here and join along at your own pace. Each letter of the alphabet has the following:
- A video: Kids (well, everyone) learns so much faster by song.
- A printable: Each verse has a different printable you can hang up.
- A goal: The reason we learn ABC verses is that our kids know there is an end in mind. They know what letter comes next, how many remain, they are excited and more likely to stick to it.
- Fun: I never had any luck memorizing bible verses with my children until I tried this approach. Then suddenly they memorized 26 Bible verses and they had fun!
Looking for an Adult Bible Memorization?
Although I went through the 26 weeks of Bible memorization with my children and had a blast, sometimes our hearts ache for a deeper connection.
Join the 6-week prayer journal challenge. Each week a new Bible verse is sent via email specifically for those that are searching for more. Additionally, you will receive a screensaver for your phone that includes the same Bible verse to really hone in on your Bible memorization.
Mid-week encouragement will come your way with a special worship song picked just for you that reinforces the Bible verse you’re meditating on.
What do you have to gain? A deeper connection to God.
What do you have to lose? Click here to join. It’s waiting for you.