When we are children, we develop and progress at a steady and consistent rate both physically and mentally. We grow, we learn and we improve day by day. We naturally jump into a momentum that gravitates upwards leading us to unlock our potential year by year. Then BAM…suddenly we hit our early twenties and reach a slump. Sometimes people hit a slump out of happiness; they marry, buy a home and have children – they don’t know what further progression looks like and they feel that they have everything that they need. Others hit a dead end out of frustration; the world seems scary, bleak and depressing so it’s easier to stop than to start.
The problem is that human beings weren’t made to live in a state of stasis. We are designed to continuously adapt and evolve. Setting goals is one such way of furthering ourselves throughout our lives. In fact, goal setting is an imperative aspect of self-improvement. Here’s how to do it:
But first things first; WHY should you set goals?
Goal setting helps you:
- Find a direction and purpose in life
- Helps you create your own flow without being forced or pushed in inappropriate directions
- Improves confidence, well-being and self-esteem
- Increases motivation and enthusiasm
- Enables the brain to have a productive focus
Goal setting is vital for EVERYONE but is especially important if you feel any of the following:
Here’s how you can get started:
Consult a life coach
Consulting a life coach isn’t 100% necessary but many people find it useful to speak to an outside party with the tools and know-how to really get them going. Think about it like this; when you start school with a brain thirsty for knowledge, a teacher gets your brain whirring and casts you off into the big wide world. Life coaches operate on a similar level; they listen to what you want and help you pinpoint where you feel stuck in life and how you should get started. It’s a great place to begin for many people.
What do you want to improve and where do you want to be?
A strong starting point for many people is simply to throw any sense of realism to the wind and to jot down absolutely everything that you’ve ever wanted to be or do. The list might include such far-fetched fancies as going into space, becoming a movie star or seeing every single country in the world and will give you a stronger idea of your desires and dreams in life. You can also write down realistic goals that are easier to implement such as learn to make chocolate gateau like mum, study veterinary nursing or go to see more Shakespeare plays. This exercise enables you to see the grand scheme of your deepest, darkest wants and wishes. You can then look at the list with a critical eye and pick one or two goals to start with that you want to work on.
Pinpoint areas of improvement
Get a diary or drawing pad and write down titles to represent different areas of your life such as ‘relationship’, ‘work’, ‘finances’, ‘family’ and ‘hobbies.’ You’ll soon find that certain areas may be lacking; perhaps you’re happy at work but don’t have time for a private life or perhaps your life is full of enriching hobbies and relationships but you just hate your job.
Name your targets
The best way to set goals is to pick two or three at a time. They can be from any area of your life. Perhaps the first three might be take a pole fitness class, apply for a PHD and write a novel. Once you master one goal you can then add another.