Organic gardening is the types of gardening in which gardeners do not use any pesticides or synthetic fertilizers for their plants. Your whole garden will grow naturally without the slightest touch of any artificial elements. Organic gardeners would work in harmony with natural resources they can use, and then they strive to reload those sources from wherever possible.
Organic gardening helps to improve your family’s health and save money and time by eating fresh veggies and fruit from your own backyard. Who knows what is sprayed on all that commercial production at the grocery store. By owning an organic garden, you will always have full control over what you are growing, so you can feel better about your footprint on the environment.
The secret to improving and cultivating your own organic garden is to know the soil of your garden. A great attention would be required as far as your selection of soil is concerned. Having healthy and organic soil is the key to better organic gardening. You need to learn about soils and their conditions. In addition, you will want to be sure you know what kind of soil works best for different plants as well as other requirements like the amount of direct or indirect sunlight and water the plants should receive. With a little practice, you should be able to watch your organic garden grow and flourish, and it will be something you can enjoy for many years to come.
Growing your own organic garden at home can be fun, and it’s also pretty easy if you follow a few simple guidelines and rules. You can grow your own vegetables, fruits and flowers, and even trees.
In this article, We will dig into more than 30 valuable resources that explain in detail how organic gardening works and how you can build your own organic garden.
If you’ve never gardened, but you still want to eat organic produce.
Well, this guide is for you too!
General Organic Gardening Resources
Before you move on to more specific resource sections, browse this offering of general organic gardening resources. Within these general resources, you can learn about organic gardening related to choosing a site for an organic garden, growing different vegetables, growing beneficial flowers in the garden for biodiversity, helpful advice from organic garden experts, an overview of the organic garden and plenty of additional information.
Everything You Need To Know To Start Your First Organic Garden – As the name suggests, in this article, you will know almost everything before starting your own organic garden from making your bed to controlling pest and weed.
What is “organic Gardening” – If you are new to organic gardening and wondering what “organic gardening” actually means, this article has the great answer for you.
Organic Gardening Guru – In this article, you will know some facts about organic gardening along with an interesting story from the author.
Organic Gardening – When it comes to placing your own organic garden, there are a few factors you should keep in mind. Check this article to know these things.
The Benefits of Organic Gardening – Environmental and health are the two main benefits of an organic garden that are gaining popularity. In this article, you not only find this information but also some arguments against Organic gardening.
How to Plant Your Organic Garden – Here are some simple instructions to grow easy vegetables, flowers, and herbs from your backyard.
Organic Garden Articles – Nature takes care of everything in organic gardening, from organic weed and pest control to organic soil enhancement. You will find these organic gardening ideas and tips in these articles.
History Of Organic Gardening
In this section, you are going to where organic comes from, the benefits of the organic garden, how organic garden works and more.
History of Organic Farming – Learn about the history of Organic Gardening. If the history of organic gardening is anything to go by, one thing is certain: what’s old is new again, and never truer than in Organic Vegetable Gardening.
What makes an organic garden – Check out this valuable article to learn about why it’s important to choose an organic garden, how the organic garden works. This ‘go to’ post is the great source for beginners to learn organic gardening.
History of Organic Farming in the United States – In this article from Sare.org, you will learn how organic gardening began and grew in the USA and why the new organic industry suffered growing pains.
Tips And Advice for Organic Gardeners
Where to start? What to plant? Types of soil? These are some of the questions you will probably have when you first start thinking about growing an organic gardening. Use the sites and articles below to answer these questions and to help guide you through the decisions you will need to make before growing your own organic garden.
Organic Gardening 101: Simple, Non-Toxic Tips and How-Tos – The purpose of this article is to introduce you the strategies for beginner’s organic gardening. It’s worth a visit to check out many lesser-known tips and strategies that can help you make the most of your own efforts.
Organic Garden Tips – There are many things that organic gardeners have to consider in the garden such as: choosing the soil, putting the plants in the right amount of sun, along with proper spacing and ideal planting and watering. This article, by C. Colston Burrell, provides some practical tips that you can really use in your garden.
A Beginner’s Guide to Organic Gardening – This article, from Martha Stewart, offers insight into basic things that you should to do help your first organic gardening efforts succeed. There are lots of tips that you can use in your own garden too.
Considerations for a Beginning Organic Farmer – Organic farming is an interesting career choice. However, organic farming is not a career to take lightly. There are many things to consider before jumping into the soil. Use this information on The Balance website to make your choices easier.
Great Tips for Starting a Spring Organic Garden – You want to grow your own organic food in Spring? Then these tips may be helpful for you.
A Beginner’s Guide to Composting at Home – Composting is an environmental and economic way to manage organic materials produced at home as well as to produce the natural fertilizer for your organic garden.
Growing an Organic Vegetable garden: tips, tricks, and inspiration – In this article, the author is going to talk strictly edibles along with the in-depth resources to really help you dig in and get your hands dirty.
Weed and Pest Management Resources
Remember, in organic gardening, all the solutions should be organic, so do not jump into synthetic solutions if some unfavorable situation pays you a visit. Rather, you should learn how to handle such problems. Use these resources below to learn how to deal with weeds, pests and be the master of organic gardening.
Creating a Weed Management Plan for Your Organic Farm – The successful weed management can make or break a new organic garden. These step-by-step guide from The Pennsylvania State University will help you to create a weed management plan for your organic farm.
My organic garden pest control – This article contains practical organic garden pest control recipe, that is a great natural deterrent for those inconsiderate bugs in your organic garden.
IPM: Smart pest management for the vegetable garden – What is IPM? Why is it smart? If you are wondering these questions, then you will find the best answers in this article.
How Do You Get Rid of Squash Bugs Organically – There are a number of techniques that you can use to organically rid of squash bugs from your organic garden. Check it to find out the technique best suited to your organic garden.
Your Organic Garden: Pest Control Without Chemicals – Before insects invade a problem, the organic garden pest control methods in this article will help you to prevent infestations from occurring.
Borax Amounts for Organic Gardening – Borax is suited for use in organic gardens and it is a cost-effective substance that can be used to help solve a number of common garden problems. It’s truly a natural wonder that has many uses in the organic garden.
Organic Pest Control in Your Garden with Dr. Jeff Gillman – This podcast contains lots of practical advice and tips about organic pest control that you can actually use in your own organic garden. Check it out to learn more tips from Joe Lamp’l and Dr. Jett Gillman.
Do it Yourself Organic Garden Pest Control [Infographic] – Check out the infographic below on how to get started with organic pest control in your organic garden this planting season:
Infographic by http://organicpestcontrolnyc.com
Organic Gardening Course For Beginners
Organic gardening Course in Co.Clare 2017 – In this course, you will learn most of the things related to organic garden such as site selection, sowing seeds, setting up a polytunnel or glasshouse, learn about no-dig gardening and green manures, and find out how to deal with weeds, diseases, and pests.
Organic Gardening Correspondence Course – The course is suitable for the first time organic gardeners as well as more experienced gardeners. It digs into much valuable information that explains in detail the concepts and principles of organic growing, how pests and diseases are controlled using organic growing principles and more.
Organic Gardening Podcast
That’s enough for reading, now you can learn while gardening. These helpful podcasts will keep you entertained.
Organic Gardening Podcast – This weekly podcast, hosted by Jackie Marie Beyer, has a lot of how to guide, practical tips and tricks related to organic gardening along with organic eating. These podcasts will help you learn more about how to grow vegetables, fruits, and flowers in your own organic oasis!
Joe Gardener’s podcasts – These podcasts from Joegardener.com feature high-quality content with big-name guests. You can expect a consistent, solid and well-produced podcast every single time.
Start with the soil – Having healthy soil is the key to better organic gardening. In this podcast, Doug and Jessia will provide some tips for what to do about heavy metals in your soil. Listen and try yourself.
Organic Gardening Organizations
Explore these various organizations that offer membership benefits and helpful information related to organic gardening:
Garden Organic – formerly the Henry Doubleday Research Association The Henry Doubleday Research Association (HDRA) was founded in 1954 to research and promote organic gardening, farming, and food. The Garden Organic is full of everything about organic gardening. It’s worth a visit to check out the advice, how-to articles, tips and tricks and all of the other free resources they offer.
Organic Crop Improvement Association – Is a member-owned, non-profit organization, which provides education, research, and certification services to organic gardeners, processors, and handlers around the world.
International Federation of Organic Agriculture Movements (IFOAM) has been the global organic umbrella organization since 1972, organize events where organic stakeholders can share their knowledge and expertise and establish valuable partnerships, guide you through the increasing complexity of organic standards and regulations, and more.
Certified Naturally Grown – The CNG is a non-profit alternative certification program, was founded in 2002 by organic farmers Kate and Ron Khosla. CNG is a less expensive and less cumbersome certification program than the USDA offers, making it a great option for small-scale organic farmers to consider.
World-Wide Opportunities on Organic Farms (WWOOF) – WWOOF is a worldwide movement linking volunteers with organic farmers and growers to provide volunteers hands-on educational and cultural experiences, learning about what is involved to grow to produce and animals organically. WWOOF gives you the opportunity to experience idealistic lifestyles while learning more about organic farming, all for free.
Maine Organic Farmers and Gardeners Association (MOFGA) – MOFGA certifies organic food and products throughout the State of Maine and has created a facility to support organic growers and demonstrate sustainable agriculture to the general public.