There are a lot of factors that can have big impacts on your health. These include diet, oral health, and exercise.
We all know that diet has a big impact on health. But did you know it has been linked to the prevention of certain common health problems? Doctors such as Caldwell Esselstyn and Neal Barnard have shown that a plant-based, or vegan diet can prevent and even reverse heart disease.
While not everyone is ready to go plant-based, research also demonstrates that cruciferous foods such as broccoli, cauliflower, and kale can help prevent ailments such as cancer. Beans and berries are known for their health benefits, too. The fiber improves digestion.
Chemical compounds in plants help us look and feel younger. For example, after cutting back on heavy dairy and meat, people report less joint pain and other common problems of aging.
Oral health is an area not many people consider in terms of balance and prevention in life.
By paying attention to your oral health, you can pick up on early signs and symptoms of serious diseases such as diabetes. By noticing these signs and symptoms early, problems can be treated before they develop more complications.
Saliva plays defense for your body. Healthy saliva contains antibodies that attack invading pathogens. Professionals, like those at Crest Hill Family Dental, know that bacteria that escape saliva form dental plaque, which can cause health problems.
Plaque can lead to infections in the forms of gingivitis, periodontitis, and trench mouth. In some cases, bacteria from the mouth enter the bloodstream and can cause endocarditis. Caring for the mouth can prevent problems throughout the whole body.
Exercise has plenty of benefits. Exercise can help prevent heart disease, high blood pressure, diabetes, and back pain. As you age, it will help you maintain better muscle tone and bone density.
Physical activity can help you feel energized and clear. These psychological benefits are known as the “exercise effect.” Chemicals including endorphins and endocannabinoids are released that improve your feelings and help lift dark moods. Exercise can be as simple as a walk, or doing chair yoga.
By taking care of your personal health, you can have a balanced life with lots of longevity. Focusing on areas including diet, oral health, and exercise can have important impacts in your life for the better.
Image from Pixabay
Latest posts by Rachelle Wilber (see all)
- 7 Solar Panel Financing Options - October 10, 2016
- Revamp, Recharge, and Remake Your Home Into a Paradise - September 5, 2016
- 4 Career Ideas for Adventurous Individuals - July 13, 2016