In the years after the 1929 stock market crash, car companies all over the world disappeared, leaving behind only those that were either innovative or large enough to survive. In 1928, more than 70 car companies manufactured automobiles and trucks in the United States and Canada. A few years later, fewer than 20 remained.
By the mid-1930s, Ford, General Motors and Chrysler were the largest automakers in North America, while other large manufacturers such as Packard, Pierce-Arrow and Auburn-Cord-Duesenberg Co. (ACD Co.) were wallowing in oceans of red ink.
Almost all the remaining manufacturers sought to alleviate their woes through innovation, but that held dangers all its own. The ACD Co. developed the futuristic Cord. The first Cord, the L 29, appeared in 1929, just in time to face the stock market crash. It featured front-wheel drive, which reduced its overall height and made it appear sleeker than the competition. It was a stunning car and front-wheel drive was a new innovation in North America, but it had many teething problems and never sold well.
The Cord foundered and production stopped in 1932. In 1936, the company had its last kick at the can. The new Cord 810 was sold for the years 1936 and ’37 and featured not only front-wheel drive but electric transmission shifting, hideaway headlights and no running boards. Its design was and still is heralded as the high point of the Art Deco car era and it sold well to an elite but limited market. But, like its predecessor, the 810 was also plagued with technical problems. In the end, the company collapsed.
Similar scenarios played out with other automakers as frantic car companies strove to capture the public’s attention. But America turned its back on cars that were innovative but somewhat unreliable and stuck to the tried and true.
Even after the Second World War, car companies continued to succumb to economic downturns. Rambler, Studebaker-Packard and Kaiser all disappeared in the 1950s or early ’60s.
Studebaker built its own Cord-like automobile with the Avanti. It was a brilliantly designed car with looks that are still arresting. But it was Studebaker’s final hurrah; the company died even as critics cheered its last creation.
Today, we find ourselves in much the same boat as people did in the period after the 1929 crash, with car companies in grave financial situations.
There might be a silver lining to the woes — if carmakers survive and attend to the lessons taught by the beleaguered auto industry of the 1930s.
The post-1929-crash public had turned its back on luxury cars, which were as expensive and unreliable as they were innovative. People required reliable and affordable cars. The surviving manufacturers gave them just that. These new cars also removed much of the disparity between luxury vehicles and more pedestrian models that had existed up until then. A 1938 Cadillac does not appear all that different from a 1938 Chevrolet — for good reason. People who could still afford a Cadillac didn’t want to stand out quite as much.
Today, the automakers best suited for survival are offering the same kind of products, at least figuratively. Vehicles will now have to make economical and environmental sense. Sure, gas prices have temporarily tumbled, but the reasons for having smaller, more efficient and environmentally friendly cars is still pressing. Vehicles of dinosaur-like proportions will likely continue on the road to extinction.
Hopefully, the once-great U. S. automakers will survive to create the cars of the future and, hopefully, we will be able to afford them.