You need to understand your own immune system and keep your
health tip-top over the winter season. As the winter nights draw close, our
thoughts will no doubt wander off to warming pies, stews and roasts and other
winter warming comfort and food.
There’s nothing absolutely wrong with engaging yourself a
little over the winter months, but how can you make sure you get all the
necessary nutrients your body needs to fight off colds and flu? Nutritionist
Sally Wisbey, on behalf of Spat one, says that our diet is no doubt crucial to
boosting our immune systems and also helps fight off the bugs (infections).
Although staying positive, exercising and getting a good night’s sleep are also relevant.
Take a moment to assess your lifestyle habits. Overworking and sleepless nights, exercise and sleep all tend to deplete our energy and our strength. This can leave us more vulnerable to harmful influences. In this post I am going to share some Reliable tips with you regarding what to eat to remain well this winter…
1. Eat Breakfast
Begin your day with a healthy slow-release breakfast, which will keep you full of energy and active until lunch. Eating oats are a great way to start your morning, a little bit of nuts or seeds and some seasonal winter fruit like apples, pears cranberries or dates can be added.
2. Eat vitamin fruits
and vegetables, wealthy in vitamin C
Take foods like sweet potatoes, tomatoes, red peppers and citrus fruits in conjunction with your meals as they contain vitamin C, which plays a vital role in the immune vitality and increase energy levels, particularly if you routinely work out.
3. Spinach, a
Reliable Source of Zinc
During winter seasons, we can come into contact with viruses
and bacteria that can cause colds or flu. So, it’s important that our immune
system is top notch and zinc contributes to this. Sources of zinc include
nourishments like legumes, spinach and
4. Eat additional
iron-rich foods – or have a supplement
Red meats, lentils and green leafy vegetables are all
sources of iron, which improves a healthy immune system. If you’re not getting
all your iron requirements from food sources alone consider taking a natural
iron food supplement.
5. Increase your
Fish such as salmon and cod, as well as milk, eggs and
cheese, are a great source of protein & vitamin B12 that contributes to the
normal functioning of the immune system and also contributes to a reduction in
tiredness and fatigue.
6. Take sweet root
veggies and soups instead of sugary foods
Sometimes the cold winter seasons can make us yearn for
sugar-laden ‘comfort foods’ that can be bad for both our waistline and our
energy levels. Nevertheless, there are lots of winter foods that are nutritious
To achieve vitality over the winter months, make sure you
give yourself time to relax, exercise and try to get both good quality and
Thank you and please don’t forget to watch our next rock-solid health post.