Pick a topic related to safety. The goal of this project is to identify a problem and develop a solution and sell that solution to management using a business case approach.
Let the topic be Carbon Fiber Firefighting Helmet (because the regurlar helmet is heavey and some people got neck injury).
you must do a cost benefit analysis . you must recommend this or not based on CBA.
This has to relate to safety.
Your project will be scored on originality, completeness (quality) and adherence to the format. This project is worth 20% of your final grade in this class.
1. Cover Page: Title of project, Submitted by, In partial requirement for SAFM, Date. Don’t have this
2. Abstract/Summary/Executive Summary: This is a short section, usually one or two paragraphs, which summarizes the report. It is usually written after the report is completed. It sells the report. It should summarize your entire contents/work documented, without getting into specific details. Major findings/contributions should be brought up without the lengthy details of how that was achieved. It may have Key words at the end.
3. Introduction: Describes the environment of the project. It briefly describes the existing problem (without details, usually), and thus, the need for economic analyses or procedures. This is usually the motivation for your work. It could document the current state-of-the-art or previous work in this area. It then states the objectives of your work or the work that has been performed so far. This is written as a consequence of your need and the ability of your methods to address your problem. It concludes with an outline of your report, i.e., Section 2 describes the problem formulation, conclusions and further work is presented in section X.
4. Problem formulation/Objectives: This is the right place to present the precise description of the problem and state your objectives. Explain what data you are going to collect that will demonstrate how you will know you solved you problem.
5. Approach/Methods/Solution Procedure: This is the heart of the work. This section is usually the main body and is sub-sectioned due to its size. It contains the solution approach or methods you have adopted or developed, and their efficacy to solve your problem.
6. Study/Application: It describes the application of your methods to the problem data, and documents the results obtained. If the results are extensive, a separate section can be devoted to them. This is where the mathematical portion of your cost/benefit analysis will appear. Your project must include a cost comparison table and a breakeven analysis.
7. Discussion/Benefit Analysis: This is an important section from the point of view of the net benefit to the company/customer. It discusses the results obtained in the previous section and their utility to the company; expected savings in $’s, time and quality improvement should be described in a quantitative manner. These discussions are based on solid arguments not guesses. Deviations from expected results should be explained.
8. Conclusions and Further work: This section concludes the work without repeating the discussions or contents of another section. It is in a summary form and could be itemized. At this point few speculative remarks can be made. Future work that will enhance the scope of the project and enhance benefits should be included.
9. Acknowledgments: if any.
10. References: Formal referencing style should be adopted (see Professional Safety Journal, or any other journal). This section should include reference to any sources used in the project. You must have both internet and traditional references.
11. Appendices: Are numbered sequentially and should have a single “theme.” Detailed problem data, secondary proofs/algorithms, etc. should be a part of the appendices. A good way to know what should not be included in the main text but in appendices is to assess the importance of the material. If it is secondary or consists of long details, not critical to the understanding of the basic project, it should be in an appendix.
12. Elevator Speech: Prepare 5 slides that explain the problem, your solution, how you know your solution worked and why the company should invest in your solution.