Teen & Child Counseling
“It is a sign of wisdom, not weakness to ask for help.” Unknown
At Creative Counseling Center we offer teen & child counseling – including play therapy – for children as young as age 2. Play therapy is the modality that is best suited for children. We use a non-directive approach that allows the child to be in charge of their play.
What is Play Therapy?
Play therapy refers to a large number of treatment methods, all of which make use of one or more of the natural benefits of play. It is a special therapeutic approach for working with children, adolescents, their families and/or care providers.
Play is the natural medium of children. Usually, children have not developed the cognitive or verbal skills that adults use to discuss feelings, emotions, and experiences in therapy. A safe and structured playroom environment is established where children are encouraged to play in ways that reveal concerns, problems, and issues they are struggling with.
A qualified play therapist is able to guide the play of children in ways that are therapeutic and healing. Parents, family members or care providers are often included in the play. This allows the play therapist to observe and interpret the full range of systemic/relational dynamics that are important to the child or adolescent. The play therapist is then able to enter into the intrapsychic and systemic reality of the child resulting in appropriate suggestions and interventions.
Play therapy & child counseling allows:
1. Children to communicate ideas, thoughts, fantasies, feelings and experience through play.
2. Children to recreate and resolve events (such as trauma, divorce, abuse or death of a parent or family member).
3. Children work though various problems in play.
4. Children can rehearse and master skills and other techniques through play.
5. A window for adults, including parents, caregivers, and foster parents, into a child’s world.
6. Children to express themselves as a metaphor for conflicts, emotions, and situations experienced.
7. Children a process of energy enhancement (“doing” versus “talking”).
8. Children a less threatening approach to talk therapy.
9. Children to helps to relieve feelings of tension and stress.
10. Children to develop self-control, self-responsibility, and appropriate self-esteem.
Length of therapy
Each Child processes information differently. The length of therapy depends on several factors of the child’s experiences. The child’s developmental stage and the age of the child at the onset of the issue are taken into consideration. Often times, the more recent the issue, the shorter the therapy.
Parents are encouraged to be a part of the play therapy process by meeting with the therapist on a regular basis. Involvement provides parents with practical strategies for managing problematic behaviors at home. When appropriate, parents may be asked to participate in the play process and be asked to do activities outside the session.
(video) When to Seek Therapy For Your Teenager
Adolescence is such an unique time in a person’s life. It can be a very confusing time and complected by life’s experiences. Many times teens and adolescents are brought to counseling at their parents’ suggestion. There are even times when the parents point to the teen as the “problem.” We understand this and meet the adolescent wherever they are in their process.
(video) Getting your Teen to Talk