Scannx Company Blog
In this age of ever-advancing technology, people are becoming more and more dependent on online resources as a means of learning – something once achieved predominately through books. But despite this evolution, a library reference desk is still a valuable source of information.
With the presence of library technology expanding to meet user demands, the typical job description of a librarian has changed. The need for libraries to incorporate technology precipitates their need to hire capable people who know and understand that technology. This has led to an emerging trend in library staffing.
We’ve talked a lot about the future of the library and how the digital age is greatly impacting the evolution of learning as well as library technology and services. With all of this discussion about the future, it’s only fitting that we dive into the past and take some cues from our predecessors in understanding the importance of library evolution.
Tags: library technology, library evolution, the digital age, evolution of the library, evolution of learning, educational programs, educational system, expansion of libraries, the future of the library, cloud-based technology, digital scanners, new technology
Today’s students are not just students. They do study and attend classes, but they also participate in extracurricular activities as well as work, volunteering, teaching, mentoring, etc. So, your run-of-the-mill library technology is not always the best option to keep up with their busy lives. Digital technology, in a broad sense, is meant to increase productivity and communication. In the busy life of the average digital-age student, this has never been more important.
Online journals are becoming more of a trend, and many newspapers are being forced to cease publication. Why? Because e-books and e-publications are the newer, quicker and more mobile way to read in this increasingly digital world.
As a fully functioning academic library, you’ve got expenses. In a perfect world, libraries would run purely on the abundant educational growth they inspire. Sadly, that is not the case. And libraries, just like any other institutions, have to pay for the services they provide while constantly being challenged by budget cuts.
It was approximately one year ago that President Obama announced ConnectED, his worldwide initiative to bring high-speed internet to 99% of American students. This initiative is wholly based on the defining characteristics of classroom learning today:
As the digital evolution progresses, it becomes more and more apparent that library technology is not what it used to be. No longer do life-sized scanning machines hog the hallways of library facilities. Libraries have begun adopting digital scanning methods that eliminate the need for paper and allow students to acquire needed materials at a faster pace. Reading materials have become accessible through tablets and mobile phones, and Wi-Fi is now a staple in library settings.