IOS App Development software is actually used for creating devices of Apple. The very first device introduced by Apple was their first generation iPhone. And since then, they have launched 11 new generations in the market. In 2007, Apple was the first brand who brought the touch screen technology with a virtual keyboard for the wide-ranging of the audience. As it was the era of keyboard phone mostly, so the introduction of touch phone with the entire range of interesting feature was a big deal.
It was considered as the biggest revolution of 2007. And it targeted the audience accurately which increased its market value in a matter of days. Apple gives proper attention to the needs and demands of their users and they try to release an updated version every year. iOS is the operating system of these devices and it is the second most popular operating system of the technology world.
Apple has a global market share of 15%. It just shows how gigantic the market value is of Apple devices. iPhones are like hot dogs in the technology market and the company has sold more than a billion devices. In 2007, the year of introduction of the iPhone, Apple succeeded in selling 1.4 million phones and from that day the number is just increasing.
Mobile App Development Approach:
Technical innovation and minimalist design make Apple one of the most valuable brands in the world. The revenue of Apple has touched the skies. Starting from generating revenue of 8 billion dollars to more than 250 billion dollars. And this happened by selling more than 200 iPhone worldwide. All the other devices played their role in it as well.
The Software Development Industry is the fastest growing industry of today. In the past years, web development was the focused area of software development. But with the increased demand for smartphones, mobile app development has become the center of concentration in software development. Due to the excessive use of mobile devices, the development of mobile applications is the talk of the town. From Android to iOS, Mobile App Development covers all the features needed for an operating system. It would be interesting to know that iOS App Development is leading in the software development industry with its unique development approach.
Mobile App Development:
The software applications used to run mobile devices are known as mobile applications. There is a great variety of mobile devices used by people nowadays ranging from smartphones to e-book. Every mobile app has specific features and each app is different from the other. Because apps are designed for specific platforms to provide specific services such as entertainment, education, games, etc.
The mobile apps are categorized as native apps, web apps, and hybrid apps. The native apps are operating systems specific such as iOS apps and Android apps. Web apps are similar to native apps while Hybrid Apps are Developed by using multi-platforms.
In the digital time of today, most of the tasks have become software dependent. Among all these software applications, iOS apps are gaining fame at very fast speed. The reason behind this is the authenticity of the Apple Platform which does not compromise on the standards of mobile applications.
iOS App Development:
Apple’s iOS is among the most popular operating systems. iOS requires a specific approach in order to develop application software. From the past few years, the rate of iOS app development has increased and become the greatest business ventures globally. iOS app development is not as easy as web development. Apple has set quite strict standards which should be followed by the app developers during the process of iOS app development.
The iOS platform has proven to be the most beneficial platform which allows the developers to turn a diverse range of unique concepts into reality. With the collaboration of the right resources and developer’s team, any idea can be transformed into a new and unique application.
Before the launch of any iOS application, the Apple platform thoroughly checks whether the app fulfills the iPhone development standards or not. These standards include seamless thematic structures, UI designs, and UX designs, and many more. The iOS app is designed and developed according to the standards provided by Apple. If Apple finds any app incompatible, it directly rejects the app and does not allow the developer to launch it on Apple’s platform.
Any business planning to develop an app for the Apple platform should follow and stick to the specifically designed standards of Apple.
In order to develop an iOS application, a Mac computer is the first requirement. And having the latest version of Xcode goes without saying. Xcode is the integrated development environment (IDE) for both the Mac and the iOS applications. There are a lot of requirements before writing, designing, developing, coding and debugging the iOS applications. And Xcode basically fulfills those needs. As it has an iOS software development kit along with tools, compilers, and techniques for forming the framework.
And as far as the coding language is considered, it is advice from the experts to use the modern Swift programming language. Well, it is important to clear it first that Xcode is just for the creating iOS application and it can run only on the Mac OC X.
SDK for iOS:
Well, the device of Apple has a lot of unique features, like camera, Siri, music application, game kit, messages, airplay facility, foundation kit, map kit, UI kit and many more which are unique and specifically just in devices of apple. So to develop all of those features, obviously, it requires a unique set of the software development kit. So the iOS software development kit is the solution. And it has all the tools, technology, techniques and capabilities along with the required language to produce the device of apple successfully.
Right environment for the development of application:
Just like any other work, having the right environment for iOS application development is also very important. It just has a few simple necessities. Like having and getting familiar with Xcode. And after that, using the basic built-in iOS simulator app to create the magic. It helps you in giving the real image of the final product beforehand.
Testing and deployment:
After the production of the application, it is supposed to go through a test framework or iOS rest unit to find out all the possible errors before launching it. And after the basic testing, developers have the authority of getting the feedback from specific audiences using the test flight technique. As it is before launching the application officially in the market, it helps in getting the overview and you can make changes when you have the time on the sleeve.
Many things can be tested in this beta testing technique like calling 3rd party apps or push notifications. The only thing needs to be done is uploading a beta build of the app and connecting iTunes to the device. The test flight installation will help in getting helpful and valuable feedback from customers.
After testing and beta testing, it is the time of launching the application. The application is deployed to the app store and made public for the use of consumers. However, it is compulsory to join  . Because it is the apple developer program and it will give access to the beta software. Not only just that but extensive beta testing tools, app analytics along with advanced app capabilities.
iOS as the market leader:
iOS being the market leader paving the path for efficient mobile application development. The main goal of iOS app developers is to develop the most advanced apps by using Apple’s platform and increase mobile interaction at a high rate. Every Software Development Company wants to develop an app which is unique and competitive.
As the software development industry is at a high rate of competition, every sleek app development design makes the software more attractive. Many companies and individual developers are working very hard to take the iOS app development to the next level. In general words, apps developed for iOS are productive enough to elevate their purchasing power among the clients.
iOS app development: the future of mobile app development
According to reports, the total number of mobile applications of apple play store is more than 2 million. And it has an influence 4-5 times more than websites or any other medium. Involvement and interaction research is being conducted on the people of the 21st century and according to the results, there is an increase of 55% in the engagement rate.
And you know how much each human is spending on average basics on these applications? Well, it is an average of rock-solid 4 hours a day. So what is going on, you must ask? Well, technology has taken over. And Apple has made the name in the global market at the fastest rate possible. So be ready to see the technology world overtaken by the apple and its devices.
The key reasons why iOS apps are considered as the future of app development are as follows:
- Introduction of Swift
- High-Quality Emulators
- Intelligence upgrade
- Consumption of Time
- Lesser Fragmentation
- Proper file management
- Better Development Support and Tools
- Digital online wallet
- Higher Revenue
iOS is a well-reputed platform and a tough competitor of other operating systems. The iOS app development has great scope and immense potential when it comes to the range of app development actions and abilities.
Introduction of Swift:
Coding is the foundation of every software app development. Any mistake in the coding of programming language can result in the development of a faulty application. Java is used frequently in the Development of Android Applications.
Same way, Apple has introduced Swift as a programming language in its latest version. Swift is a new and popular programming language. This programming language requires fewer codes as compared to other programming languages. The other programming languages require 40% more codes than Swift.
Moreover, Although Swift is new, it’s delivery results are quite promising. It has proven to be a good communicator between the coder and the computer. By using Swift, the programmer can easily direct the computer what to do without any confusions. With reduced codes, Swift reduces the probability of bugs and other technical issues.
In app development, emulators are the software systems which enable the host system to run software or use peripheral devices designed for the guest system. Every mobile device has its own emulator which is software specific. iOS emulators provide great support and are also faster in speed.
Android emulators, on the other hand, are slower in speed which also slows down the process of Android app development. Moreover, the slow speed of the Android emulators makes the development process tougher for the developers. Due to this reason iOS app development is ahead.
And the overall upgrade:
The very important update in the iOS application is of intelligence. Who remembers the day Siri joined hands with apple? It has revolutionized the work of artificial intelligence since then. Waking you up to dialing your numbers for you, booking a vehicle to answering your complicated questions, we all have come in a new world. Well, this world is offered by iOS applications only. Even though Alexa is trying to beat but still Siri has its own place. Other than the GPS service of Apple devices are way more accurate and it never let you get lost in any part of the world.
Consumption of Time:
iOS app development takes less time than Android. The reason is that the programming language Swift and the emulators used in iOS app development consume less time. As compared to this, the Android app development is quite a time-consuming process because of the slow emulators and long coding sentences. Due to long coding sentences, the chances of occurring a bug is also higher. iOS app development is done with shortcodes which saves time and also reduces the probability of bugs.
Foreseen bugs are the nightmares of android app developers. Because the applications developed for Android are relatively for general devices. As these applications are available to download on almost all of the brands of electronic devices. And these devices have different sizes and measurements which leads to unexpected complains and errors.
But it is not the case for iOS apps because they are for specific devices only. As these applications are on Apple’s play store only. And that is accessible for Apple devices users only. So the lesser fragmentation saves the application from unexpected bugs.
Proper file management:
With the introduction of iOS 11.3 in the market, everybody is talking about the new update. Basically, the new update is with the name “files”. It helps the user save all of the data in forms of a file. And that file is just a click away at the time of the use. So everybody is obsessed with this feature. Because it has made saving documents, pictures, videos, all kind of data a lot easier. And even companies are using this feature because of its convenience.
Better developers support and tools:
As described earlier, the developer of iOS applications uses Xcode. Xcode is way more advanced and has updated tools and techniques that the best operating system of the market (Android). It only shows the commitment of Apple towards its developers that they are providing them with the best in every way possible. That is helping them moving forwards easily. And in a matter of very little time, Apple will take over its biggest competitor i.e., android also.
Digital online wallet:
Nobody really deals with paper money anymore. That is plus in the form of online transactions but it has caused a lot of security hazards as well. When you are using Apple’s digital mobile wallet, the only thing in your mind will be the service or product you’re buying. The security issue is not even a matter of concern. Because iOS deals with it, in the best way possible. The security system is really high. And the transactions take place through messages. And no need of putting your credit card details anywhere.
The importance of digital wallet is being expressed in the form of a 500% increase rate of transactions of apple pay. It shows that the Apple devices and its unique features are ready to take over.
Comparison between the revenues of both giants shows it really clear that iOS is way ahead of Android in terms of money. It also gives the customers a clear image that they have more to invest in the applications and devices. And where the developers and developing companies will go? Obviously towards the brand with more money. And it has been made public already that Apple is investing way more on the developer in contrast to Android owners.
The world is always changing and the most intelligent thing to do is to change with time. Updating your devices according to the need of the time is the way to succeed. As iOS developers are developing the latest applications, it is smart to change accordingly. As everybody enjoys using the latest update and iOS developers provide you with the latest updates every now and then. And it is beneficial for the developers also. Because it is less time consuming as well as more profitable to make iOS applications. So switching to iOS is really worth considering.