Were you recently diagnosed with diabetes, just like many other Americans. This condition can be life-threatening and cause different complications to individuals. You should know that you can control diabetes by following the advice you physician or doctor has given you, like losing weight and taking your medication.
They are a couple of ways of controlling diabetes and some people take time to move from their denial stage. Many people refuse to believe they have diabetes although it has become a national epidemic. The two main precursors of diabetes is not being over weight and not eating lots of sweets. Diabetes strikes everyone and some indications states that it can be an inherited disorder. If one of your relatives had first degree diabetes, chances are highly possible that you may get it as well. Don’t forget to tell your physician as well of you once had a relative with diabetes so they can do a blood test to see if you are at risk for diabetes as well.
The first thing to do if you are type II diabetes is getting yourself a blood sugar monitor to keep records of your sugar level. Doctors recommend that you do this several times a day, especially when you’ve finished eating. You will be also given diet suggestions and prescribed to certain medications.
It’s a shame that many people with type II diabetes do not take their medication, eat the wrong foods, and fail to monitor their blood sugar levels.
Monitoring the gylcemic index is one of the main things to do when controlling diabetes. Carbohydrates are not good for type II diabetes and people with this condition should stay away from them since they have a difficult time absorbing, breaking down sugar and starch in their system. A certain number of carbohydrates have high glucose levels which takes too much time in breaking them down. So when monitoring the gylcemic index you should be aware of which carbohydrates tend to rank high in the glycemic index sheet.
You can surely take control of your diabetes by monitoring your sugar levels, becoming aware of carbohydrates that tend to be high in the glycemia index, and taking your prescribed medication.