What is online safety?
'Online safety is defined as being safe from risks to personal safety and wellbeing when using all fixed and mobile devices that allow access to the internet as well as those that are used to communicate electronically. This includes personal computers, laptops, mobile phones and gaming consoles such as Xbox, Playstation and Wii.' (from .Gov.uk)
How do we teach Online safety at St. Helen's?
Online safety is a crucial element in keeping our children safe here at St. Helen’s. We encourage children to use digital technology safely. At St. Helen’s we have extensive security measures in place both internally and externally, that support children’s learning whilst keeping them safe. The safety and well-being of our students is imperative. In St. Helen’s online safety is managed in accordance with our online safety policy and acceptable user policy.
Online safety Curriculum
Within our computing curriculum we offer a comprehensive online safety learning experience for children across KS1 and KS2 at the start of each academic year. Each unit is designed to provide children with valuable information on common topics, for examples; safe surfing, our digital footprint and privacy.
Children have internet access via mobile phone, computer consoles, TV’s and computers. We feel that it is paramount that you as a parent are fully aware of the dangers your child could face while accessing the internet outside of school.
Dates to Remember
Safer Internet Day - Tuesday 5th February 2019
Parent Online Safety workshop- Monday 5th - 9th November 2018
Scenarios for different year groups.
Online Safety Display
Online Safety Assembly
Year 5 worked with an online safety company to be an advertising school for their book I Spy With My Little Eye, Things That Spy On Me. We had a workshop and were also involved in the launch event for the book.
Click here for the Sky News article.
Online safety Workshop
In November, we held an online safety workshop week for parents and children, to help them be aware of the dangers children can face online, playing games and using social networking sites.