THE PALESTINE-ISRAEL CONFLICT:
A Basic Introduction, 3rd ed.
by Gregory Harms, with Todd M. FerryLondon: Pluto Press, 2012. 288 pages.
Buy on Amazon
BACK COVER: The Palestine-israel conflict is the most notorious conflict of the twentieth, and now
twenty-first, century. Yet the way it is reported in the media is often confusing, leading many to
assume the hostilities stretch back to an ancient period. This accessible introduction covers the
full history of the region, from biblical times until today. Perfect for the general reader, as well
as students, it offers a comprehensive yet lucid rendering of the conflict, setting it in its proper
historical context. Harms and Ferry show how today's violence is very much a product of recent
history, with its roots in the twentieth century. This third edition is fully updated, including an
analysis of the ongoing situation in Gaza.
STRAIGHT POWER CONCEPTS IN THE MIDDLE EAST:
US Foreign Policy, Israel, and World History
by Gregory HarmsLondon: Pluto Press, 2010. 240 pages.
Buy on Amazon
How did the US become a world power?
How did it become involved in the Middle East?
What is the history
and nature of its "special relationship" with Israel?
AMAZON COPY: Given the increase in tensions in the Middle East, and the United States' involvement in them, news
coverage is in abundance. Yet, the reportage and discussion of American foreign policy is often
narrow in scope, offering little background or context. The subject is routinely treated with the
vocabulary provided by government officials, presenting best intentions while conceding occasional
mistakes and unfortunate incidents. As Gregory Harms demonstrates in Straight Power Concepts, the
historical record bears out a different vocabulary and tells a story that sharply contrasts with the
In this brief and accessible account, the reader is guided through the panoramic sweep of world and
American history, reviewing how the US became a world power, how the Middle East became "modern,"
and how Israel became an American "strategic asset." In doing so, the book provides a broad frame of
reference, illustrating that recent developments are closer to business-as-usual and nothing
resembling the rhetoric commonly used by heads of state, press secretaries, news media, and
As in his highly successful book The Palestine-Israel Conflict, Harms makes complex subjects
accessible to everyone, without sacrificing analytical rigor. This book should be the first port of
call for students and anyone seeking clarity and a historical elucidation of current events
involving the United States, Israel, and the Middle East.