Good Morning Everyone..!!
We are here with your Daily dose of Challenging Wordlist. Consider the given newspaper article as a Comprehension for your exams and do answer the questions at the end.
Today’s article, 'First among allies?’ has been picked from The Hindu.
This article talks about the protest against Nuclear policy during the Britian visit of U.S. President (Donald Trump) as Britain has begin the process to free itself from the EU, its relationship with the U.S. has gained more and more importance. The government’s policy to BREXIT is alienating it even further from its neighbours in Europe.
To read more, you can go through the article from the link below -
Challenging Words in the Article -
- Outcry (आर्तनाद) - Noun
Meaning - an exclamation or shout
Synonyms - clamor, ferment
Antonyms - acceptance, praise
Example - A loud outcry was raised in the fleet and the country.
- Embarks (चढ़ना, शुरू करना) - Verb
Meaning - begin (a course of action)
Synonyms - commence, launch
Antonyms - cease, finish
Example - Neha has plans to embark on a new career as a journalist.
- Extricating (समाधान करना) - Verb
Meaning - free (someone or something) from a constraint or difficulty
Synonyms - detach, rescue
Antonyms - connect, combine
Example - The little kitten did not know how to extricate himself from the string of tape.
- Contours (रूप-रेखा) - Noun
Meaning - an outline representing or bounding the shape or form of something (Noun)
mould into a specific shape, especially one designed to fit into something else (Verb)
Synonyms - curve, figuration
Example - New sea ice is rough in contour and milky-white in colour.
- Aftermath (परिणाम) - Noun
Meaning - the consequences or after-effects of a significant unpleasant event
Synonyms - residual, impact
Antonyms - cause, start
Example - Food prices soared in the aftermath of the drought.
- Rescinded (विखण्डित) - Verb
Meaning - revoke, cancel, or repeal (a law, order, or agreement).
Synonyms - abolish, retract
Antonyms - allow, enforce
Example - He rescinded his marriage proposal!
- Skewed (विषम) - Verb
Meaning - suddenly change direction or position
Synonyms - alter, twist
Antonyms - maintain, straighten
Example - The car had skewed across the track.
- Cater (आवश्यकताएं पूरी करना) - Verb
Meaning - provide people with food and drink at a social event or other gathering
Synonyms - gratify, indulge
Antonyms - ignore, neglect
Example - We have to cater to fifty people in the party.
Now considering the article above as a Reading Comprehension question, try to answer the following -
- According to the passage what has been defined as “best friend and neighbour” by Theresa May?
- What are the main objectives of trashing the free trade agreement of India to Britain?
Given below are some words to check your vocabulary you can make sentences with those words in the comment section which will be reviewed by us.
Take the Quiz below to find out how versed you are in your vocab.