HOW do you make money on the Internet? In the late 1990s, this was the question on everybody's lips. The answers bandied about included “building communities”, “ensuring stickiness”, “B2C”, “B2B” and many others. Buzzwords came and went, and eventually nearly everyone went bust. The problem was that advertising revenue was insufficient to keep most sites running, and there was no standard way to charge for things on the Internet. There still isn't. Getting people to type their credit-card details into a web page raises security concerns, and makes purchases of less than a few dollars impractical. A handful of sites selling books, CDs, flights and holidays look as though they will survive. But most news and content sites are losing money, and many are now trying to introduce subscription fees. Many more have folded. Why should things be any different on the mobile Internet?
Mobile is different from the fixed Internet in three important respects. First, a mobile phone is a far more personal device than a PC. It is likely to be used by only one person, who will probably have the phone with him for most of his waking hours. Whereas e-mail messages go to a machine sitting on a desk, text messages go directly to the mobile phone's user. Often the network operator knows exactly who that user is, including his name and address. In order to route calls to and from the mobile, the network operator also needs to know where it (and therefore probably its user) is at all times.
Second, network operators can determine what menus and services appear on their users' phones. Whereas on PCs users have lots of scope to play around with the settings, on mobile phones all they can easily change is the ringing tone and the screen logo. The ability to set the default portal—the starting page that users see when they connect to the mobile Internet—is a big advantage, because it allows operators to act as gatekeepers.
This will cost you
Last, and most important, people know that using mobile phones costs money, and there is a mechanism for the network operator to charge them for that use. What is more, users seem prepared to pay a “mobility premium” to do things while on the move. Sending an e-mail or instant message over the Internet from a PC is essentially free; sending a text message from a phone costs an average of 10 cents, but users are prepared to pay because they regard it as good value, or because it makes their lives easier. And even when text messaging is more expensive, people still use it. In some places, sending a text message home while “roaming” in a foreign country can cost as much as euro1 (92 cents). Such charges are currently under investigation by the EU's competition commission. But compared with the cost and hassle of buying a postcard and a stamp, this still seems reasonable enough to many people.
In short, if you have a mobile phone, the network operator knows who you are, where you are, can direct you to the portal of its choice, and can charge you money. This is a very different world from that of the fixed Internet.
Mobile has some drawbacks, of course. Mobile devices have more limited screens and keyboards than PCs, and slower connections. Also, says Niklas Savander of Nokia, mobility makes people much more impatient. Researchers have found that a five-second delay to access something on an Internet-capable phone seems far longer to users than a five-second wait to call up a web page. “With the same response time, people rate mobile as slower,” he says. “So we have a slower connection, but users want a faster response.”
For me, here, now
But the combination of personalisation, location and a willingness to pay makes all kinds of new business models possible. Tomi Ahonen, head of 3G Business Consulting at Nokia, gives the example of someone waiting at a bus stop who pulls out his Internet-capable phone to find out when the next bus will arrive. The information sent to the phone can be personalised, reflecting the fact that the user's location is known, and perhaps his home address too; so bus routes that run from one to the other can appear at the top of the list, saving the user from having to scroll and click through lots of pages and menus. A very similar service, which allows users to find out when the next bus is due by sending a text message from a bus stop, is already available in Italy.
Would-be providers of mobile Internet services cannot simply set up their servers and wait for the money to roll in, however, because the network operators—who know who and where the users are, and control the billing system—hold all the cards. This has changed the balance of power between users, network operators and content providers. On the fixed Internet, the network access provider acts as a “dumb pipe” between the user's PC and, say, an online bookstore or travel agent. The access provider will not know how the connection has been used, and there is no question of claiming a commission. Mobile network operators, on the other hand, are in a far more powerful position. “Wireless is a smarter pipe,” says Chris Matthiasson of BT Cellnet. This means that operators are much less likely to be disintermediated.
Having avoided one mistake made on the fixed Internet, however, wireless operators may be tempted to make another, by setting up “walled gardens” of services and content. In theory, restricting users to a handful of approved services will enable operators to capture a much larger chunk of the expected bonanza in data revenues. In the 1990s, online services such as AOL, Compuserve and Prodigy operated on the walled-garden principle; but as soon as one of them offered unfettered Internet access, the others had no choice but to follow suit. The walled-garden model will turn out to be just as unsustainable on the mobile Internet, because users get annoyed by it.
Furthermore, unlike Internet access providers, wireless operators charge by usage, either for every minute spent online, or for every byte downloaded. This means they make money on transporting data come what may, so it makes sense to offer users the widest choice of content possible to encourage them to run up transport charges. That is how i-mode works; the vast majority of DoCoMo's data revenues come from transport, not the sale of content (though the firm does take 9% on the sale of other providers' content). A typical i-mode user spends ¥2,000 (about $17) per month on data-transport fees, and only ¥400 on content subscriptions.
Operators therefore generally offer a selection of approved services through their own chosen portal, and also give subscribers the option of going elsewhere. This is what AOL does with its dial-up Internet service; it offers services such as instant messaging, chat-rooms and e-mail, as well as access to the web. But surveys show that most users still spend most of their time within what used to be AOL's walled garden. The best way for operators to keep users within their walled gardens, says Katrina Bond of Analysys, is to offer attractive services. The fact that operators know who and where their users are—and may be able to keep this information to themselves—can give their home-grown or approved services a valuable advantage.
The upshot is that the operators need decent content and services to drive traffic; and the content providers need the co-operation of the operators if they are to charge for their wares. A number of business models have emerged to govern the relationships between the two.
Show me the money
The simplest one of these involves sharing revenues from text messages. Lycos, a web portal, provides a service that allows PC users to send text messages from a web page and receive the replies on their PCs. The effect is to stimulate text-message traffic between mobile phones and PCs. The PC users do not pay to send messages, but the mobile users do; and through agreements with mobile operators, Lycos gets a cut. There are other services, such as mobile games, that encourage mobile users to send text messages; the content provider gets a share of the extra revenue generated. Sometimes the operator also charges for the messages at a higher rate.
Another model involves the use of premium-rate text messages as a means of charging for one-off lumps of content, such as ringing tones, logos or horoscopes. Users send a text message to a special number, are charged accordingly, and have the content delivered in the form of a text-message reply.
More elaborate is a model sometimes called “reverse billing”, in which services are charged directly to the user's phone bill. In effect, the operator bills the user on behalf of the content provider, and then hands over the money.
In theory, reverse billing could be used as a means of payment for online commerce; a book, CD or cinema ticket could be charged directly to the user, as though it were an expensive phone call. And since mobile operators are used to handling a large number of small transactions, their systems can handle such transactions at around a tenth of the cost of a bank or credit-card transaction. This means that micropayments, which have never taken off on the fixed-line Internet, are feasible on the mobile one.
But users may prefer to pay lumpy subscription fees rather than a small charge for every morsel of information they access. Following the example of i-mode, whose sites work on monthly subscription fees, T-Motion, a mobile portal owned by Deutsche Telekom, has decided to try that model for WAP content, starting from November 1st. Subscribers to its T-Motion Plus service will pay euro10 ($9) a month for a bundle of free ringing tones and text messages, plus news, weather, financial updates, sport reports and games; this revenue will be split 50/50 with the content providers. T-Motion will track the popularity of the content, and will replace the least popular services every three months. With this model, the paid-for services cannot be given away free on other portals, or users will not be prepared to pay for them; the effect is to produce a walled garden of sorts, with premium services that only subscribers can access.
The most radical model is the “mobile virtual network operator”, or MVNO, in which a network operator acts as a wholesaler of airtime to another firm, which then markets itself to users just like an independent operator with its own network infrastructure. Virgin Mobile, a British mobile operator, is in fact an MVNO that resells voice and data airtime on the network belonging to another operator, One2One. The MVNO allows content providers to get their hands on transport fees, but operators feel ambivalent about the concept. On one hand, MVNOs can brand themselves to appeal to a wider range of customers, and thus boost overall use of the network; but on the other, MVNOs turn network operators into dumb pipes, giving them a smaller piece of the action. For the time being, most operators have chosen to deal with customers direct, rather than become wholesalers to MVNOs.
In various combinations, all of these models are in use now, but operators are still struggling to implement new billing systems. Most operators, says Nokia's Mr Savander, have between 20 and 40 separate billing systems to handle different kinds of services; one has 54. Software firms are competing to offer consolidated billing systems that will support any or all of these business models.
Which model will prove most successful remains to be seen, but there is certainly money sloshing around on the mobile Internet. Unlike on the fixed-line Internet, people are prepared to pay for content and services they really want. But what exactly might those be? As on the fixed Internet, there are two distinct markets: consumer and business. Although it is still early days, there are already signs of a “killer application” in each.
This article appeared in the Special report section of the print edition under the headline "Why mobile is different"