In the 90’s, all the kids were saying, “Me and this person are good friends” or, “Me and this person are going to the mall.” When teachers and other adults caught onto this, they started to come down hard on the younger generation to make sure they were saying “This person and I” instead. Although that is correct, it caused a major overcorrection, and almost everyone is using “I” where they should be using “me.” Few people use them correctly anymore. Worse yet, many people who think they are using “I” and “me” correctly like to speak down to others and correct their grammar, but their “corrections” are wrong.
When I was younger, I was one of the people getting the two mixed up until my wise mother shared a simple trick with me: Take the other person out of the sentence. How would you say it if you were just talking about yourself? I haven’t had any trouble since then. Below are some examples you can refer to:
Incorrect: Would you like to come to the mall with Zach and I?
Correct: Would you like to come to the mall with (Zach and) me?
Incorrect: It is Zach and I’s anniversary. (I’s is not even a word!)
Incorrect: It is me and Zach’s anniversary.
Correct: It is (Zach’s and) my anniversary.
Incorrect: Nicole loves music as much as me and Zach do.
Correct: Nicole loves music as much as (Zach and) I do.
Incorrect: If everyone else leaves, it will just be you and I left.
Correct: If everyone else leaves, it will just be (you and) me left.
Incorrect: Me and Zach’s house is in a cul-de-sac.
Incorrect: Zach and I’s house is in a cul-de-sac. (Again, I’s is not a word.)
Correct: (Zach’s and) my house is in a cul-de-sac.
Incorrect: There is nothing going on between he and I.
Incorrect: There is nothing going on between him and I.
Correct: There is nothing going on between (him and) me.
Incorrect: Me and Zach went to the store.
Correct: (Zach and) I went to the store.
Incorrect: This is for Zach and I.
Correct: This is for (Zach and) me.
Incorrect: The craziest thing happened to Zach and I!
Correct: The craziest thing happened to (Zach and) me!
Grammar is important. If you’re correcting other peoples’ grammar, make sure you KNOW you’re correct first. Anyway, keep following us for more writing (and speaking) tips and tricks! Until next time, keep writing!