Getting pregnant is more than just having sex at the right time. What you and your partner eat can have a big impact o how easily and quickly you can get pregnant.
Good nutrition can generate valuable dividends and there is no better time than now to start. The better the nutritional status is for both you and your partner, the healthier is the sperm and the more easily the women and get pregnant.
Here are tips to good nutrition to enhance your chance of pregnancy:
1) Healthy fats
Trans fats also cause inflammation in the body, which can disrupt ovulation, conception and early stage baby development.
2) Reduce or avoid processed carbohydrates
Processed or refined carbohydrates such white rice, pasta, biscuits and cakes are easily digested and spike blood sugar level. High blood sugar and its corresponding insulin level is one of the common causes of infertility. High insulin level affects ovulation cause Polycystic Ovarian Syndrome ( PCOS).
Eat whole grains and plenty of fruits and vegetables to replace the refined and processed carbohydrates.
3) Folic acid and Iron
Folic acid is essential to the process of building, repairing and replication of DNA ( the genetic material of all cells) during conception and pregnancy.
Folic acid is also important in maintaining a low-level of homocysteine in the blood. High homocysteine level increases the risk of high blood pressure and miscarriage during pregnancy.
Iron plays an important role in the synthesis of DNA. Great source of folic acid and iron is lentil, chickpeas, asparagus, spinach, broccoli, lima beans and beets. An excellent source of natural folic acid and iron is Spirulina, the algae that is complete with most of the essential nutrients needed for good health.
4) Avoid smoking, caffeine and alcohol
Research papers reported in Current Opinion of Obstetrics and Gynaecology said that caffeine, alcohol and cigarette increase oxidative stress in the body, which affect fertility.
Drinking 5 cups of coffee a day is associated with lower fertility. 2 portions of alcohol a day affects how receptive the uterus is to the egg in women and reduce sperm count in men.
- Zinc – helps to produce good quality sperm and reduce the risk of miscarriage.
- Selenium – a strong antioxidant that helps to increase male fertility and prevent miscarriage.
- Vitamin B6 – helps to balance the reproductive hormones.
- Vitamin B12 – it is needed for cellular reproduction and increase sperm count.
- Vitamin E – helps to increase sperm count, stops sperm from sticking together and increase the mobility.
- Essential Fatty Acids – Omega-3, Omega-6 are the 2 key essential fatty acids. Optimum ratio must be maintained at 1:1. They are important in helping with sperm mobility, sperm count, abnormal sperm and reducing fibroid and endometriosis.
So, feed your body with the right nutrition to overcome any deficiencies and get healthy first. This may take some time if your baseline is low. So, be patient and start with the basics.
If like this post, you can receive more by filling in the form at the right side and you will get more tips and information coming your way.