The day of Christmas, which celebrates the birth of Lord Jesus, has finally dawned.
Apart from these fun activities, combined with family get-togethers, chanting hymns and carol singing sessions, the occasion of Christmas is also a time for charity. Helping the less fortunate and the homeless not only makes the world a better place but also confers immense incentives for a person’s mental and emotional health.
There are many simple ways in which an individual can spread goodwill and show compassion towards humanity. Donating clothes and food to families from poor backgrounds, offering to help deprived people with medical expenses, volunteering to teach at a local school for the underprivileged, or simply helping a friend or relative get through a tough situation, all demonstrate benevolence in its purest form. Also Read: Christmas Spirit: Why Doing Good Keeps You Happy & Healthy
Moreover, the time, effort and even money that a person spends in these generous endeavours positively influence key regions in the brain, namely - the septal area, the ventral striatum and the amygdala. These are the parts of the mind responsible for improved blood flow to nerves, as well as uplifting feelings of love and calmness.
An act of altruism, hence, substantially benefits your cerebral, cognitive and psychological wellness. Read on, to know more.
5 Amazing Ways Sharing And Caring Augments Your Mental Wellbeing
Elevates Levels Of Happiness
Numerous studies on human behaviour have proven that the brain is wired to give to others who are in need. Thus, you are naturally inclined to donate to a person, to help them get past difficult circumstances and doing so leaves you feeling happy and contented.
Considerably Decreases Stress
Lending a helping hand to a loved one or a stranger establishes a meaningful connection between you and the other person. This attribute of social contact enhances moods and lowers stress. It also regulates amygdala signalling, to effectively combat anxiety
Significantly Improves Longevity
Performing a thoughtful act or volunteering for a cause bestows upon you advanced emotional stability. This assists in developing better-thinking skills, reducing the risk of heart disease and pacifying symptoms of chronic pain, all of which guarantee a longer and healthier life. Also Read: Get A Hobby For A Happier, Healthier Lifestyle
Vastly Promotes Self-Esteem
Spending valuable time and putting in sincere efforts, to do good deeds for improving the community naturally instils a sense of accomplishment in you. It boosts your levels of self-confidence, thereby empowering you to achieve your future goals with optimism and conviction.
Provides A Sense Of Belonging
Often, you will find yourself being bogged down with personal conflicts and work tension, wherein you tend to feel lost and lonely. Volunteering can help shift your focus from your worries, stimulate your cognitive functions and provide a profound meaning to your life.
In essence, a small kind deed done with a big heart and an open mind contributes to elevated brain activity and vastly supplements mental wellbeing. People can collectively engage in these activities of sharing and caring, not just during the Christmas season, but all through the year, to help heal the world and truly showcase the spirit of giving.