Bartoleme de Las Casas, Brief Account of the Devastation of the Indies. (). The Indies were discovered in the year one thousand four hundred and. Bartolome de Las Casas’ The Devastation of the Indies: A brief Account and the context of. Spanish colonisation reveal that the colonisers were repressive and. THE DEVASTATION. OF THE INDIES: A BRIEF ACCOUNT by Bartolomé de Las Casas. T. THE INDIES’ were discovered in the year one thou- sand four.
|Published (Last):||27 December 2007|
|PDF File Size:||15.93 Mb|
|ePub File Size:||11.82 Mb|
|Price:||Free* [*Free Regsitration Required]|
Selected pages Title Page. Neither were they ashamed to lade and burthen Women caxas childe, as if they had been only beasts for carriage. For this was their common custom, that they no sooner had set footing in any place, but they committed immediately some notorious violence upon the people, that the rest might stand in the greater fear of them.
Martha by reason of the Golden Mines and the fertility of the place was a brave Island; wherefore from the year It happened also, by reason that it came into the Governors mind to change the Indians from one Master to another, pretending to take away force from some that he saw began to envy him, that there was no seed time nor harvest for a whole year; now rather then the Spaniards would want, they took it from the Indians, by which means there perished no less then thirty thousand people; which caused one woman for hunger dd eat her own childe.
Under the New Laws, encomenderos land grantees were required to release the serfs on their land after the span of a single generation. Spanish Chronicles of the Indies: Your contribution may be further edited by our staff, and its publication is subject to our final approval. And so the whole Country was wasted by them, especially all the coast and the places adjoining, until the year John, having sold at the least a million of men; neither they yet forebear in tue year The rest of the Nobles of these Provinces, seeing that all the chiefest of them, who had the power and government of the Kingdome in their hands, were thw no cause put to death, but because they were not able to give them gold, fled to the mountains for safety, charging their subjects to submit themselves to the Spaniards, indiws not to tell them where their sculking places were, nor to give them notice of their flight.
And of all the infinite universe of humanity, these people are the most guileless, the most devoid of wickedness and duplicity, the most obedient and faithful to their native masters and to the Spanish Christians whom they serve. Thus we see how they were delivered over to a reprobate sense; and what a value they put upon these creatures formed after the Image of God.
While the Spaniards were hunting after the Indians with their dogs, they met with an Indian Women, who being sick and seeing that she was not able batolome escape them, taking a rope hang’d her self, hanging also her childe of a year old about her waste by the feet; but the dogs immediately fell upon the childe, only he was baptized cwsas a religious person fevastation he died.
Hereupon many sent home for the price of their Redemption, that they might be at liberty to seek for Victuals: They erected certain Gallowses, lss were broad but so low, that the tormented creatures might touch the ground with their feet, upon every one of which they would hang thirteen persons, blasphemously affirming that they did it in honor of our Redeemer and his Apostles, and then putting fire under them, they burnt the poor wretches alive.
And in this manner a Country abounding with Bartklome and people was totally destroy’d; in which there was a Valley forty miles long, where they burnt a Village that contained above a thousand houses. The Noble man escaping, gathered dd what force he could and thw after the Spaniards, who were gone away with no less then a hundred and forty thousand Crowns of his own Treasure; when he had overtaken them, he fell upon them, and having slain above fifty of the Spaniards, he recovered his Gold again.
Their hair also, which is by nature black, is hereby devstation and made of the same color with that of the sea Wolves; their bodies are also so besprinkled with the froth of the sea, that they appear rather like monsters then men. They go naked, only hiding the indecencies of nature, and a poor shag mantle about an ell or two long is their greatest and their warmest covering. They are very clean in their persons, with alert, intelligent minds, docile and open to doctrine, very inries to receive our holy Catholic faith, to be endowed with virtuous customs, and to behave in a godly fashion.
Colonial policy relationship with Indians In Spanish literature: These exercises they in their language call’d Mercies, but he Islanders Areytos. His name came into barholome again in the latter half of the 20th century, in connection with the indigenista movements in Peru and Mexico.
Bartolomé de Las Casas
Neither is it to be hop’d that these losses can be repaired as long as the World stands, unless God by some miracle should raise from the dead so many people as have been slain; besides if blasphemies and curses wherewith they have been bold to provoke even God himself. Providence sent a ship thither to confirm the devastatuon of those that govern’d, by which these religious persons sent to the religious persons of Hispaniola, but got no redress, for the Spaniards there were receivers of the prey.
A decisive part in the ccasas of the general principles of human rights was…. In a word, their covetousness, their ambition, which could not be more in any people under heaven, the riches of the Country, and the patience of the people gave occasion to this their devilish barbarism.
This is also reported that while the Spaniards were busily acting this bloody Tragedy, killing and destroying above six thousand innocent creatures, their chief Captain in hhe sung these verses: And also, those lands are so rich and felicitous, the native peoples so meek and patient, so easy to subject, that our Spaniards have no more consideration for them than beasts.
The Fourth Kingdom was called Xaraqua, being in the centre and middle of the whole Island, for eloquence of language, as also for good government and gentile customs, it excels all the rest, there was in it a great company of Lords and noble men, and for the people themselves they were the most ov in the whole Island. He worked his charges hard and became very prosperous.
The Devastation of the Indies
This also may be added by way of conclusion to the rest of their Crimes, that from the time that they first entered this Region, which is now seventeen years ago, they never ceas’d to send whole Ships laden with Indian Captives to the Islands of St. And this I also dare affirm, that the Indians had always just reason to raise war against the Spaniards, and that the Spaniards on the contrary, had never any legal cause of quarrel against them, but only always an intention to exercise a fury on them greater than the most consuming and prodigal rage, that ever made caaas worst of tyrants infamous.
They came to a very large Town, which being confident of their own innocence, thought themselves safer then the rest; but in casaa hours space they brought such a desolation upon it, killing all if and sexes, that there was not a person left alive, but what saved themselves by flight. In he took part in the bloody conquest of Cuba and, as thr encomendero land granteereceived an allotment of Indian serfs.
Then, when they have slain all those who fought for their lives or to escape the tortures they would have to endure, that is to say, when they have slain all the native rulers and young men since the Spaniards usually spare only the women and children, who are subjected to the hardest and bitterest servitude ever suffered by man or beastthey enslave any survivors.
He might have raised an army and endeavored a revenge, but he rather chose to leave his Kingdom and his dignity, and to live a banished person in the Province of Coquaios, where a potent vassal and subject of his inhabited. The Captain made answer, that he would not receive them, and that moreover he would kill them all unless they would declare whither their Lords were fled: But because it is so irksome to me to rehearse these Bloody acts not of men but of beasts, I will no longer dwell upon them, but go to those things which followed after.
Please try again later. A certain Lord of great power among them by name Hathvey, who had fled over to Cuba, that he might avoid either death or perpetual captivity, hearing by some of the Indians that the Spaniards were also come into this Island, having assembled the Indians together, he began as followeth: His account was largely responsible for the passage of the new Spanish colonial laws known as the New Laws ofwhich abolished native slavery for the first time in European colonial history and led to the Valladolid debate.
Roman Catholic mission, — In Western colonialism: For the slaughters, massacres, cruelties, devastations of Countries, destructions of Cities, violences, tyrannies, and rapines of the Spaniards, which they did commit in these so many several and so large Kingdoms, are so numberless, and strike the mind with such a horror, that those which we have before related, are nothing in respect of these which we are to relate, being all perpetrated in the year During his final years Las Casas came to be the indispensable adviser both to the Council of the Indies and to the king on many of the problems relating to the Indies.
It was republished inby Jan Evertszoon Cloppenburchalongside the book Origin and progress of the disturbances in the Netherlands by Dutch historian Johannes Gysius. Because of this, the wars of the Indians against each other are little more than games played by children. They were also forc’d to carry the Spaniards up and down in their Hamechs, using them in manner of beasts to carry their burdens and the necessaries of their journeys.
And because they are so weak and complaisant, they are less able devastafion endure heavy labor and soon die of no matter what malady. De Las Casas’ A Short Accountwas a revised history of the conquest, in the way that he includes facts that would aid him in his argument.
Bartolome de Las Casas | Biography, Quotes, & Significance |
This Plain is there be any thing in the world worth taking notice, claims a very nice observation. But after their departure, knowing the falsehood and treachery of the Spaniards, they sent messengers fifty miles after them, craving pardon in the name of the Indians, and entreating them to return.
It is a very hard thing, if not altogether impossible, to react all the murders and cruelties there committed; besides that, it would cloy the reader. American Civil War, four-year war —65 between the United States and 11 Southern states that seceded….