This condition, a complication of diabetes, is a buildup of toxins in the blood. It is a medical emergency that can be life-threatening.
Find out why hypoglycemia, or low blood glucose, is dangerous; the symptoms you should look out for, and learn what you can do to avoid it.
See why hyperglycemia, or high blood glucose, is dangerous; the symptoms you should look out for, and some important strategies to avoid it.
Hypoglycemia, also known as low blood sugar, is relatively common among people with diabetes, and is a side effect of medication, both pills and insulin. Early recognition and appropriate treatment of hypoglycemia is an important part of your diabetes management plan.
Living with Complications
Charcot foot is a deformity that can result as a complication of diabetes and other conditions. It develops after you lose sensation in your legs and feet. The joints and bones of your foot begin to break down and collapse. You cannot feel these injuries, and you may continue to walk on the foot. This worsens the damage. Charcot foot is a disabling deformity. It can be difficult to treat, but there are techniques that can be used to correct it.
This condition, which most often occurs as a complication of long-term diabetes, is a progressive degenerative condition that affects the foot. It is characterized by nerve damage in the foot along with severely weakened foot bones. This combination can result in a person fracturing the foot, but continuing to walk on the broken bones, which leads to debilitating foot deformity.
Preventing Long Term Complications
Learn about the long-term complications that can result from type 2 diabetes, and some ways you can help lessen this risk.
Watch how plaque build-up within large blood vessels reduces blood flow to your heart and extremities.
See how smoking affects people with diabetes, and learn some strategies you can use to help you quit.
Not long ago there was a preconceived notion that if you had developed diabetes you would eventually suffer complications. Today a patient with diabetes doesn't necessarily have to lose a limb or require kidney dialysis. In the program "Diabetes: Avoiding Complications" physicians from the National Institutes of Health, the University of North Carolina and the University of Texas Health Science Center in San Antonio provide a comprehensive look at coping with diabetes and avoiding, or at least delaying, its complications.
Obesity is sweeping the nation and those people are even more at risk for diabetes. In Part 4, learn what you need to know.
Skin & Foot Care
Learn how managing your blood glucose levels will help you to prevent or delay skin and foot problems.
Understand the importance of professional skin and feet exams, and the need to prevent injuries between healthcare visits.
Patients with diabetes are much more likely to develop serious foot problems. To decrease the risk of complications, people with diabetes should check their feet daily. Learn how and when to perform a foot exam, what to look for, and when to call the doctor.
This term is used to describe foot problems that stem from diabetes. These problems can be difficult to treat.
Understand how preparing a sick day plan, while you are healthy, can help you manage your diabetes on days which you are ill.
Understand the importance of making a plan for how you will manage your diabetes when you are not feeling well.
Learn which diabetes management supplies, medications and documents you should keep on hand in case you need to use them in an emergency.