The stern face of a Red Army soldier frowns down at the ruins of Brest Fortress, shattered by the Nazis' surprise attack in 1941. The defenders, surrounded, outnumbered and with no prospect of relief, fought on stubbornly and held up the German advance for several days. In recognition of this action, Brest earned the title "hero fortress." The laurel echoes the "hero city" titles given to Moscow, Leningrad (now St Petersburg), and Stalingrad (now Volgograd), sites of bloody and protracted battles thatultimately thwarted Hitler's invasion.
Brest is in Belarus (or "White Russia"), which today is a separate country from Russia. The colossal war memorial is a dramatic reminder of how WWII is perceived in the former Soviet Union, and a startling piece of work. While other former Soviet states may havemixed feelings about their Soviet war memorials, thecomplex at Brest fortress remains a major attraction, bringing in more than 20 million visitors since 1971.
The centerpiece is a sculpture called Courage, the head of a soldier next to a hammer and sickle flag. The monument is more than a hundred feet high. CNN jokingly included it in their list of the ugliest attractions in the world, but later apologized when they found the Belarussians did not regard a solemn monument to the courage of dead soldiers as a laughing matter.
The defense of Brest was the subject of the 2010 Belarusian/Russian war movieFortress of War, noted for its (grim) historical accuracy.
"Courage" is dwarfed by an obelisk 300 feet high clad in titanium steel. It is called the "bayonet obelisk" because the design is based on thecruciform bayonet of the Mosin-Nagant rifle , a weapon dating back to 1891 but which was favored by Red Army snipers during WWII. The individual sections were so large they required specialized trucks to get them here, and the structure haspendulum-like dampers inside to prevent it from swaying in the wind.
The fortress itself was built in the early 19th century, but was still in use as a military base when the Germans attacked in 1941. The gatehouse and other structures still show the scars of the assault. Inside were the defenders as well as a large number of civilians, including women and children, who died during the surprise attack by artillery and Stuka diver-bombers.
This 40-foot statue recalls a grim part the history here. The water supply was cut off at the start of the defense during an unusually hot summer. During the course of the siege, defenders tried to get down to the river to fetch water on several occasions. All were machine-gunned down. The statue depicts a parched soldier attempting to gather water in his helmet.
A collection of iconic WWII Russian armor near the entrance includes a SU-100 tank destroyer , T-44, the T-34, and an SU-152 assault gun. The Red Army had a powerful tank fleet that played a major role in the Soviet Union's eventual success, but these vehicles all appeared much later on during the war. The garrison defended Brest Fortress with much lighter weaponry.
Many examples of vintage WWII graffiti have been found, apparently scratched into the concrete walls by soldiers with bayonets, and these have been preserved in the complex's museum. They typically record the dates anddefiant slogans: "We will die, but we will not leave the Citadel. " "I will not surrender. Farewell Motherland."
At the center of the citadel is this Russian Orthodox church. In 1941 it was an officers' club, and became the site of some of the fiercest fighting. The Nazis captured the building in their initial assault, but a counter-attack by the defenders forced them out after 24 hours of room-by-room combat. Days later, the church was one of the last centers of resistance before the fortress fell.
More than a thousand bodies are buried beneath the central square, but only aquarter of them have been identified. Memorial plaques record the names of those who are known. Those who were captured are unlikely to have survived, as Russian POWs were treated far worse than American and British prisoners andmore than half of them died in the prison camps.
After 1945, some in the West talked about having had "a good war" with travel and adventure. On the Eastern Front, the memory seems to be entirely one of sacrifice.