Are you wondering how in the world you’re going to teach kindness to your kids? Are you trying to find resources that can spark in them that selfless feeling of wanting to do something meaningful to others? Then I’m glad you landed here. These 4 free printables will make teaching kids kindness a breeze!
If you look it up in the dictionary, here’s what kindness means: the quality of being friendly, generous, and considerate. A kind act.
What I created to help myself teach my kids about kindness were 4 kindness message cards with cute pictures and thoughtful messages so they can impact someone else’s day (heck, maybe even their life) by handing them a card and showing them they care.
This activity is in its essence, a kind act, it is being considerate, generous, and friendly to others.
I just thought it’d be nice to share these free printables with you guys in case you find it helpful as well.
4 Free Printables to Help You Teach Kids Kindness
These 4 message cards are actually a little DIY project that you can take on with them. All you have to do is cut around the pictures and messages and glue them on a colored paper or cardstock paper to make them an actual card. If you want to make it even more fun, you can go all out and use glitter glue, stickers, and add other elements to the project.
You can add more text if you’d like or leave them as they are. I think they all have simple, short messages but that can make a difference to someone else who’s having a bad day or who’s just not expecting to receive any kindness at all.
While you cut the printables and put the card together, you have an excellent opportunity to ask them what kindness means to them. If they’re right, awesome! You may elaborate more on the true meaning of the word kindness, you may tell them a story of how someone really impacted your life by being kind to you.
I think telling them a story at this moment would be a genuinely smart way to make this learning experience a lot harder to forget. Stories are memorable, they bring people together and they help us assimilate information better.
I remember several stories my dad told me when I was a little kid. I was around 5 years old, but I can still picture all of those moments with so many details. That’s all because of the unforgettable stories that he told me.
You can snag your Kindness Message Cards printables here:
As you download these 4 printables about kindness, start thinking about stories and experiences that you lived that are a phenomenal example of what the word means. By doing this little exercise now, you will be a lot more prepared later when it’s time to actually tell them the story.
I just hope with all my heart, that this activity can be one of those memories you and your kid will not forget. I truly hope they will look back on time and realize that as you played together, you were teaching them one of the most important lessons they will ever learn.
Now, would you share with me in the comment section down below how you practice kindness with your kids at home? If you’ve never done it, no worries. That makes two of us! This was my very first activity about kindness with my 3-year-old son, Samuel. This can be your first one too!