|A Western scrub jay enjoys a cool drink. Photo by J.J. Meyer|
MAKE A SPLASH WITH YOUR BACKYARD BIRDBATH
California towhees, Western scrub jays and robins tend to jump into the middle of a birdbath and splash with gusto. Smaller birds are often more timid, walking around the edges of a bath until they feel confident enough to test the water. Hummingbirds prefer to fly through a gentle spray.
With so many types of fountains and birdbaths on the market, how do you choose one that most birds will actually use?
For the birds, it’s all about feeling safe.
“The water should be no deeper than 3 inches for a water feature to be attractive to most songbirds,” said Robyn Bailey, NestWatch project leader at the Cornell Lab of Ornithology. “And gentle sloping basins are preferable to one that drops off sharply.”
Rocks can be added to an existing bath that may exceed this depth. And it’s best if the basin has a rough texture of the surface to give the birds a sure footing, she said. When it’s too slippery, the birds may not feel comfortable using it.
Like all animals, birds need water to survive. Bathing is a bird’s best friend for feather care. Birds bathe frequently to wash off dirt, parasites and other skin irritants. After vigorous splashing, a bird usually retreats to a perch where it fluffs its feathers to dry. Then it methodically preens each feather, adding a protective coating of oil secreted by a gland at the base of its tail.
Birds are attracted to the sight and sound of moving water, which makes some fountains or birdbaths with misters a popular rest stop for resident and migratory birds.
Placement of the water feature in your yard also matters to the birds. Some shy species such as orioles and warblers will only visit birdbaths and fountains near protective vegetation.
“If cats are a concern, chose a birdbath with a 3-foot pedestal and place it in an open area, about 15 feet from shrubs to give birds a chance to see the approaching danger,” Bailey said. “In yards without a threat from predators, a basin can be placed on the ground or short pedestal."
The California Department of Fish and Wildlife suggests sanitizing birdbaths at least once a week by using a 10 percent solution of household bleach in water. Scrub with a stiff brush, rinse well and refill. Clean and replace the water frequently, especially in the heat. Replacing the water every few days will help reduce the threat of breeding mosquitoes, which can carry the West Nile Virus.
“Consistency is key,” she said. “If the birdbath is always drying out, the birds will stop coming. Providing water as part of a backyard habitat is important especially in periods of extended drought.”