Project JUNIOR - Teamwork
A German educational programme focusing on the development of enterpreneurship skills in young people with a view to encouraging them to consider establishing and running their own businesses. It is coordinated throughout the country by the JUNIOR Central Office team who provide continuous support for participants as they run their companies. JUNIOR is open to students from year 9 upwards at all secondary and vocational schools.
Purpose and process
In Germany very few of those who work for a living work for themselves. Compared with other industrialised countries there is relatively little enthusiasm for establishing one’s own business. One of the reasons why Germany lags behind in this respect is considered to be the inadequate teaching of business know-how in schools. This is where JUNIOR comes in.
JUNIOR is a programme run by the Institut der deutschen Wirtschaft Köln JUNIOR gGmbH or similar national organisation. It is designed for school students from year 9 upwards and one of its most important aims is to promote hands-on learning. Theoretical knowledge taught in the classroom is put to the test in a practical environment. A JUNIOR company is founded by between 8 and 15 pupils, who themselves assume all necessary functions – including that of managing director. The young entrepreneurs use their abundant creativity to develop and market their business ideas (e.g. felt cushions, picture frames, games, mobile phone courses for the elderly, computer services). When the company is launched, the young entrepreneurs must sell 90 shares at 10 euros each. They then set about bringing their business idea to market. The market for their product or service must be analysed and a marketing strategy developed.
At the end of the project, participants receive a certificate which can be used to great advantage to support their applications for vocational training or a university place.
Through participation in JUNIOR, students can:
- develop key entrepreneurial qualities, e.g. responsibility and reliability; independence, initiative and self-reliance; the ability to work in a team; a constructive will
- increase their understanding and acceptance of market-based economics
- be supported in choosing a career
- develop a spirit of enterprise in theory and practice
- as team members, learn about and experiment with the basic principles of free enterprise
- be encouraged to start out in business on their own
- develop a wide range of knowledge and practical skills, e.g. presentation techniques; how companies are structured and organised; the principles of accounting, marketing and management
- benefit from the opportunity to promote understanding of how business works and inspire other participants to take on commitments and responsibilities.
The programmes also enhance schools’ profiles and enable teaching staff to make their lessons more lively. They provide support for teachers in the communication of both curriculum content and social skills. Last but not least, the JUNIOR programmes establish firm links between schools and local businesses.
Curricular or thematic relevance
Can be used to supplement Economics lessons by allowing students to put the theories they have learned into practice.
How to organise:
JUNIOR Projects can be organised either as extra-curricular, voluntary activities or during timetabled lessons. Sometimes, groups may need to use their own time for manufacturing products, participating in a fairtrade event or for running a shareholders' meeting. They work for between 2 and 4 hours per week over 1 year.
Assessment and evaluation approaches
Success is gauged by how well students can sell shares, market and run their business and make a profit.
Volunteers are needed to support the groups; they may include parents, alumni participants of previous JUNIOR Project programmes and entrepreneurs or other professional people.
JUNIOR is recognised as an educational programme by Germany’s regional education authorities.The JUNIOR Central Office provides continuous support for participants as they run their companies. JUNIOR maintains a constant dialogue with students and link teachers by means of regular events, workshops, discussion forums and a hotline.
helper do TM detail body (June 6th, 1st half)
A great tool that addresses several issues at the same time. The process is very well described.
It very important for take responsibility and develping planing skills.