Today, December 4, believers celebrate the Introduction in temple Presvjatoj of the virgin Mary. Your attention traditions and superstitions on this day – find out what you can and cannot do!
Date 4 Dec made history several significant events and holidays.
TODAY WAS A RELIGIOUS HOLIDAY
The Church calendar today honors the memory of 4 December is one of the great religious holidays – Introduction to the blessed virgin Mary, also known as the Third all-pure. It is believed that today we should pray for blessing for children and grandchildren.
BIRTHDAY: WHO CELEBRATES THE DAY OF THE ANGEL
Wednesday, December 4, nameday of the owners of such names are:Ariadne, Ada, Prokop, Yaropolk, Maria. Don’t forget to congratulate the heroes of the occasion with the Day of the angel!
THIS DAY IN HISTORY: INTERNATIONAL HOLIDAYS AND EVENTS
1563 — the Council of Trent of the Catholic Church, with breaks over the course of 18 years.
1674 — French Jesuits founded the city of Chicago (now USA).
1735 — building on the 10 Downing Street in London became the official residence of the British Prime Minister and has the status so far.
1791 — the first issue of the oldest Sunday Newspapers in the UK Observer.
1808 Napoleon abolished the Inquisition in Spain.
1918 — U.S. President Woodrow Wilson sailed to Europe to participate in the Versailles peace conference. This is the first case, when the highest official of the States left outside of the country.
1939 — by the decree of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet part of Ukraine was created in Lviv oblast, Drohobych, Stanislavsky, Ternopil, Volyn and Rivne region.
1941 in Moscow signed the Soviet-Polish Declaration of friendship and mutual assistance than the London exile government actually recognized the Soviet occupation of Western Ukraine and Western Belarus in September 1939
1941 — in Semipalatinsk (Kazakhstan) began the creative activity evacuated from Kiev academic Ukrainian drama theatre named.Franco.
1979 — opened station of the Kiev metro “pioneer” (now “Forest”).
1987 — resumed the work of the 3rd unit of the Chernobyl NPP.
1989 — the UN General Assembly approved the International Convention against the recruitment, use, financing and training of mercenaries.
1991 — independence of Ukraine recognized Lithuania and Latvia.
1992 — the IV all-Ukrainian Congress of the people’s movement of Ukraine Rukh has turned into a political party, and its Chairman was elected Vyacheslav Chornovil
1996 — from Cape Canaveral launched unmanned space station, Mars Pathfinder, which 4 June 1997 delivered to the surface of Mars special self-propelled device for collecting samples of Martian soil
WHO WAS BORN DECEMBER 4,
34 — Persia, the Roman poet, master Satori.
1795 — Thomas Carlyle, English essayist, historian, philosopher
1875 — Rainer Maria Rilke, the renowned Austrian poet (New poems, Dusk elegies, the Sonnets to Orpheus)
1897 Marie Andriessen, Dutch sculptor.
1898 — Stepan kozhumyaka, Ukrainian engineer and bridge Builder, avtodorozhnik, philologist, essayist, dissident, social activist
1913 — Robert Adler, American inventor, one of the developers of a television remote control, the author of a large number of patents.
1922 — Philip Gerard, a French actor (starred in the film Fanfan Tulip, Red and black)
1928 — James Lovell, American astronaut, the first man, who orbited the moon (Apollo 8, 1968).
1949 — Jeff bridges, American actor (Bad time in El Piano, Fire)
1963 — Sergey Bubka, Ukrainian athlete, one of the greatest athletes-jumpers XX
1969 — Jay-Z, the famous rapper (real name Shawn Corey Carter)
1973 — tyra banks, American supermodel, actress, singer, producer and television presenter.
FOLK SUPERSTITIONS AND TRADITIONS
If the Introduction SnagIt, it is not necessary to wait for a snowy winter, and if on the contrary, the snow will stay until spring;
If today hard frost, the winter will be very cold;
If the day is Sunny and frosty weather, then luck is on your side;
If Dec 4 cloudy and warm, the new year will be a small harvest;
If it is very cold on December 4, the summer will be hot.
WHAT NOT TO DO TODAY
Can do cleaning, Laundry and sewing;
You can not swear, to take offense and quarrel;
You can’t eat dairy meals, meat and eggs;
You can’t give someone a debt and to ask for money;