New Soft-Touch Pteranodon (Flying Reptile)
Flying reptiles, more correctly termed Pterosaurs are very popular with young dinosaur fans and budding palaeontologists. Although not dinosaurs, these flying reptiles did evolve from Archosaurs so they share a common ancestor with the dinosaurs. Appearing some time in the Triassic, the Pterosaurs were the first group of back-boned animals to develop powered flight and they dominated the skies for over 100 million years evolving into all shapes and sizes until the emergence of the birds hastened their decline.
Towards the very end of the Age of Reptiles, the last Pterosaurs evolved into giant gliding forms, some with wingspans bigger than a small plane. Perhaps, the best known of these flying reptiles was Pteranodon, with its toothless beak (the name means toothless flyer) and bizarre bony crest. Remains of Pteranodon have been found all over the world in North America, England and Asia. Some species of Pteranodon had wingspans in excess of 9 metres.
Team members at Everything Dinosaur have been searching for a reasonably accurate model of Pteranodon, this new model, just added to our range is very nicely painted and very detailed. For example the crest is a bright colour and patterned. Palaeontologists believe that Pteranodon may have used its crest not only in flight to stabilise it, but also in displays to put off rivals and attract a mate.
The New, Large Pteranodon Figure from Everything Dinosaur
Picture Credit: Everything Dinosaur
This figure is moulded in soft-touch plastic, it is easy for a youngster to carry around, soft and squeezy and makes an ideal addition to a young dinosaur fan’s collection. The wings and body even show texturing, given the impression of fur, as scientists now believe that Pterosaurs were warm-blooded and they may have been covered with fur to help insulate their bodies and keep them warm.
To view Everything Dinosaur’s range of dinosaur soft toys: Pteranodon and Dinosaur Soft Toys
The close up of the head shows the fine detail and painting, also it illustrates one of the points crucial to our dinosaur experts and enthusiasts. The model shows Pteranodon with no teeth, like many later flying reptiles, the teeth were lost, perhaps to lose weight just as birds have lost their teeth as well. As fossils of Pteranodon have been found in marine sediments, palaeontologists believe this animal was a fish-eater, flying low over the surface of the sea and jabbing its head down to pick up fish at the water’s surface.