An organic garden is a fascinating thing that also requires a lot of time and attention. Sound organic gardening techniques can help you do just that. Nurturing your organic garden ensures that your veggies are bigger and your flowers are more beautiful. The tips in this article should start you on the road to doing just that with a successful organic garden.
Let your children be involved in your organic gardening efforts. A garden can be a great learning experience for your children, and it gives you a chance to bond while producing healthy food.
If little ones live in your home, consider including everbearing strawberries in the garden plot. Small kids enjoy picking fruit themselves out of a garden. Because of this, they’ll be more likely to provide you with some assistance in your garden if they feel like they’re receiving something out of this.
Add aspirin to your plants to help them fight sickness. Crush and dissolve one and one-half 325mg tablets in two full gallons of plain water. The solution can then be used to spray the entire plant, and will offer protection naturally. Your plants should be sprayed one time each three weeks.
If you have plants inside, make sure the thermostat stays between 65 and 75 degrees. They need this type of warm temperature in order to grow. You can also buy a heat lamp to maintain ideal conditions for your inside plants during the winter.
For some plants, pine needles makes an ideal mulch. A number of plants commonly grown in garden settings do best in an acidic soil. If you have acid loving plants, use pine needles as a mulch. Using several inches of needles to cover your beds provides acid for the soil as they begin to decompose.
Coffee grounds are a good addition to your soil. The grounds contain essential nitrogen, which will benefit your plants in many ways. It is best for your plants to use coffee grounds that are part of a blend of ingredients in the compost or soil you are using for your plants, rather than directly adding coffee grounds to your garden plants.
Regular maintenance prevents your gardening tasks from becoming overwhelming and unappealing. While you may not be able to spend time in the garden on a daily basis, there are still many things you can do to keep things from snowballing out of control. Try pulling a few weeds from the garden while your dogs are out doing their business.
As a good general practice, you should make sure to plant your seeds three seed-widths deep into their containers. Some seeds need sunlight and should not be buried. Example of these kinds of seeds include the petunia and the ageratum. If you are unsure about your seed’s requirements for sunlight, the resources are often provided along with the seeds, or you can find out online.
As you’ve read, you can grow fresher, more nutritious produce in your organic garden than you can get from other sources. Although organic gardening isn’t easy since you have to put in time and effort and wait for results, the health benefits make it worth it.…