A study published in the journal Environmental Science and Policy earlier this year found that vertebrate biodiversity on indigenous-managed lands in Australia, Brazil, and Canada is equal to or higher than protected areas.
Land titling in Australia has undergone a revolutionary shift over the past four decades. The return of diverse forms of title to Indigenous Australians has produced some semblance of land justice. About half the continent is now held under some form of Indigenous title.
Seven new Indigenous Protected Areas will recognise conservation led by Aboriginal and Torres Islander people is central to the protection of nature in Australia.
Indigenous Pacific knowledge should inform the science to save the world's oceans.That was the consensus among Pacific ocean scientists and other regional stakeholders who gathered in New Caledonia recently for the first global workshop aimed at arresting the decline of the world's oceans.
More than one million plant and animal species worldwide are facing extinction, according to a recent United Nations report. Now, a new UBC-led study suggests that Indigenous-managed lands may play a critical role in helping species survive. Link to full article below.
The head of the United Nations body responsible for ocean conservation says indigenous Pacific knowledge can help define the science needed to save the ocean. Link to full article below.
Meet the Indigenous rangers teaching scientists a thing or two in central WA...The Birriliburu rangers have been managing the area since 2013, continuing a tradition that stretches back 25,000 years. Click on the link below to read the full article.
It’s considered one of the oldest aquaculture sites in the world, and after more than a decade of fervent lobbying, the Budj Bim Cultural Landscape has finally been added to the UNESCO World Heritage List. Click on the link below to read the full article.
Traditional marine conservation practices in the Pacific could be key to more successful commercial practices.That's the view of a marine conservationist from Palau, who's one of a group of Pacific environmentalists who met in Tahiti last week to further plans for extended marine sanctuaries and