A Welsh lesson to celebrate Welsh poetry day
A new contemporary lesson has been created by the National Centre for Learning Welsh to give Welsh learners a taste of Welsh poetry.
On 4 October, which is the national day of poetry in Wales, schools, colleges, the media and of course, poets, will host events to celebrate and promote poetry.
This is the latest lesson in a series of contemporary lessons that are being prepared annually by the National Centre for Learning Welsh to introduce Welsh learners to events in Wales and the world around us.
The purpose of this lesson is to present some of the most prominent features of poetry in Wales. These include the main awards of the National Eisteddfod, popular Talwrn y Beirdd competitions on Radio Cymru, stomps and the role of the Children's Poet of Wales.
There will also be an opportunity to discuss some linguistic features that belong to poetry such as rhyme, alliteration, and Cynghanedd.
As part of this lesson, Catrin Dafydd, the poet and writer from Cardiff, who won the crown this year at the National Eisteddfod in Cardiff discusses her series of winning poems on the theme 'Olion' (Traces). The collection celebrates the Welsh life that exists in Grangetown.
Mererid Hopwood, who won the Chair at the National Eisteddfod in Denbigh, 2001, has written a poem ‘Fy Ardal i’ (My Area) as part of the contemporary lesson, referring to her hometown, Cardiff, and talks about some of her memories about her childhood there. Learners will have the opportunity to listen, read and learn new vocabulary whilst appreciating the work of our poets here in Wales.
Helen Prosser, Strategic Director at the National Centre for Learning Welsh, said: "It is very important that every aspect of our culture is open to those who learn Welsh, and Welsh poetry is a way of celebrating that culture. It is also an opportunity with the new lesson to stimulate interest, challenge and encourage the learners’ development at each stage within the Advanced level. "
As part of the day’s celebrations there will be ‘Her 100 cerdd’ organised by Literature Wales. Four poets will be challenged to compose 100 original poems in 24 hours. Employers and workers in Wales will also be encouraged to support #diwrnodbarddoniaeth by bringing poetry to work, placing poems on the wall, reading their favourite poems to each other, and having a limerick writing competition.
To see the contemporary lesson on Welsh poetry day, the notes, and all the resources available to coincide with the lesson, go to learnwelsh.cymru or call the National Centre for Learning Welsh on 0300 3234324 for more information.