Nemophila maculata Benth. ex Lindl.
Hydrophyllaceae (Waterleaf Family)
USDA Symbol: NEMA
This hairy, trailing annual reaches 12 in. in length. Delicate, showy, bell-shaped flowers grow in clusters at the tips of its branches. Each of the five petals are white, with a bluish to purple spot at the tip. Leaves are lobed and opposite.
Fivespot grows quickly and easily in cultivation, especially if given afternoon shade. It reseeds readily.
From the Image Gallery
Bloom InformationBloom Color: White , Purple
Bloom Time: Apr , May , Jun , Jul
DistributionUSA: CA , OR , UT
Native Distribution: In CA, w. base of the Sierra Nevada from Plumas Co. to Kern Co.
Native Habitat: Moist slopes & flats below 7500 ft.
Growing ConditionsWater Use: Medium
Light Requirement: Part Shade
Soil Moisture: Moist
CaCO3 Tolerance: Medium
Soil Description: Mesic to dry soils.
Conditions Comments: Five spot grows quickly and easily, especially if given afternoon shade. It reseeds readily.
BenefitConspicuous Flowers: yes
Value to Beneficial InsectsSpecial Value to Native Bees
This information was provided by the Pollinator Program at The Xerces Society for Invertebrate Conservation.
PropagationDescription: Where winters are relatively mild, sow seed in fall; otherwise sow in early spring.
Seed Collection: Not Available
Seed Treatment: No treatment may be necessary but for more uniform results, stratify for 2 months or germinate in cool temperatures (less than 70 degrees) and in darkness for the first 3 days.
Commercially Avail: yes
Find Seed or Plants
Find seed sources for this species at the Native Seed Network.
From the National Organizations DirectoryAccording to the species list provided by Affiliate Organizations, this plant is on display at the following locations:
Native Seed Network - Corvallis, OR
Additional resourcesUSDA: Find Nemophila maculata in USDA Plants
FNA: Find Nemophila maculata in the Flora of North America (if available)
Google: Search Google for Nemophila maculata
MetadataRecord Modified: 2007-01-01
Research By: TWC Staff