March 12, 2014 “Changing Minds” webinar for special education leaders provides insights that supports students and prevents behavior problems
SAN FRANCISCO, February 17, 2014 – Problem behavior in children and teenagers is a common source of stress for educators, parents and families, impacting both academic performance and overall quality of life. To help educators better understand and address the rising number of behavior issues they see in the classroom, PresenceLearning, the leader in online speech therapy and other special education-related services for K-12 students, has partnered with Dr. Barry Prizant, a leading expert on classroom behavior management strategies, to present “Preventing Problem Behavior in Schools: An Emotional Regulation, Relationship-Based Approach” on Wednesday, March 12, 2014 at 1:00 PM Eastern time/10:00 AM Pacific time. This free webinar is part of the “Changing Minds” webinar series. To register, visit http://pages.presencelearning.com/spedahead-changing-minds-barry-prizant.html.
During the webinar, Dr. Prizant will discuss problem behaviors that are often symptomatic of autism and other neurodevelopmental disorders. He will also inform educators of his “Bio-Pyscho-Social” perspective to handling problem behaviors in practical, respectful and innovative ways.
By attending the webinar, participants will:
• Gain a new perspective and understanding of emotional regulatory problem behaviors
• Learn new strategies to prevent and respond to problem behaviors
• Develop an understanding of how these strategies enhance a child’s ability to stay emotionally well-regulated, maximize learning, improve social participation and balance relationships.
With the rise in cases of neurodevelopmental disorders in students, it is more urgent than ever for schools and administrators in special education to be prepared. The “Changing Minds” webinar series connects leading experts in childhood neurodevelopmental, behavioral and mental disorders with educators. During the webinar series, the experts will share their expertise, tackle common misconceptions and provide practical strategies to better manage challenges and help students succeed.
Since 2009, PresenceLearning’s online speech therapy services have provided schools with a practical, affordable new option for service delivery: web-based access to a nationwide network of live, highly qualified, fully licensed speech-language pathologists who are available whenever and wherever they are needed. This past year, PresenceLearning added online occupational therapy (OT), online assessments and online counseling to their service offerings. By partnering with PresenceLearning, school districts can fill staffing gaps related to acute and chronic SLP and OT shortages, reduce high caseloads for onsite personnel, reduce their backlog of assessments, improve student outcomes and become more efficient. PresenceLearning also offers access to technical specialists, as well as culturally and linguistically diverse speech-language pathologists, occupational therapists and counselors.
PresenceLearning has delivered more than 250,000 live online therapy sessions in public, charter and virtual school districts of all sizes nationwide.
About Dr. Barry Prizant
Dr. Barry Prizant has more than 40 years’ experience as a clinical scholar, researcher and international consultant on ASD and managing related emotional/behavioral challenges. He is an Adjunct Professor at Brown University and Director of Childhood Communication Services, a private practice. Barry is co-author of The SCERTS Model: A comprehensive educational approach for children with ASD (Prizant, Wetherby, Rubin, Laurent & Rydell, 2006) He has published more than 120 articles and chapters, serves on the advisory board of five professional journals, and has presented more than 700 seminars nationally and internationally. His forthcoming book is entitled Uniquely Human: Seeing Autism Through a Different Lens (Simon and Schuster).
PresenceLearning (www.presencelearning.com) is the leading provider of live online speech therapy services for K-12 students and now offers online occupational therapy as well. The company offers school districts web-based access to a growing, nationwide network of hundreds of highly qualified speech language pathologists (SLPs), occupational therapists (OTs) and other related services professionals via live videoconferencing combined with the latest in evidence-based practices and powerful progress reporting.
Serving thousands of students in public, charter and virtual schools throughout the U.S., PresenceLearning has shown that online speech and language therapy is practical, affordable and highly effective. PresenceLearning is an ASHA-approved continuing education provider for SLPs and a U.S. Department of Education grant-winner, dedicated to bringing the highest clinical standards to online therapy.
Katie Povejsil, Vice President of Marketing, PresenceLearning
Christine Allman, Public Relations for PresenceLearning