Education is the fundamental human right and there is a widespread consensus that it is the single most important investment that can lead to a greater social and financial mobility for an individual. Yet, globally there are a staggering 61 million primary-aged children out of school . Progress in reducing this number has stalled for the first time since 2002 because of decreasing aids, according to UNESCO Institute for Statistics and Education for All Global Monitoring Report 
Several successful attempts have been made to address the issue of accessibility and engagement. One such attempt in the United States is Khan Academy that reinvented education. The brainchild of Salman Khan, this online platform became popular by delivering content via mainstream consumption channels like Youtube. Khan Academy used the most basic tools to make education accessible to millions at a fraction of cost. It disrupted the traditional model of ICTs in Education by doing the pilot implementation on web - an implementation that instantly viral.
There are lessons that can be drawn from Khan Academy’s implementation for many online MOOC (Massive Open Online Courses) and can be applied to ICTs in EdTech for developing nations. Shikkhok.com is an example of a successful MOOC for Bangladesh and India. Shikkhokh started with a basic goal of providing quality education at low cost for students in rural Bangladesh and India. It delivers the course content in local language (thus reducing one of the accessibility issues). Shikkhok.com has spent only $15, but yet reached 20,000+ students, at a cost of only US $0.00075/student (about 6 Bangladeshi paisa per student).
Shikhokh’s success story have started to register the effect MOOC phenomenon with policy makers. And Shikhokh has proven that MOOCs can be harnessed to disrupt existing EdTech solutions for developing nations. MOOC’s viral nature has the power to reach millions of people at a given time.I think MOOCs have the potential to transform the “bottom of pyramid” in education for developing nations. However, before using MOOCs as swiss army knife, we need to evaluate key issues like infrastructure readiness, relevance of course content for the local job market, and usage of local language for instruction.
 http://www.globaleducationfirst.org/images/Education_First_Infographic_section-2.jpg http://www.uis.unesco.org/Education/Documents/fs-25-out-of-school-children-en.pdf Mishra, Sanjaya. "The E-Learning Bandwagon: Politics, Policies and Pedagogy." National Seminar on" Choice and Use of ICTs in ODL: Impacts, Strategies and Future Prospects" organized by GRADE, Dr. BR Ambedkar Open University, Hyderabad on. 2007. http://www.quora.com/Survey-Questions/What-is-one-accomplishment-you-are-most-proud-of/answer/Ragib-Hasan