The concept of mimicking nature, planting in 'guilds' (groups of plants that strengthen each other) and working with natural forces, rather than opposing them. The benefits are increasing yields with less input.
To be truly free one must be able to provide for themselves. In today's world we are dependent on consuming, and often wasting, vast amounts of water, oil, land and natural resources; stripping our earth of the very things we need to survive. Blue Marble Solutions (a non-profit corporation) focuses on bringing freedom back into the lives of our communities. Teaching individuals and families how to grow their own organic, nutrient-dense foods, in their own space and community, while restoring the earth's resources.
We do this through education, opportunities for hands-on experience and continuing technical support. Providing the tools needed to start this path to Independence, to a way of life within the means of our planet, sustainable and rewarding for every person. Health, community and a sense of purpose have been shown to be the important factors to lead a full and happy life. With these tools and resources we hope to help many families achieve this.
"You never change things by fighting the existing reality. To change something, build a new model that makes the existing model obsolete." -Buckminster Fuller
By building community that supports each other and works together, we can change the existing model. We can design a new vision for the future that works by providing healthy, locally-grown foods, rewarding work and support structures that require very little resources beyond that which can be obtained locally.
William Penn mapped out Philadelphia to have space for each family to have a large garden behind their homes to allow families to independently sustain themselves. With the vast amount of land that is vacant we can re-purpose to the original intent. Instead of living in a food desert we could live in a food forest.
Below you will find some of the methods that will allow us to achieve our goals...
What we are all about.
This is the combination of Aquaculture and Hydroponics in a closed loop and scaleable system. This means it is sustainable, with little or no waste.
Intensive gardening such as square foot, vertical, 'lasagna' (layered), straw-bale and other methods can be utilized to produce more food in smaller spaces.
Rainwater is an under-utilized resource. If the rain that lands on each rooftop is harvested the demand load on municipal water treatment facilities would be vastly reduced.
It is people that make our goals possible, without them an idea stays an idea, with them we can change the world we live in.
Join Our Team
Blue Marble Cooperative is more than just a food co-op,
it embodies all that we do at Blue Marble Solutions. The simple principle is, anything that is good for one person is even better done by a community of like-minded partners.
Workshops and classes dedicated to teaching children, families and communities, how to achieve food production in their own space.
Educational videos on food and environmental issues that affect our food production and consumption.