We know that lifestyle choices during pregnancy can have a big effect on the health of your baby, but can the choices we make before getting pregnant – like too much caffeine or having a high-stress job – affect fertility?
For better or for worse, yes, lifestyle factors can affect a woman’s odds of getting pregnant, according to the studies. But what to do with that information? How well do the discoveries made in the lab or with small samples of participants translate to real life? For help, I talked to two doctors who specialize in the subject to sort out the real and rumors about fertility: Nicole Noyes, M.D., director of Reproductive Surgery at NYU’s Fertility Center, and Zev Rosenwaks, M.D., director of the Cohen-Perelman Center for Reproductive Medicine at New York-Presbyterian/Weill Cornell.
Here’s the full story on top 10 fertility myths and facts:
1. Age Matters.
True. Age is perhaps the No. 1 variable that affects fertility, says Noyes. Since the age of first pregnancy is increasing around the globe—it’s 25 in the U.S., 29 in Japan, and 30 in Germany – it is likely culprit for many fertility problems in women. “It’s really all about a woman’s ovarian reserve,” says Noyes, which decreases markedly as a woman ages.
2. Poor Nutrition Lowers the Odds.
True. Being too thin or too heavy can reduce fertility. Women who don't consume enough calories and fats every day risk not being able to ovulate normally and become pregnant, says Rosenwaks. On the other hand, being overweight or obese can also have negative consequences for one’s ability to conceive, since obesity can interfere with normal hormone function and fertility.
3. Smoking Is OK (as long as quit after you're pregnant).
False! Smoking cigarettes – even secondhand smoke – has been shown to reduce fertility time and time again, says Rosenwaks. This is true for both assisted (IVF) and non-assisted reproduction. If you are thinking of becoming pregnant (and even if you’re not) now’s the time to quit.
4. Foods Affect Fertility.
False. Some have suggested that consuming more (or less) soy affects fertility because of its phytoestrogens, and wild yams have also gotten attention in the fertility department. But there’s little evidence that eating specific foods would have any effect one way or the other. Of soy and yams Dr. Noyes says, “I say eat each as much as you want. They won’t affect your fertility.”
5. Caffeine Inhibits Your Pregnancy Odds.
Unlikely. While a recent study showed that caffeine inhibited ovulation in lab mice, the doctors both agree that it’s less likely in real life. On the other hand, Rosenwaks says he makes it a point to tell his patients to do everything in moderation. [Update, 4/2016: A recent study suggests that coffee consumption in women or men may raise the risk of miscarriage. See more here.]
6. Stress Reduces Fertility.
True. To some extent, anyway. A recent study showed that women who took a stress reduction course had significantly greater success with IVF. But Noyes points out that women become pregnant in all kinds of stressful situations around the globe. She does tell her patients who have very stressful jobs to try to work less while they are trying to conceive. Considering all the ways in which stress hurts our bodies, it’s not surprising that it could affect the reproductive cycle.
7. Alcohol Boosts Your Chance Of Pregnancy.
False and true. Excessive alcohol consumption has actually been shown to decrease fertility in women. If people are getting pregnant more while they’re drinking, it’s probably because (shocker!) they’re having more sex, says Noyes, because there’s no evidence to suggest it would help in any way.
8. A Little Toke Can't Hurt.
False. Using any drugs, even pot, can affect the menstrual cycle. Heavier drugs like opiates have been shown to suppress the reproductive cycle by affecting the centers of the brain that control release of the female hormones, says Rosenwaks.
9. Nothing Wrong With Prescription Drugs Though.
False. Some antidepressants (like SSRI's) can "raise a woman's serum prolactin level which can then interfere with normal ovulation," says Noyes. Even certain antiemetic (anti-nausea) medications can alter prolactin levels, adds Rosenwaks. Because of this, it’s important to check with your doctor and ask questions, before taking any medication if you might become pregnant.
10. Common Chemicals Are Fertility Inhibitors.
True. Some studies have shown that the now-infamous Bisphenol A (BPA) can decrease fertility in women, and Rosenwaks points out that perfluoronated chemicals (PFCs), used in Teflon, for example, have also been shown to affect the menstrual cycle. Since there’s a lot of mixed evidence – and controversy – as to whether certain additives may affect fertility and the health of the fetus, if you’re concerned, it’s best to talk to your doc.