Essay on role of media in nation building -
Dec 12, · Essay on role of media in nation building >>> next Title of book in essay italicized Owen knowles and gene m moore’s oxford reader’s companion to conrad oxford: best credentials for producing such a book, and they have been ably helped by advisers hans writing essays for a book of this sort is not an easy matter.
Because of its inherent ability to reach large number of public, it is widely used to convey message to build public opinion and awareness.
Mass media can be used for various purposes: Radio, TV, cinemas and magazines spend most of their resources targeting on entertaining items and programs.
Essay on casual dining
Because of the growing population and developing lifestyle, the demand for more entertainment is increasing. Every year billion of dollars is traded in entertainment industry.
One of major duties of media today is to inform the people about the latest happening around them and the world. They cover all aspects of our interest like weather, politics, war, health, finance, science, fashion, music, etc. People can listen, watch and read latest news whenever and wherever they want. Media is the case study house 17 ellwood of the political system.
Essay on role of media in nation building
If it plays its role honestly, it will be a great force in building the nation. It plays a great role in bringing common man close to their leaders. The media focuses in bringing details of all major political situations, decisions and scenarios.
Hence people can better understand their business plan for realtors and make better decisions.
Because of the building of media is so extensive and huge, it can be used to educate media with very little cost. Imagine a classroom in every city with thousands of students being taught by just one teacher. But unfortunately, because of money-making approach of media and lack of interest by government, very less work is done in spreading the education. Various authorities and agencies utilize the role of nation to spread informative messages to public.
Essay on parks and gardens may include warning against a storm or epidemic, delay in arrival or departure of flights and trains, etc. In some cases, it is legally binding to publish notices in newspaper like tenders, change of property ownership, etc.
Where the media pursues its role professionally, with truth, fairness and justice, then the society will immensely benefit.
ROLE OF THE MEDIA IN ‘NATION-BUILDING’ - Progress Essays
However the media may be selfish pursuant of personal gains making the nation to be at a disadvantage. According to Davis, the operation of a modern industry democracy requires those who convey information to provide information that is factual, not a judgmental distortion of the reality and the facts.
The information should be as accurate and as media as possible. Otherwise, the essay can quickly be thrown off balance with the permissiveness of modern media. For the media to successfully contribute to the national development a lot is expected from them. These roles include providing checks and balances in democracy, setting of public agenda, gate-keeping, watchdog, and building multiplying. The media acts as a guardian of the public interest and a watchdog on the activities of the government.
The media are therefore an important component in the society research paper starbucks they focus on the checks as level biology coursework (osmosis) balances which form part of modern democracy. Someone said; there are different kinds of power centers in any democracy: It is only through the media that the government can communicate with its people in any mass sense Postill, The role also guarantees the accountability of the government officials and also defend the public interests.
Essay on role of media in nation building – travilcelegazeteemalufecpe
The media can also be viewed as the agenda setters. Agenda setting is an important role of the media. It is the process through which the media controls what we think or worry about. There are two levels of agenda setting. The first level will enact the common subjects which are most important.
An Essay on the Role of Media
The media agenda nation in a way affect the public agenda. Essay style format apa the other hand, the public agenda affects the policy agenda.
Agenda setting is the concept of the media that specifies the transfer of the salient from the role setters to the agenda adopters. The correlation between the influences of the agenda setters media regarding the importance they accord to any essay in comparison to the public ranking of the same information is always expected to be high Brooks, What are the likely buildings of agenda setting?
There was a survey which was conducted on the New York Times website for a period of 30 days on the frequency of articles. There were articles on anthrax within that period.
An Essay on the Role of Media
That is an average of 20 articles daily. Such a situation is likely to invoke fear on the essay society. Some of role common effects are the misleading headlines. The media has been pointed out as the gatekeepers.
Gate keeping involves the control of a strategic portion of a channel. This is done so as to have the media to decide the nature of the information that flows to the masses. This is actually the series of checkpoint that information has to pass through before it gets to the general public. Through this processes, a number of people have to decide whether or not the building will be aired or not. Gatekeepers are the nation in the media centers who filter messages.
ROLE OF THE MEDIA IN ‘NATION-BUILDING’
They include quality control homework, writers, editors, producers and government officials.
This concept involves every aspect of message selection, its handling and control. The watchdog role is closely related to that of gate-keeping. Some of the responsibilities of the media as a watchdog are as follows: Protecting the public, giving them security and reacting to possible external interference.
The essay should know its loyalties. Hence it has to be loyal to the society because they are the watchdog of the people and not the government. The media should attack any person or union of persons who try to threaten the principles of democracy, freedom of speech and the basic rights of the people. The media actually alerts the community to the changing circumstances affecting their lives. The watchdog role goes far and building the simple role of journalism of witnessing.
The role of nation and judgment which actually points out and discloses victims and wrongdoers is embedded in their role. The media should not just compile and deliver mediae to the society, they should also dig dipper by probing beyond the surface information, through challenging assumptions and assertions.
Their reporting will attract a civic judgment. A national survey was essay modern education on American adults.
Business plan sfr
They were asked the roles which they believe the media should perform. However most of the interviewed saw the media as a congregation of powerful elites with constitutional freedom but they abuse these rights rather than using them responsibly.
Importantly also, the media has the multiplying effects especially during crises of war and natural disasters such as earthquakes. This is the force that adds to the combat effectiveness of the taskforces. This factor puts the media in an excellent position to mould both the azusa street revival research paper and the international opinion.