Colin Ferguson, born in Kingston, JA, to a wealthy business couple, is known as the infamous LIRR Shooter. On December 7, 1993, Ferguson purchased a ticket for the east-bound train at the Atlantic Terminal in Brooklyn. This train stopped at the Jamaica Station in Queens. Ferguson boarded the third car of the east-bound Long Island Rail Road (LIRR) commuter train from Penn Station to Hicksville, along with more than 80 other passengers. Ferguson, who sat on the southwestern end of the car, was carrying his handgun and a canvas bag filled with 160 rounds of ammunition.
As the train approached the Merillon Avenue Station, Ferguson waited for the black passengers to depart before he drew the gun, dropped several cartridges on the ground, stood up and opened fire at random. During the next three minutes, Ferguson killed six people and injured another 19. Some passengers mistook the gunshots for caps or fireworks until a woman shouted, “He’s got a gun! He’s shooting people!”
Roughly 26 people were shot and six died from their injuries.
Police found pieces of notebook paper in Ferguson’s pockets with scribbled notes with the heading “reasons for this”. The main reason listed was “Racism by Caucasians and Uncle Tom Negroes.” Ferguson was arraigned on December 8, 1993. Convicted of 19 counts of attempted murder and 34 counts of assault, Ferguson received a sentence of 315 and 8 months to life.
I remember when this incident came out and the reactions to it. Whites were terrified and enraged. Blacks were empathetic and worried about “white backlash.” Incidentally, the Ferguson Murders were the catalyst for stricter NYC gun control laws. I remember his Jewish lawyers who took the case. They decided to plea insanity to which the courts denied. They believed he knew exactly what he was doing.
Question: What’s the difference between Ted Kaczynski, Jeffrey Dahmer, Wade Micheal Page, James Holmes, Ted Bundy, Charles Manson and Colin Ferguson? Do you classify their crimes separately?