Steps towards Recovery
- Recovery does not mean forgetting what happened, shutting your emotions off, or never feeling sad again; it means to live the best you can with what you have and to accept what has happened without holding onto it. Recovery means that although some pain may never leave, you are above the pain, not drowning in it.
Anxiety relief tips
Your anxiety-ridden or obsessive compulsive thoughts are not the truth. Don’t believe them.
- Thoughts are not facts: Errors in Anxious Thinking
- Tips for anxiety relief: here
- Practice some self care: What Self Care Is and Isn’t Self Care
Did you know that fear is what feeds ocd? The less the anxiety, the less the thoughts will come. It’s not about preventing the thoughts from popping up; its about your reaction to them.
Did you know there are different types of depression? Depression can affect anyone.
Depression is real and not your fault, but don’t let your mind sulk in unhealthy ways that reverse your recovery. Avoid hopeless-themed blogs, don’t listen to sad music or watch sad content that could make you worse, and don’t self-victimize yourself.
Recovery and happiness doesn’t mean you can’t still hurt. It means you can live above the pain without drowning in it.
Eating disorder tips
Eating disorder communities on tumblr & twitter may be detrimental to your health and counterintuitive to recovery
Stop the stigma that those who idolize weight are conceited; it runs much deeper than that.
- Insecurity does not mean that one is concerned with vanity. The root for many eating disorder victims is insecurity. Body dysmorphia and emotional ties to eating are other common causes.
Male mental health & preventing gender stigma
75 % of suicide victims are MEN.
Yet 1 in 3 said stigmas within their gender’s culture may prevent them from expressing openly about their health and seeking help, according to a study.
Various mental illnesses such as depression, anxiety, predisposition to addiction, and more are linked to genetics.
Not only can genetics be a factor, but one’s environment can play a huge role in a person’s makeup and mental health.
Sometimes it’s important to bring family members together in therapy, to gather all perspectives, analyze the family’s dynamics and effects on one another, find a common understanding, and work on ways to improve.
OCHPA’s Nature & Nurture program has group therapy programs called Intensive Outpatient Programs (IOPs) on various topics.
Check to see the topics if you are interested. Group Therapy Programs (IOPs)