(Breast X-ray; Mammogram; X-ray of Breast Tissue)
by Cynthia M. Johnson, MA
This exam uses low-dose x-rays to make a picture of breast tissue. The picture is called a mammogram.
Most medical organizations in the United States and Canada advise regular screening. There are some differences among these groups about when to start and how often to have the screenings. The United States Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) advises that women aged 50 to 74 years old get the test every two years. Other organizations advise screening every year starting at age 40. Women who are at high risk for breast cancer may need to have the tests starting at an earlier age and more often. Talk to your doctor about what is best for you.
Reasons for Test
This test is done to find breast cancer. It may be done:
Problems from the test are rare, but all procedures have some risk. Mammograms use low dose radiation and can cause brief pain in the breasts.
The test may not be advised if you are pregnant. If you are planning to have this test, your doctor will go over potential problems with you.
What to Expect
Prior to Test
Mammograms can be uncomfortable. While there is no proven method to reduce discomfort, you can try:
Note : Tell the technician if you:
On the day of your exam:
Description of Test
You will stand in front of a special x-ray machine. It has a platform to place your breast on. The technician will adjust the height of the platform. One breast will be lifted and placed between special plates that hold film. The plate is brought close to the platform and compresses the breast. The exam will cause some discomfort. Tell the technician if you feel any pain.
At least two pictures of each breast are taken. For one picture, you face toward the platform and the image is taken looking down at the breast. For a second picture, you stand beside the machine for a side view. Extra images may be needed if you have implants. Your doctor may also need more images if this test is being used to help make a diagnosis.
You will wait in the facility until the x-rays are developed. More images may be needed. You can go home after the exam.
How Long Will It Take?
Will It Hurt?
You may feel some discomfort and pain.
The radiologist will look at the images and may speak with you at the end of the exam. You will usually get your results within seven days. If you do not, call and ask for the results. If the results are normal, you will need your next exam in one to two years.
The test can sometimes find things that look like cancer, but are not. If something is noticed on the test, you may need to have other tests done, like an ultrasound or a breast biopsy. This will help find out if there is a real problem or if all is fine.
Also, like all screening tests, the test will not detect every single abnormality.
Call Your Doctor
After the test, call your doctor if you have:
American Cancer Society
American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists
Breast Cancer Society of Canada
Radiology for Patients
Mammograms. National Cancer Institute website. Available at:
...(Click grey area to select URL)
Updated December 7, 2016. Accessed July 24, 2018.
Mammography (breast imaging). Radiological Society of North America Radiology Info website. Available at:
...(Click grey area to select URL)
Accessed February 3, 2017. Accessed July 24, 2018.
Mammography for breast cancer screening. EBSCO DynaMed Plus website. Available at: http://www.dynamed... . Updated September 20, 2017. Accessed July 24, 2018.
8/12/2011 DynaMed Plus Systematic Literature Surveillance http://www.dynamed... : The American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Practice bulletin no.122: Breast cancer screening. Obstet Gynecol. 2011;118(2 Pt 1):372-382. Reaffirmed 2014.
Last reviewed May 2018 by EBSCO Medical Review Board Kathleen A. Barry, MD
Last Updated: 7/24/2018
EBSCO Information Services is fully accredited by URAC. URAC is an independent, nonprofit health care accrediting organization dedicated to promoting health care quality through accreditation, certification and commendation.
This content is reviewed regularly and is updated when new and relevant evidence is made available. This information is neither intended nor implied to be a substitute for professional medical advice. Always seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider prior to starting any new treatment or with questions regarding a medical condition.
To send comments or feedback to our Editorial Team regarding the content please email us at firstname.lastname@example.org. Our Health Library Support team will respond to your email request within 2 business days.