Many people think of banana’s when potassium is mentioned and many others don’t really know that much about potassium or why it’s important. Potassium supplements are usually not considered unless their doctors tell them they are needed.
Potassium is a mineral that helps to keep the kidneys functioning properly. It also plays a crucial part in heart function.
What most people don’t know is that potassium has benefits that help to make the skin healthier and more beautiful. In addition to helping keep the body keep the muscles under control; it also helps with the growth of new skin cells which in turn keeps the skin looking healthy.
An added benefit of potassium is that it may help to relieve any stressful or anxious feelings which also help to reduce the risk of high blood pressure and it may even be able to prevent stroke.
Potassium Supplements Sources
Potassium is available in many foods, as a prescription, and as a nutritional dietary supplement. Many foods that are high in potassium include meats, fish, poultry, apricots, avocados, and bananas to name a few.
Contrary to popular belief and the age-old theory, the fruit with the highest amount of potassium is not bananas, it is ready-to-eat apricots followed by tomato puree. Apricots have 1380mg of potassium per serving compared to 400mg in bananas.
Fruits are not the only sources of potassium, baked potatoes with the skin are also excellent sources of potassium, as are nuts and bran flakes.
Potassium is also found in flounder, cod, salmon, chicken and other meats. All in all, potassium should be easily obtained from diet. However, this is not always the case.
Potassium supplements are also available in both prescription form and as a dietary supplement available in health and nutrition stores. Physicians may prescribe potassium for patients who are using diuretics and losing potassium and others may use potassium supplements for skin care.
Potassium Supplements Side Effects
Potassium is important for body functions and for beautiful, healthy skin. However, as with any other vitamin or mineral supplement, there are side effects if the body receives too much.
Too much potassium can lead to diarrhea and nausea. Very high amounts of potassium can cause muscle weakness, slowed heart rate and an abnormal heart rhythm. Potassium supplements should only be taken under the advice of a doctor.
On the other side of the coin, there are also side effects to the body not having enough potassium. A potassium deficiency can cause weakness, lack of energy, muscle cramps, gastro issues, an irregular heartbeat. Potassium deficiencies can be life threatening.
Potassium, if not obtained through a nutritional, well-balanced diet, can be added through the use of potassium supplements. These should only be used under the care of a doctor.