Learn how to confidently feed your child with ADHD for better attention, behavior and growth (without wacky diets, power struggles or dramatic meltdowns) through the ADHD Diet for Kids Nutrition Class.
Parenting a Child with ADHD
If you’re a mom or dad looking to improve your child’s weight, growth, behavior and attention, then you probably already know you need to get your nutrition ducks in a row.
After all, you probably know that kids who get proper nutrition — day in and day out– grow well, have the right amount of energy (not too little or too much), and can function in their daily tasks.
The ADHD Diet for Kids by Pediatric Nutritionist, Jill Castle, MS, RDN
I’ve been a pediatric nutritionist for over 28 years and a mom to four kids. I have insight, experience, and wisdom to share about nutrition and food for the ADHD child.
The ADHD Diet for Kids program is a result of my extensive work with ADHD children, the nutrition science as we know it today, and my experience with real families who bravely navigate nutrition and ADHD every day.
Nutrition for the Child with ADHD
No matter what approach you’ve tried in the past, the real success comes from taking a refreshingly new approach to nourishing the child with ADHD.
The ADHD Diet for Kids nutrition class helps you balance food, eliminate food sensitivities, target inadequate nutrients, and feed with love and limits so your child improves in all areas, including attention, behavior, learning, growth and overall health.
The ADHD Diet for Kids program is a whole-child, integrated approach using healthy food, positive feeding strategies and detective-like interventions to correct common nutrition challenges.
What You’ll Learn about ADHD & Nutrition
Module One: Eating with ADHD
As the name suggests, in this module, you’ll give your complete focus to food and nutrients. Specifically, what your child is eating, what he should be eating, and how to strategize a path to better nutrition.
The module breaks down into the following lessons:
Lesson 1: Growth & Nutrition Challenges with ADHD
Lesson 2: Nutrition for ADHD
Lesson 3: Sugar & Additives and ADHD
Lesson 4: Improving Nutrition with a Healthy ADHD Diet
Module Two: Feeding Kids with ADHD
Here, the focus is on the day-to-day grind of feeding your child. From setting limits and positive feeding strategies to navigating special diets and tailoring your feeding approach, by the end of this module you’ll have:
Here are the lessons you can expect in Module Two:
Lesson 1: The Ups and Downs of Eating
Lesson 2: What is Food Parenting?
Lesson 3: Feeding for Success
Lesson 4: Special Diets
Module Three: Common Challenges with ADHD Nutrition
Designed to help you troubleshoot the most common food, feeding and nutritional problems, you’ll tackle challenges you can solve with food, those you can solve through strategic feeding, and the challenges you can solve with a combination of both food and feeding.
Module Three breaks down into the following lessons:
Lesson 1: Challenges You Can Solve with Food
Lesson 2: Challenges You Can Solve with Feeding
Lesson 3: Challenges You Can Solve with Food & Feeding
Bonus Modules: Real Life Stories &
Healthy Gut Check
In the bonus modules, you will experience real life stories of children with ADHD and my expert advice to move them forward. You’ll also learn about the importance of a functioning, healthy digestive system, including how to deal with constipation and the role of pre- and probiotics in a healthy gut.
Printable Materials and Books
In addition to the modules and bonus trainings, you will get audio recordings with experts in the field, over 25 printable worksheets and guides, and two e-books to further support your learning and progress.
The ADHD Diet for Kids is the complete nutrition plan that addresses the whole child, inside and out.
A Food and Feeding Plan for ADHD
- In just 6 weeks, you get a comprehensive food plan that assures your child is getting the proper nutrients his brain needs to function well, while also covering the nutrition he needs to grow as expected.
- You’ll have an effective feeding strategy that hits the right meal and snack timing, sets loving limits around eating, and nurtures your child to try new foods without negative repercussions.
- Discover — and know how to plan for — eliminating the foods that disturb your child’s ability to pay attention, behave, and learn, while encouraging the foods that sustain your child in his everyday world.
- Pinpoint deficiencies in your child’s diet and address them head on, so your child pays attention, learns, and is on an optimal path for health and well-being.
- You’ll have confidence, know-how, and tools to navigate any nutrition challenge that comes your way.