Once you have a site as well as an application, speed is essential. The quicker your web site works and then the quicker your applications function, the better for you. Because a web site is simply a collection of files that talk with each other, the devices that store and work with these files play a vital role in website general performance.
Hard drives, or HDDs, have been, until the past several years, the most efficient systems for saving data. However, in recent years solid–state drives, or SSDs, are already gaining interest. Look into our comparison chart to determine whether HDDs or SSDs are more suitable for you.
1. Access Time
SSD drives present a brand new & imaginative approach to file safe–keeping in accordance with the use of electronic interfaces rather than any moving parts and spinning disks. This completely new technology is way quicker, allowing for a 0.1 millisecond data accessibility time.
The concept driving HDD drives times back to 1954. And even though it’s been significantly refined in recent times, it’s nonetheless can’t stand up to the revolutionary technology driving SSD drives. Through today’s HDD drives, the highest data access speed you can attain may differ between 5 and 8 milliseconds.
2. Random I/O Performance
Caused by the completely new significant data file storage strategy incorporated by SSDs, they feature swifter data access rates and swifter random I/O performance.
In the course of our tests, all of the SSDs revealed their capacity to deal with a minimum of 6000 IO’s per second.
With a HDD drive, the I/O performance progressively improves the more you use the hard drive. Nevertheless, just after it reaches a particular restriction, it can’t go faster. And because of the now–old technology, that I/O limit is much lower than what you can receive having an SSD.
HDD can only go as much as 400 IO’s per second.
SSD drives are created to include as fewer rotating components as is feasible. They utilize a comparable technique like the one utilized in flash drives and are significantly more dependable in comparison to traditional HDD drives.
SSDs offer an typical failure rate of 0.5%.
HDD drives work with spinning hard disks for keeping and browsing info – a concept going back to the 1950s. With hard disks magnetically hanging in the air, rotating at 7200 rpm, the odds of something going wrong are considerably increased.
The common rate of failure of HDD drives varies among 2% and 5%.
4. Energy Conservation
SSD drives operate almost silently; they don’t make extra warmth; they don’t call for added air conditioning options and use up much less electricity.
Tests have established that the typical electricity usage of an SSD drive is amongst 2 and 5 watts.
HDD drives are renowned for being noisy. They demand extra electric power for air conditioning applications. On a hosting server which includes a lot of HDDs running continuously, you’ll need a great deal of fans to ensure they are kept cool – this will make them much less energy–economical than SSD drives.
HDDs consume somewhere between 6 and 15 watts.
5. CPU Power
SSD drives support faster data file access rates, which, in turn, permit the processor to complete data queries considerably faster and after that to return to different responsibilities.
The normal I/O wait for SSD drives is 1%.
When compared with SSDs, HDDs allow for reduced file accessibility rates. The CPU is going to wait around for the HDD to come back the demanded file, reserving its allocations for the time being.
The common I/O wait for HDD drives is about 7%.
6.Input/Output Request Times
The bulk of our brand–new machines moved to solely SSD drives. All of our lab tests have demostrated that with an SSD, the typical service time for an I/O request although building a backup continues to be under 20 ms.
During the same trials with the exact same web server, this time fitted out using HDDs, functionality was significantly reduced. During the hosting server backup process, the normal service time for any I/O calls varied somewhere between 400 and 500 ms.
7. Backup Rates
Discussing backups and SSDs – we have found a substantual improvement with the backup rate since we switched to SSDs. Today, a standard hosting server data backup can take just 6 hours.
On the other hand, with a web server with HDD drives, an identical back up could take three or four times as long to complete. A complete back–up of an HDD–equipped hosting server often takes 20 to 24 hours.
With NaplesNerds, you can find SSD–powered hosting services at the best prices. Our Linux cloud web hosting packages consist of SSD drives automatically. Go in for an website hosting account with us and observe how your websites will become much better quickly.
- Live Demo
- All of our Virtual Private Servers include no installation service fees and function in a stable network delivering 99.9% of uptime. Full root access to the server warranted.
Compare our prices
- Simply review the parameters and capabilities provided by all of our Virtual Private Servers. Discover which VPS configuration will provide you with everything that you want to deal with your multi–media online presence with no hassle.
- Compare our hosting plans
- Our representatives are online for you 7 days a week to reply to all queries with regards to our VPS solutions. 60–min response time frame guarantee.