|Explore Judaism||Jewish Thought|
Jewish IQ Test - A
game of Jewish unTrivia with 10 different questions each time.
Concerning The Jews - A Cartoon Study of Jewish Survival
Living Up to the Truth - A rational justification for living traditional Judaism. Rejecting a "leap of faith", the author shows that there is sufficient evidence to warrant basing one's life on the truth of the Torah.
The Controversy over Living Up to the Truth - Ephriam Rubin's review (Chocolate Philosophy) of Rabbi Gottlieb's Living Up to the Truth with Rabbi Gottlieb's response.
613 Mitzot Commandments as listed by the Rambam
Roadmap to Jewish Learning - A guide to the written and oral law.
Matan Torah - The Giving of the Torah - The chronoligical order of events in the giving of the Torah according to Rashi.
Daf Yomi - The Worldwide Daily Study of a Page of Talmud
Gematria of the Bigdei Kehuna - Comparing the Gematria of the clothing of the Kohanim with the sins for which they atone.
|Jerusalem & Israel Several Features on Jerusalem & Israel.|
Love of the Land Selections from classical Torah sources which express the special relationship between the People of Israel and Eretz Yisrael
Jerusalem Quartered Written by Rabbi Yakov Goldman. A closer look at the history of the Old City of Jerusalem.
Soul Food - The Jewish Dietary Laws A summary of the laws of Kosher food and explanations of the reasons behind it.
The Jewish Wedding Ceremony An explanation of the laws and customs of a Jewish Wedding.
Taamei Hamitzvot - Reasons for the Commandments An explanation of the concept of giving reasons for Mitzvos.
The Other Side of the Story Stories Relating to the Concept of Giving People the Benefit of the Doubt
Talmudic Method of Studying Texts by Harry A. Wolfson
Taryag Mitzvos "613 Commandments", Origin & Meaning
When Jew Murders Jew Rabbi Mendel Weinbach comments after the assassination of Israel P.M. Yitzchak Rabin.
The Helicopter Tragedy: Whose Failure? Rabbi Mendel Weinbach comments following the helicopter collision in the North of Israel, February '97