An independent nuclear power expert said an incident earlier this month at the San Onofre Nuclear Generating Station in which a canister filled with spent nuclear fuel got wedged into a storage cavity about 18 feet from the floor did not pose a threat to the public or workers at the plant that is in the process of being decommissioned.
But at the same time, David Lochbaum of the Union of Concerned Scientists said the incident raises red flags.
The plant’s operator, Southern California Edison, is in the process of transferring 73 canisters of nuclear waste from what is called “wet storage” to a newly constructed “dry storage” facility at San Onofre.
The Aug. 3 incident with the wedged canister is the second in five months related to fuel transfer at the plant — and that is what concerns Lochbaum.
“A lot of other canisters have been moved without such incidents,” said Lochbaum, director of UCS’s Nuclear Safety Project in a telephone interview from his home office in Tennessee. “So while neither one of these (incidents) caused harm, you need to quit tempting fate and have skill be more part of the equation than luck.”
A nuclear engineer, Lochbaum worked in the nuclear power industry for 17 years and spent one year at the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, the federal agency in charge of protecting public health and safety related to nuclear energy.
Back in March, the fuel transfer was delayed 10 days after workers discovered a piece of shim — essentially, a pin 4 inches by a half-inch — came loose while a canister, designed by New Jersey-based Holtec International, was being loaded at San Onofre. Edison received assurance from Holtec and an independent engineering firm that the canister’s integrity was sound. Fully loaded, a canister weighs about 45 tons.
Tom Palmisano, vice president of decommissioning and chief nuclear operator at the plant, called the Aug. 3 incident “unacceptable” and has suspended all transfers of spent fuel until “the handling practices, the human-performing practices, the procedures are sufficient and are demonstrated to my satisfaction.”
Lochbaum said Edison, Holtec and the NRC “need to ensure that whatever is causing the string of problems stops before it gets worse.”
After studying the Aug. 3 incident, Lochbaum concluded it was unlikely the wedged canister of irradiated fuel could have dropped 18 feet but, “I keep saying, the more times you invite disaster at some point, disaster accepts the invitation.”
A worker speaks out
The incident came to light after a man identifying himself as an industrial safety worker at the plant stood up during the public comment period at the quarterly Community Engagement Panel meeting earlier this month and described what happened Aug. 3.
David Fritch said a canister being lowered into what is called a “cavity enclosure container” got stuck but two workers guiding the descent did not realize it.
“So what we have is a canister that could have fallen 18 feet,” Fritch said. “It’s a bad day. That happened and you haven’t heard about it and that’s not right.” Fritch said the canister was “hanging by about a quarter inch.”
Fritch said he’s been working on the site for about three months and said some workers are “under-trained,” some supervisors don’t thoroughly understand the transfer process and “we don’t have the proper personnel to get things done safely.”
The Union-Tribune has left multiple voicemails with Fritch but has not received a return call.
Palmisano said Fritch is an inspector for a subcontractor who works for Holtec. Palmisano said “it’s not for me to disclose” the name of the company Fritch works for but said he had spoken to the president of Fritch’s company and the president of Holtec “and told them both that I commend Mr. Fritch for voicing his concerns.”
In a report to the Community Engagement Panel, Palmisano said “there is a very snug fit” as the canisters are lowered into the cavity enclosure containers and it’s not unusual for the loading team to make “a few adjustments” to get the canister in place properly.
The enclosure containers are about 20 feet high and the canister got lodged on an inner ring that helps guide it into place.
But the Holtec crew were unaware the canister was wedged. About 20 minutes later, an oversight team recognized the mistake and the canister was re-adjusted and successfully lowered to the bottom. Once inserted, the canisters rest largely underground in the cavity enclosures at the dry storage facility.
The incident happened on a Friday and Palmisano said the following Monday Edison’s staff at the plant notified the NRC, and Palmisano decided to suspend subsequent transfers.
“It’s an unacceptable incident,” Palmisano told the Union-Tribune but said the “very robust design” of the canister would have prevented any radiological leak — even if it had fallen 18 feet.
Lochbaum agreed, saying safety analyses of the canister showed it “would have remained intact so that there would not have been a release of radioactivity to harm workers or the public.”
But combined with the March incident involving a broken pin, the Aug. 3 incident is problematic for Lochbaum.
“If I lived in the area I wouldn’t pack up the car and head for the hills or anything like that,” Lochbaum said, “but it’s troubling.”
Palmisano described the wedged canister issue as a “significant issue” but he did not mention it during his presentation at the start of the Community Engagement Panel, which occurred six days after the Aug. 3 incident. Why not?
“Because the canister did not fall or drop, because it was recognized quickly and remediated and because I had stopped the activities (related to future transfers), I had thought it didn’t warrant an explicit discussion,” Palmisano said. “In retrospect, I wish I had … Hindsight is always 20/20 but yeah, if I could do it again, I would have addressed it upfront like I did with the shim issue in the first quarter.”
William Alley of San Diego, who with his wife Rosemarie has written a book about handling nuclear waste, said he was not reassured.
“They did not take this serious enough,” Alley said. “They seem to be in a mode of, ‘don’t worry about it.’ ”
Rosemarie Alley criticized Palmisano for not bringing up the issue at the start of the Community Engagement Panel.
“This has been a pattern with (Edison) throughout, it’s ‘trust us’ when the evidence is just not there,” she said.
Why transfer nuclear waste?
Used-up fuel at nuclear power plants is thermally hot and in order to cool it, operators place the fuel in a metal rack that is submerged into a deep wet storage pool.
Once cooled, the spent fuel is commonly transferred to a dry storage installation. One dry storage facility at San Onofre already holds 50 canisters and Edison is in the process of transferring 73 others from wet storage a newly constructed dry storage facility.
The Aug. 3 transfer marked the 29th canister to be placed at the new dry storage site.
Palmisano said there is no specific target date when the transfers will resume but said it was “on the order of weeks,” adding, “We will take whatever time it is to get this right ‘til we’re satisfied so this doesn’t occur again.”
Palmisano said he still hopes to have the transfer completed by the middle of next year.
SONGS is home to 3.55 million pounds of nuclear waste, which is located on the plant’s premises, about 100 feet from the Pacific Ocean behind a seawall 28 feet high.
One of the busiest freeways in the country — Interstate 5 — runs to the east of SONGS. About 8.4 million people live in a 50-mile radius of the plant, which has not produced electricity since 2012.
(619) 293-1251 Twitter: @robnikolewski