I have always been curious about how some cat lovers can identify breeds at a glance. Thus, I decided to become an expert myself. I am now going to share with you all how a Balinese cat can be identified.
Identifying a Balinese cat can be tough for those who do not have much information about them. To make things easier, we will categorize the Balinese cat’s identification features into three groups:
- Professional assistance
We will elaborate on the various features of these beautiful little furballs. It will then become a whole lot easier for you to determine whether your precious pet is indeed a Balinese cat or not.
Identifying the breed
People often endeavor to know everything they can about their pets. After all, they spend a significant portion of their day with these little creatures, so a little curiosity is natural.
Furthermore, knowing which breed your cat is can make it feasible for you to understand it better. You will then be in a better position to take optimal care of it.
Let us proceed with the various aspects of the Balinese cat that can play a pivotal role in identifying it.
Males: 6-8 lbs.
Females: 5-7 lbs.
Blue and almond shaped
Shape of head
Various physical traits can enable you to identify these fur balls.
1. The build
Balinese cats are medium sized. They can attain growth of up to 1.5 feet long and their tail is almost a foot-long.
2. Head shape
A distinguishing feature of Balinese cat is the shape of their head. They have a wedge-shaped head with slanted eyes. They also have large and pointed ears.
3. The body’s shape
4. Body characteristically built for speed
These cats have specific body characteristics that give them speed and agility. Thus, you will find that the back legs of Balinese are higher as compared to the front. Their paws are oval-shaped, and they have a tapered and long tail.
5. The texture of the coat
It is quite well-known that Balinese cats have long-haired coats with a silky texture. The hairare close to the bodies. However, despite the long hair, there is minimal shedding.
Therefore, check the texture of your cat’s coat. If it is silky and you are left with little to no hair on your hands, you might have a Balinese cat with you.
6. The color of the coat
The color of the coat of Balinese cats can be one of the following:
- Dark gray
Siamese cats also have the same colored coats. The distinguishing feature would then be the tail. The tail of Balinese cats is monochrome and full plume.
Therefore, if you spot a cat with these physical attributes, it can be safe to assume that you have stumbled upon a Balinese cat.
Behavior and temperament
Extent of behavior of the breed
Behavior with children
Behavior with dogs
Every cat breed has certain personality traits that are specific to it. When you become aware of these traits, taking care of the cat does not seem all that difficult. Balinese cats are no different.
If you are having trouble understanding whether you indeed have a Balinese cat, a close observation of its behavior can be quite revealing.
7. Social behavior
Do you think the cat is friendly enough, even to strangers? Does it like being in the company of children? If the answer to these is in affirmative, there is a strong likelihood that your cat is Balinese.
These cats are highly social and have quite a friendly personality. They love being in the company of people. Thus, you will find them following you around, preferring to curl in your lap. They would also want to sleep with you in your bed.
These friendly cats do not like to be left alone. They need to be kept in someone’s company, even if it is that of dogs or other animals. Before you know it, you will find them getting along well like a house on fire with other animals.
They also let their displeasure be known by meowing loudly. You might also find them greeting you with sound when you walk in a room.
10. Energy levels
Does your cat like to play? Does it often indulge in climbing activities? Balinese cats are known to be quite active. Their energy levels are very high and they love to play with the family. They run around in ample space and climb over large areas. You will find them leaping on shelves or cupboards.
Balinese cat is one intelligent breed. Training them is easy, and with time, you might end up realizing that they have trained you. They can make you go in their desired direction on a leash. You might not even realize that you have been taught to watch it perform those little tricks.
There is no obstacle challenging enough for it to give up. These silky cats find a way for everything. This also implies that they will keep you on your toes. They need to be given challenges for entertainment. So some effort will be required on your part.
12. Lesser risk of allergic reactions
With such long coats, you will expect Balinese to trigger severe reactions in those with cat allergies. However, this is not the case.
These cats are not entirely hypoallergenic. There is no such thing. Every cat breed can cause allergies, some more than others.
However, the risk of allergic reactions with a Balinese cat is minimal since they do not shed much.
Therefore, if you have a cat that is highly intelligent, social, extrovert, vocal and energetic, it might be sufficient evidence that it is indeed a Balinese cat. This can further be substantiated by the lack of allergic reactions it causes in susceptible individuals.
This is for those who are very serious about finding the breed of their cat. It is for those who will not rest easy till they find some official confirmation of what breed they have. There are three ways to go about this route for identifying a Balinese cat
13. Consult a professional breeder
If, despite all your efforts and observations, you fail to confirm whether your furball is a Balinese; seek the opinion of a professional breeder. You can go back to the one who sold you the cat in the first place. It could also be someone you trust who also is interested in Balinese cats.
Professional breeders seldom fail in identifying Balinese. Thus, their knowledge and expertise will make things more apparent to you. You can also ask for pedigree papers of the cat when you purchase it. These contain information about the lineage of your cat.
14. Consult a vet
15. DNA testing
This is the way for those willing to go the extra mile. If you want to be sure without a shadow of a doubt if your cat is indeed Balinese, this tactic will give you what you need.
You can have your cat undergo DNA testing. These tests are about 90% accurate, and thus you can rely on their results. Your vet can direct you to a Lab that performs DNA tests on animals. All that will be required is a swab taken from the inside of the mouth of the cat. You will get the results in no time.
With these 15 ways, you can make sure that the cat you have spent on is indeed Balinese. Considering that these precious little furballs cost over $600 or so, it is natural that you do not want to be duped.
What is known about the origin of Balinese cats?
The lack of documented history of Balinese cats can baffle some. References can be found here and there about the breed, but little is known with conviction.
One theory that isplausible is that this breed resulted from a natural mutation that took place in the Siamese cats for long hairs. Occasional spotting of Siamese kittens with long hairs has occurred. However, the first program of their breeding did not commence until the 1950s.
Breeders of the Siamese cats, Helen Smith, a resident of New York and Marion Dorsey from California had Siamese kittens with long hairs they absolutely loved. Smith named them Balinese because she was reminded of the dancers from the island of Bali by the kittens owing to their elegance.
The breed was officially recognized by the International Cat Association in 1979. It then also acquired recognition from other cat registries including the Cat Fanciers Association.
What care should be given to Balinese cats?
Taking care of a Balinese cat is easy. Their long, silky coat is quite deceiving. One might think it would require a lot of grooming, but that is not the case.
You need to comb it once or at the most twice a week, using a stainless steel comb like this one for the purpose. This removes the dead hair effectively and reduces shedding.
Frequent baths are not required. Perhaps once a week or twice in a month would be a good idea.
Brushing the teeth is essential if you do not want to worry about periodontal diseases in your cat. Daily cleaning of the teeth can save you from a lot of trouble.
The ears should be checked weekly for any dirt. If you find them dirty, wipe them using a damp cloth. Ensure that cotton swabs are not used for this as they can be damaging for the inner ear.
The litter box should be spotlessly clean.
These are highly energetic cats that love to run around. If you leave them outdoors, they can get into accidents. Therefore, it might be better if you keep these precious little things indoors. Make sure that you give them ample space to play around.
What are the health conditions that a Balinese cat can be affected with?
There are quite a few health issues that you might find your Balinese at the risk of. Let us take a look at some of these health conditions.
- Progressive retinal atrophy
This is a genetic condition characterized by degeneration of the retina in both eyes. It leads to vision loss progressively, ultimately resulting in blindness.
- Crossed eyes
This occurs owing to a defect in the pathways of the retina. They lead to problems in the perception of depth. Unless your cat is suffering from other health problems, this will not affect their quality of life to a large extent.
This rare condition results in decreased functioning of the liver. Symptoms you need to watch out for include poor quality of coats, dehydration, lethargy, and weight loss.
- Hyperesthesia syndrome
This is also a rare condition, also referred to as rolling skin disease. It leads to self-mutilation and agitation. You will even notice that the skin ripples when touched.
- Bronchial disease
These cats can suffer from respiratory infections, mainly when they are young. They might experience excess secretion of mucus which results in obstruction of airways, leading to breathing difficulty.
- Congenital heart defect
Some of them might also suffer from certain congenital heart defects including aortic stenosis and HCM (hypertrophic cardiomyopathy).
They might have lymphoma, a type of cancer.
This is a neurological disorder. It results in rapid movement of the eye, involuntarily.
- Bladder stones
If the cat is not given enough water, bladder stones can result which can be excruciatingly painful for your pet.
- Periodontal disease
This occurs owing to inadequate dental hygiene, and thus it is in your hands to prevent it.
What should I feed my Balinese cat?These elegant cats are quite selective and picky about their food. They are partial to wet food as opposed to dry food. They might enjoy some dry food now, and then but mostly; you will need to get them some high quality of wet food.
One important thing to keep in mind is that their nutritional requirements need to be fulfilled. For this, you might have to provide them with vitamin supplements occasionally. Cat food enriched with vitamins can easily be found on the market. Make sure that they are of profound quality.
These are carnivorous, and thus they will have to be fed with meat products as well. Balinese cats need Taurine for optimal health. Deficiency of it can cause blindness or heart problems. Therefore, ensure that you incorporate protein-rich food into their diet.
The age of your pet plays a significant role in the food you provide. The diet for a kitten will not be the same as that of an adult Balinese. Therefore, while selecting the menu, pay heed to the relevant factors. If you are confused, you can contact your vet for assistance.
Is Balinese cat right for me?Before you proceed to purchase a cat, it is essential to ensure that the breed is right for you. You need to be sure that you will be able to provide the best care to it.
These are beautiful and elegant cats with high energy and intelligence levels. They demand attention and are noisy.
Thus, if you have enough time to spend with them and do not mind the noise, you will find them to be ideal companions. However, if you leave your house empty for long hours, perhaps this is not the right option for you.
These cats have a long lifespan. Therefore, if you are looking for an intelligent companion who would entertain you; shower you with love, and be with you for a long time, Balinese cat would not disappoint.
What would be the best place to get a Balinese cat?This breed is a tad bit expensive. Furthermore, there are quite a few health conditions that you need to be cautious about as well. Therefore, make sure that you purchase the cat from a reputable breeder. Ask around and inquire from someone who has bought a cat before.
Get a clean bill of health during the time of purchase.