A noun is a type of word the meaning of which determines reality. Nouns provide the names for all things: people, objects, sensations, feelings, etc.
WHAT DOES BOUGAINVILLEA MEAN IN ENGLISH?
Bougainvillea is a genus of thorny ornamental vines, bushes, and trees with flower-like spring leaves near its flowers. Different authors accept between four and 18 species in the genus. They are native plants of South America from Brazil west to Perú and south to southern Argentina. Bougainvillea are also known as buganvilla, bugambilia, Napoleón, veranera, trinitaria, Santa Rita, bonggavilla or papelillo. The vine species grow anywhere from 1 to 12 m tall, scrambling over other plants with their spiky thorns. The thorns are tipped with a black, waxy substance. They are evergreen where rainfall occurs all year, or deciduous if there is a dry season. The leaves are alternate, simple ovate-acuminate, 4–13 cm long and 2–6 cm broad. The actual flower of the plant is small and generally white, but each cluster of three flowers is surrounded by three or six bracts with the bright colours associated with the plant, including pink, magenta, purple, red, orange, white, or yellow. Bougainvillea glabra is sometimes referred to as "paper flower" because the bracts are thin and papery.
Definition of bougainvillea in the English dictionary
The definition of bougainvillea in the dictionary is any tropical woody nyctaginaceous widely cultivated climbing plant of the genus Bougainvillea, having inconspicuous flowers surrounded by showy red or purple bracts.
The translations of bougainvillea from English to other languages presented in this section have been obtained through automatic statistical translation; where the essential translation unit is the word «bougainvillea» in English.
List of principal searches undertaken by users to access our English online dictionary and most widely used expressions with the word «bougainvillea».
FREQUENCY OF USE OF THE TERM «BOUGAINVILLEA» OVER TIME
The graph expresses the annual evolution of the frequency of use of the word «bougainvillea» during the past 500 years. Its implementation is based on analysing how often the term «bougainvillea» appears in digitalised printed sources in English between the year 1500 and the present day.
Examples of use in the English literature, quotes and news about bougainvillea
10 ENGLISH BOOKS RELATING TO «BOUGAINVILLEA»
Discover the use of bougainvillea in the following bibliographical selection. Books relating to bougainvillea and brief extracts from same to provide context of its use in English literature.
Thrilling To The Psychological Core&What A Corker Of A Book!' Outlook Clarice Aranxa Has Come To Bougainvillea House To Die. But There Will Be No Peace Here, Nor Quiet Surrender, As Long-Forgotten Memories Are Brutally Revived.
Kalpana Swaminathan, 2006
Beyond the Bougainvillea
There, embraced by the rough-and-ready people who built the great Ruck-a-chucky Dam on the American River, she begins to find her true mission in life and the possibility for love and happiness with an Army Corp engineer of Cherokee Indian ...
On the Edge: Bougainvillea\Shelter Island\Capsized
In three novels of romantic suspense, artist Kit Delaney returns to Florida and a deadly legacy, Dr. Antonia Winters hides from a stalker on a lonely island, and DEA agent Kelly Sloan escapes murderous drug dealers to land near Galveston.
Heather Graham, Carla Neggers, Sharon Sala, 2011
Floriculture in India
A most popular ornamental shrub, sometimes a climber, bougainvillea was first
collected by Commerson, a French Botanist, from Rio-de-Janeiro, Brazil, and was
named after the famous French navigator Louis Antoine de Bougainville.
"Made Wijaya guides readers through fantastically imagined and designed, stylistically diverse outdoor environments exploring various theories of Modernism and its current expressions."--Veranda
Made Wijaya, 2012
Bougainvillea: Flowers Are God's Sign to Us That He Made the ...
The simpler things in life bring joy. A 3-day quest and 9 flower-laden fields; this is what Emily was called to. As Emily gains an appreciation for some of God's simple yet profound tapestries, her family would let nothing get in her way.
A. R. Johnson, 2012
Floral Diagrams: An Aid to Understanding Flower Morphology ...
Flowers of Bougainvillea are typically arrangedinthree-flowereddichasia.Flowers
are enclosedbylarge, often petaloid, bracts(involucre). Insome casesbractsmaybe
confusedwithsepals, as inMirabilis where five fusedbractsenclose the flower ...
Louis P. Ronse De Craene, 2010
Bougainvillea along the Bosporus: City of Love
City of Love Alex J. Owen. kilometers maybe fifteen minutes – traffic OK at this
time of day.' JJ wondered why it would take so long to cover two kilometers ifthe
traffic was OK, almost immediately finding out. They screeched toahalt as they ...
Alex J. Owen, 2013
Brighten Up Your Life with Bougainvillea: A Friendly Guide ...
This book is designed not only for the specialist horticulturist but for the weekend occasional gardener as well.
Eric Simon, 2005
Encyclopedia of Cultivated Plants: From Acacia to Zinnia [3 ...
Another frequently grown bougainvillea is Bougainvillea glabra Choisy. Like
Bougainvillea × buttiana Holttum and Standley, Bougainvillea glabra Choisy has
sharp spines and dull ovate leaves. The bracts of Bougainvillea glabra Choisy
Christopher Cumo, 2013
10 NEWS ITEMS WHICH INCLUDE THE TERM «BOUGAINVILLEA»
Find out what the national and international press are talking about and how the term bougainvillea is used in the context of the following news items.
Villa No 174, Rio de Janeiro: Pure Rio, but with an touch of riad
On the next floor down, there are three rooms, all with a long, bougainvillea-draped balcony and hammocks. The style inside the suites is ... «The Independent, Jul 15»
Top things to do in Tampa Bay for July 7
Included with regular daily admission. 9:30 a.m., Busch Gardens, 3605 Bougainvillea Ave., Tampa. $97, $92 for ages 3-9. (888) 800-5447. «Tampabay.com, Jul 15»
Waning in/out boards
A name board greeted you as you passed through the gate and crossed the portico, garlanded with multi-coloured bougainvillea. Such a board ... «Deccan Herald, Jul 15»
Travel: Portuguese jewel of the Atlantic
The island is rich in exotic flowers originating from all over the world from orchids to bougainvillea, geraniums. azaleas, acacias and ... «Irish Independent, Jul 15»
Summer loving: Three women's tales of holiday romances
I fantasised about moving to stunning Sorrento, to live out my days on a goat farm, surrounded by lemon trees and the bright pink bougainvillea ... «Belfast Telegraph, Jul 15»
Quest2Glory gives young swimmer a helping hand
Marketing Manager of Bougainvillea Beach Resort Jamal Griffith (left) presenting Danielle Titus and her family with a coupon for a four-day stay ... «Nation News, Jul 15»
DROUGHT: 91 freeway landscaping, irrigation plan criticized
The 91 freeway plans call for hundreds of thousands of containers of freeway daisies, ice plant, bougainvillea and trees. None of them are ... «Press-Enterprise, Jul 15»
Neal: Fungus causes spots on rose bush leaves
Q: I have wintered two bougainvillea baskets the last few years, and they have been blooming wonders until this year. Did I too much or too little ... «Jackson Clarion Ledger, Jul 15»
Eclectic Home of a Hollywood Swashbuckler
... by 65 hectares, or 160 acres, of semi-tropical forest: bougainvillea, numerous types of palm tree, cacti and imported tropical species. Located ... «New York Times, Jul 15»
3 Reasons That Keep Me Returning to Italy
Balconies bursting with red bougainvillea. But let's be real. Italy has its aspects of irritation as well. People will cut in front of you in line, drive ... «L'Italo Americano, Jul 15»
« EDUCALINGO. Bougainvillea [online]. Available <https://educalingo.com/en/dic-en/bougainvillea>. Jan 2020 ».