The medical term DNA testing refers to a DNA-based test where genealogical relationship and ancestral ethnicity are determined by examining the specific location of the genomes. The test results acquired from the DNA test not only help in finding from which genealogical ethnicity the test subject or individual opting for the DNA test has descended from, but also in getting information about other individuals whom the test subject may be related to. There are various ways of doing this test, one among them being hair DNA testing.
Here is a brief account of how DNA testing really works.
How does DNA testing work?
Every human being has 23 pairs of chromosomes, where the location of every pair comes with a specific DNA sequence. Whether it is hair DNA testing or DNA testing using any other type of DNA sample, the sample is analyzed in order to identify the DNA sequence for multiple loci in the father, mother and the child. By analyzing the DNS sequences of each locus of the chromosome of a person, it is possible to determine paternity and maternity.
Can DNA testing be done anytime?
Be it chemotherapy or blood transfusion, there is nothing that can alter the results of DNA testing. However, in case you have recently had a blood transfusion, it is better to wait for at least a month. Or, if you have undergone chemotherapy, make it a point to wait for at least a few months before opting for DNA sample collections such as the cells inside the mouth or hair for hair DNA testing.
How accurate is the test?
When it comes to a test that can scientifically establish the paternity or the genealogical connections with another individual, there is nothing more accurate than DNA testing. This testing method’s ability to trace the inheritance patterns for different regions of the chromosomes or genetic materials is the reason why it is bestowed with scientific accuracy.
In order to avoid any chance of error, doctors prefer to have more than one single genetic marker. However, whether it’s through blood samples or semen samples or is simply a hair DNA test, the DNA testing procedure can be time-consuming and even expensive, depending on the markers examined.