Are you annoyed when you see that 90 per cent of universities now ban free speech on campus?
Do the Brexit ranters (on either side) drive you crackers?
Does being told that you can’t dress your kid as Moana make you froth at the mouth?
Then the media is telling you that you are probably, firstly, older, and secondly, a hater of ’snowflakes’ – the term now used to describe anyone who seems over-sensitive, politically correct – and usually young.
(And if you are a man who raged against Dr Who regenerating as female, then you could probably describe yourself as a ‘broflake’.)
Last year, the term ‘snowflake’ was the Insult of 2016 – and also one of Collins Dictionary’s words of the year.
However, the highly sensitive live among us, and you will need to get along with them.
In fact, research shows that 20 per cent of the population are HSP – or Highly Sensitive Persons.
Distinct from snowflakes, whose sensitivity seems to be related to the current culture, HSPs actually have a biological disposition to sensitivity, as shown in brain scans.
And it is nothing to do with being less resilient, according to the experts.
As Dr Riccardo Di Cuffa, Director and GP at Your Doctor, says:
‘In a world full of emojis used to express emotion, faltering privacy because of social media, and a lack of face-to-face communication, it is easier than ever to misread a situation.
‘Some people, though, are described by others as over-sensitive with the inference that they are weak, dysfunctional and overly emotional.
‘In fact, this group of people often simply have nervous systems that process stimuli intensely and they think and feel deeply.’
These people are our friends, lovers, and colleagues. They are family members.
So it’s a good idea to try to spot a highly sensitive person, and try to understand them.
A good way is by following the DOES acronym and checking off the signs.
For example, D is for depth of processing: an HSP will overly analyse everything, it’s innate, from the way you accidentally dismissed them at a meeting – or forgot to ring.
O is for easily overstimulated. A person with HSP, who is often called shy, will feel overwhelmed by too much stress, noise, and people – and will even find it hard to tolerate stimulants like coffee.
E is for emotionally reactive. HSP people are empaths and pick up on your mood. Research shows they also have an increased emotional connection to art and music.
S is for subtle stimuli. They are more intuitive and can understand the subtlest nuances in a book – or a glance.
Overall, they are overly affected by external influences that would not affect others, such as constructive criticism, as Dr Di Cuff explains: ‘Those who are overly sensitive may feel things more deeply, are more emotionally reactive, may take a longer time to make decisions, may get more upset about decisions that they or others make that don’t turn out well and may cry more.
‘Over-sensitive people are more prone to anxiety or depression.
‘On the other hand, they often feel happiness and gratitude on a deep level, are compassionate, empathetic and caring, and have the potential to be great leaders in the workplace because they are conscientious, loyal, intuitive and all about the detail.’
But how do you handle a lover? Do you constantly give them reassurance when they voice their concerns?
Kitty Waters is a wellness and mindfulness expert, coach, author and host of the Kitty Talks podcast. And she advises that you try not to get caught up in their drama.
‘It’s easy to get sucked into their way of viewing life.
‘If they come out with an overly sensitive comment just say, I hear you, and that’s it.
‘This way they feel heard but you are not adding fuel to their fire.’
And if you need to have a potentially fraught conversation with them?
‘Talking to someone while walking can be very effective,’ says Waters.
‘The movement can alleviate the pressure of a face-to-face conversation.’
Sometimes it’s more difficult at work.
It seems the rules are constantly being rewritten and you could face the sack for a comment that you find innocuous but could deeply offend someone with whom you share a desk.
Or even what you do out of work? For example, the woman who flipped the bird at the president’s car and shared her photo on social media was sacked.
Dr Di Cuffa advises: ‘There is no single best way to handle over-sensitivity but it’s really important to listen to what that colleague has to say and allow them to retain their personal dignity if a situation has arisen in the workplace.
‘Ask them to focus on the positives in the situation and the things they are good at.
‘Keeping busy is often a good way to keep stress in check.
‘If you are feeling stressed and anxious, cortisol the stress hormone will suppress neurotransmitters, which in turn will impair memory, appetite, sleep, motivation and much more.
‘Walking, exercise, meditation or just relaxing can help. Tell them they are welcome to talk to you again.’
Waters agrees: ‘If you do need to talk to them about a certain topic make sure to approach them at the right time.
‘Don’t do it when they are busy or potentially rushed. Try to work with them when they are in their happy place you will get the best results.’
And, despite what you may think, the highly sensitive make good leaders.
They are not reactive but make good judgement calls after fully processing the information to hand.
They are also sensitive to the needs of the workplace – and the workforce. They are more likely to listen and less likely to judge.
They are also highly creative. However, they also need to be surrounded by people who handle stress well.
And if you’re a snowflake?
Try mindfulness, and use your empathy to understand others’ viewpoint and to decide whether they are really being insulting/racist/sexist* (delete as appropriate), clumsy communicators, or even just having a bad day.