HomeWhatWhat Would it is Like to Live on The Moon?
What Would it is Like to Live on The Moon?
Hi, Good Morning! It is a beautiful day, isn’t it? But you know what; I live in the underground but not on earth. Even I can reach to up to eight meters by one leap from my bed to the washroom. My sink water drains into a very small greenhouse where I grow my own vegetable. After suiting up my first work to check and inspect the generator and remove any issue with that. I will reach my generator location by a transport chute. We I reach surface it full black lie last 12 days. Yes, this is another life on the moon. In this post, we will learn “What Would it is Like to Live on The Moon?”
Live on The Moon:
With the European Space Agency’s idea to establish a first “moon camp” for mankind by the 2020s. But it seems like that day may be closer. But living on the moon surface is not so easy. The moon camps envisioned is not like a village as inhabited research based. It can be similar to those placed in Antarctica.
But there are far more obstacles to spend the day on the moon with could temperature. The biggest problem will be cosmic radiation. Like earth, the moon has no atmosphere and magnetic field. If you stand on moon surface then you will receive over 400-time heavy ion radiation than maximum safe dosage. This level of radiation is fatal within ten hours even in a spacesuit.
So, first, step to built camp on the moon by involving the robots and 3D printers constructing covered habitats from lunar soil or building shelters inside the caves. This cave is formed by lava tube from the moon volcanic past.
What Would We Live on:
Our suppliers need to be transported from earth at first. We know growing plants need a greenhouse, soil, water, and air with Carbon Dioxide gas which is rare on the moon. But it could be synthesized from recycle material. Water treatment plant can be supplied by ice mined from the moon polar reasons. This job can be done by a very specialized drill that can bore two meters beneath the moon surface. Another thing is that friendly bacteria’s and viruses are necessary for the human microbiome and immunes system. This type of bacteria’s and viruses are free on the earth.
On the lunar surface, you will feel weightless and you can move long distance by a single jump. It so cool isn’t it. But remember the weight you had when you are on earth. You will become fattier without exercise. On lunar inhabitance would have to exercise for hours a day to maintain bones and muscle mass. Moon gravity is just one-sixth that of the earth.
But Why Moon:
It looks like very strongly to go through all those troubles to build a base on the dead rock where we already visited. But truth is that NASA’s Apollo Mission only explored a portion of the moon. After that mission, we discovered much information about the moon. It includes ice near the poles and particle on solar wind gases that date back billions of years. Till now the moon has much to teach us about the history of our solar system.
The lunar surface is rich in minerals like silicon, aluminum, magnesium, and helium-3 creating a great economic potential for mining. But the biggest advantage of moon camp does not lie on the moon, it’s beyond the moon. Because out only International Space Center is going to retire in about a decade then moon base will be the first foothold towards becoming interplanetary species.
Moons smaller gravitational force will help us to lunch new ships with more cargo but burning less fuel. In the meantime base on the moon, the surface will be used as a testing ground for our future space operation. It can also use as a refueling station and a supply depot all in one. With Europe, Russia, China, and the U.S are expressing the interest in this project. This moon camp can be involved in space agency of all nations with the private space agency. If it becomes true then we can say within a decade moon surface will be a mining operation, research station, and tourist routes. We may already visit the moon but now we are closer than before to make it our humanity’s home.