Pomona Valley Historical Collection
Cal Poly Pomona is located in the Pomona Valley, a distinct geographic and cultural region 30 miles east of Los Angeles. The Valley was primarily an agricultural area and known especially for citrus production prior to World War II suburbanization. The Pomona Valley is also home to the Pomona Fairplex and the Los Angeles County Fair, the Claremont Colleges, and a portion of Historic Route 66. Learn more about the history of Pomona Valley and resources.
Adelia Hawkins was secretary to Los Angeles attorney and civic leader Henry O’Melveny (1859-1941). The collection includes newspaper clippings, photographs, and printed materials related to O’Melveny and his experience in Southern California collected by Hawkins.
Douglass Adair joined the United Farm Workers union in 1965 at the age of 22. He helped organize the nationwide grape boycott and served as editor then publisher of the union's newspaper El Malcriado from 1965 to 1970. Through the 1970s and 1980s, Adair worked in the fields at various California ranches and as a member of the union's legal department. The collection includes correspondence, notes, notebooks, and records documenting Adair's involvement with the union and his employment as a farm worker; clippings and short publications on the union and related topics; and realia, ephemera, and photographs related to the farm workers' rights movement.
Photographs, emails, letters, sketches, programs, statements, and a DVD documenting the Envisioning the Future Project in Pomona (2003-04) involving Judy Chicago, Donald Woodman, and other artists.
Hilda Solis was a United States Congresswoman representing the 31st and 32nd districts in California between 2001 and 2009. The collection includes correspondence, news clippings, voting information, awards, photographs, and other materials related to Solis' tenure in Congress. There are also some materials related to her role as President Barack Obama's nominee for United States Labor Secretary.
Numerous newspaper articles, magazines, certificates, and more, eulogizing the years of the John F. Kennedy Presidential administration. Included are items that precede Kennedys election and items referring to his assassination and the aftermath.
The Pomona Fox Theater first opened in 1931 and has had a rocky history. It was shut down in 2001. But finally after a 10 million dollar renovation it proudly re-opened its doors on April 18, 2009.
The United Farm Workers (UFW) agricultural labor union was formed in Delano, California in August 1966. The union rose to prominence for leading the Delano grape strike from 1965-1970, which culminated in a collective bargaining agreement with grape growers and drew national attention to the farm workers movement. Cesar Chavez led the union from 1966 until his death in 1993. The collection contains flyers, posters, short publications, and other ephemera promoting the UFW, the Delano grape strike and other UFW campaigns, and Chavez's legacy.
The United Farm Workers (UFW) is a labor union for farmworkers in the United States headquartered in Keene, California. The news clippings collection was created by UFW staff member Dolores Velasco as a way to disseminate information to union field offices. Velasco collected and copied the news clippings and then faxed them to the field offices before filing them away for future reference.