The search found 39 results in 0.044 seconds.
This study traces the trajectory of Indigenous residential segregation in sixty Australian towns and cities, using census data from 1976 to 2016.
Executive SummaryThe impact of mixed funding sources on homelessness support for Indigenous Australians forms one part of the research program in the AHURI Inquiry into the funding of homelessness services in Australia, which aims to understand the mix of government and non-government...
Strategies to manage crowding in Indigenous households can reduce the negative effects for people living in those households, according to this report.
Key PointsCrowding in Indigenous households has structural causes, including the shortage of appropriately designed and affordable rental housing, and...
This is the final report following a series of five research reports prepared for the Department of Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs over the last two years on Indigenous homelessness in regional Australia.
The overall aim of this...
This report explores why it is necessary to design and deliver homelessness services specifically for Indigenous people.
This report presents information on both Indigenous and other Australians, with the aim of providing a broad profile of Indigenous Australians experiencing, or at risk of, homelessness.
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people are over-represented in the homeless population.
Whilst Indigenous Australians represent...
The rate of homelessness for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people is four times that of non-Indigenous Australians.
Homeless Indigenous Australians were almost twice as likely to sleep rough, or in improvised dwellings and shelters, than non-Indigenous Australians. The rate of home ownership for...
This report contains a policy-orientated synthesis of the disparate contributions to remote Indigenous housing from the design, policy and public health literatures as grounded and tested in fieldwork in three sample communities in different parts of Australia. This integration of primary and secondary research is...
Paul Memmott, Stephen Long and Linda Thomson find that the people of Dajarra, Alpurrurulam and Mt Isa, although exceptionally mobile by Australian mainstream standards are, for the most, relatively stable in their customary attachment to their home community, country and their cultural region. This is...
For any chance of success in achieving targets for improvement in Indigenous socio-economic outcomes, policy makers need to understand where relative and absolute need is greatest. To summarise the distribution of relative need a single index can be used to rank regions or areas within...