A health profession concerned with the diagnosis, treatment and prevention of mechanical disorders of the musculoskeletal system, and the effects of these disorders on the function of the nervous system and general health. There is an emphasis on manual treatments including spinal adjustment and other joint and soft-tissue manipulation.
WFC Dictionary Definition
World Federation of Chiropractic, 2001
Many people are looking for a more natural approach to their healthcare. Chiropractic uses no drugs or surgery and is extremely safe. Published research is now validating the results that chiropractic patients have experienced for over 100 years. Chiropractic interventions are recommended in the 2018 Low Back Pain series of articles, published in the worlds most respected medical journal, The Lancet: https://www.thelancet.com/series/low-back-pain
Chiropractic is a highly cost-effective health strategy for both patients and third-party payers.
Today’s chiropractors are highly-qualified professionals, who are committed to helping individuals of all ages; achieve improved health and function. Chiropractic care is aimed at the detection and correction of abnormal joint movement and position. Although chiropractic care is often focused on the spine , care frequently involves treatment of other areas of the neuromusculoskeletal system. After thorough examination and analysis, chiropractors use carefully controlled and directed pressure, (adjustments) to restore proper spinal and other joint function and thereby reducing interference to the nervous system. Chiropractors also recognise the importance of nutrition, exercise and other lifestyle factors on overall health and will often give patients advice on these topics.
Doctors of Chiropractic undergo a minimum 4-year full-time university education, with an emphasis on neurology, diagnostic imaging, physiology, and spinal adjusting. In many cases the actual course is five years to Masters level.
Most major health insurers cover Chiropractic care, but please check with your provider for any terms associated with your particular policy.