If you’ve been studying the HTML and CSS, you will know how to embed a graphic image into a web page. That is web graphic. Logos are one of the most common uses of web graphics.
Most websites have a logo on every page. Logos are usually created using illustration software, such as Adobe Illustrator, then exported to GIF format. Photos are becoming increasingly popular too, especially with so many digital cameras and camera phones available these days.
Photos are usually either scanned into the computer, or imported directly from a digital camera. Once the photo is saved on the computer, you can make adjustments, re-size it, and then save it in JPEG format. Take a picture of your beloved cat beside her fancy best automatic cat litter box, edit it a bit and voila! you a beautiful header image for your website. Icons can help a website look more professional, as well as help users quickly identify the purpose of a link. Icons are usually created using illustration software, such as Adobe Illustrator, then exported to GIF format.
Decorative images are often used to do the bits that HTML and CSS can’t do. For example, diagonal lines and rounded corners. Decorative images are also commonly used for repeating backgrounds on web pages. Depending on the image, a decorative graphic can be created using illustration software such as Adobe Illustrator, or image editing software such as Photoshop or GIMP. It is then exported to GIF format.
It’s certainly not a simple subject but being secure on social networking sites has never been as relevant as it is today. But despite it’s complexity there are some very basic rules that can help you become much more secure online. Here’s just some of rules you really shouldn’t ignore.
Passwords – one of the most dangerous things you can do is to use the same password across all your sites and logins. Online hackers and cyber criminals know that this is what people tend to do. They won’t waste time targeting professionally secured sites like Facebook and Twitter but instead hack into forums or other sites. They will then test these usernames and passwords on the bigger sites like Paypal and Facebook. Of course when they have access to one of these sites or your email they’ll be in business.
Information overload – it’s tempting I know to get carried away with posting on you facebook page or Twitter. Of course you want to tell your friends you’re jetting off to Barbados for three weeks. But I urge you to thing again – what you’re basically doing is announcing that yoru house will be empty to potentially thousands of people. Similarly be very careful posting too many personal details, addresses, phone numbers – all are gold for the cunning identity thieves who can make your life a misery with enough details.
The final point I’d like to raise is that of how long your information stays online. The answer is potentially forever, so next time you want to post something online think carefully. That post or tweet could be visible in twenty five years, will it still look the same? It’s especially important to stay away when you’re angry or have had a few drinks.
It’s not easy to stay secure online there are so many potential dangers however common sense goes a long way. It might also be worth consdering using a VPN or proxy server which also further secures your connection. The added benefit of these is that it enables you to hide your real IP address too, this can help you access content and sites normally blocked by location. Check out some of the technology involved on this site – http://www.theninjaproxy.org/tv/how-to-use-a-bbc-iplayer-proxy/ , it’s got some useful information on how the technology works and what you c an use them for.
I think a lot of us have started to see a change in the way things are sold online. To start, there are more personal brands being built rather than companies. The question becomes, do you want to be the next Apple, or the next IBM? Do you see the difference, Steve Jobs was the face of Apple and has continued to be the face of the company even after his untimely death, while IBM has faced a series of years with falling share prices and no real draw.
For those selling products via ecommerce, web design, graphics and the use of video is becoming even more important. For example, a company selling wine gift baskets could theoretically show scenes from each of their suppliers while talking about why each of those suppliers was chosen. It’s an exciting way to show off your products and really sell what you do well!