Politics and Government
From democracy to communism, every country on earth has a different political organization. Ask questions about political parties, leaders and history here.
What did Oliver Cromwell ban in England?
Asked in Politics and Government, Communism
How can you summarize communism?
Marxist viewpoint on History and Economy: History revolves around class struggle and violent revolution against the ruling class by the lower class. Economy, "from each which he is able, to to each according to need." Dictatorship of the proletariat: The rule by people who is the best option for the working class (if they knew what was best for them). Command economy: The government controls the factors of production and makes all economic decisions. Idea of belonging to a global movement: Marxist History is prospective, thus, it is naturally ordained that communism will be achieved throughout the world. Anti-theism: As Marx said "religion is the opioid of the people," religion is typically banned or treated with official disdain and disapproval. That true communism has never been achieved: No "Communist" country has ever actually claimed to have achieved real communism. Deng Xiao Ping put the achievement of true communism on the shelf in China for a few hundred years by saying that true communism will take many generations to achieve (a generation typically refers to 60 years in Chinese thought). Even North Korea does not believe that it has achieved true communism, it still progressing through the final stage of socialism, having evolved from capitalism (which had evolved through revolutions from feudalism). One of the two countries to be considered communist today, North Korea has generated some of its own additions that are quite unique in history: Juche: Meaning self reliance, is a "religion" to which all N. Koreans must subscribe. Interesting as this makes the DPRK the one of the only two countries on Earth where the whole population belongs to a single religion (the other being the Vatican); also interesting because it goes against Marxist anti-theism. Perhaps installed as a means to replace religion rather than ban it; it is similar in many ways to Confucianism. Necrocracy: (rule by a dead person) Kim Jong Il was proclaimed "President for Life" in response to Kruschev's De-Stalinisation of the USSR. Therefore, he is the only world leader to still be in power despite the fact that he is dead. Inclusion of intellectuals as a part of the working class. Again, another clever addition. Perhaps in response Pol Pot's woeful attempt at achieving Communism in Cambodia and the realisation that intellectuals are as necessary as factory workers and farmers. For communism read communial (people working together as a supportive unit to attain a collective goal). It is an acheivable ideal but not in the current political imbalance that is todays global society. Thomas more propounded this ideal in his book 'utopia' written 500 years ago. Orwell shows a more sinister, and relevent to what we see as modern 'communism' in his book 1984. The problem with communism as we experience it in todays world is the desire for power outweighs the desire to share. 'We'll all be equal, only I'm going to be more equal than you' Communism is a Theocracy to the goddess Athenia Communism is Marx & Engels application of Athenian philosophia doctrine via the use of the dialectic method, upon an concentration of individuals. Most folks miss the fact that Hegel (instructor of Marx & Engels) taught Athenian philosophia doctrine, which is commonly referred to today as philosophy. The word philosophy is made up of two Greek words; philos and sophos. Philos means love or affinity or affection for, such as brotherly love Phila-delphia, where the same word is used. Sophos means knowledge or wisdom or understanding, its use is related to Athena which was the patron goddess of Athens and the goddess over all knowledge. Philos-Sophos is the attesting to or love of the quest for knowledge as provided by the goddess Athena. Knowledge is derived through the use of clever argument known as dialectic (argument using thesis and its opposing anththesis, which results in synthesis). There are other encapsulations used with the dialectic method of thinking, some of which are the antithesis must be logical and reasonable and observable by the senses of man. The idea behind this doctrine, is for man to become enlightened with knowledge, through this dialectic process until he/she reaches the level known as Sage, (all knowing or all understanding). In Athens these Sage were also known as the educators or teachers of the day, often referred to as Sophists. The Sage included adherents to Athenian philosophia doctrine such as Aristotle, Plato, Socrates, and Zeno, as well as many others. Marx & Engels used their dialectics, especially the dialectic of materialism to establish a political-relgious system (often known as a theocracy), which is called Communism. All believers in communism must also accept Athenian philosophia doctrine, and the use of dialectics. Communism is a collective which does not allow for the individual separate from the collective. The commune is run, directed, guided, by the self proclaimed Sage, who reside over all decisions, all property and all the means of production within the commune. The system is built upon a utopian idea of the all knowing, all wise Sage who protect and enlighten the people of the commune. The commune is often referred to as "The State". The idea is for all the subjects of the commune to become enlightened trough the application of the doctrine of philosophy via the dialectic method. Live peacefully and prosperously as a commune of all knowing Sage. or those striving for the level of Sage or perfection. The practical application has historically failed to achieve anything other than a State dictatorship over peasants. Control over the various decisions and means of production and ownership of property, often succumb to human greed and corruption which results in a ruthless dictatorship. The Apostle Paul engaged believers in this same philosophia doctrine while he was in Athens, the account is documented in the book of Acts chapter 17. Later in the book of Colossians, in chapter 2 we find Paul's warning concerning this same doctrine. Historically we now understand that the application of this philosophia doctrine, ruined both Greece and Roman civilizations. Theocracy ends
What is the Elastic Clause?
What is the meaning of 'Faith and begorrah'?
What are questions about the Prime Minister of the United States?
There is not a Prime Minister in the United States. The head of state and head of government in the United States is the US president. Currently, this is Barack Obama. The executive branch of the US is elected separately from the legislative branch, although they are related by their political parties. It is possible to have a President whose party does not hold a majority in Congress. Americas' Prime Minister Each country in North America and South America has its own political structure, with its own head of state. Canada and many other countries with a British parliamentary heritage have prime ministers.
Asked in Politics and Government, Botswana
What is the largest political unit in San society?
What is Christianphobia?
Christianphobia (usually called Christianophobia or Christophobia) is the irrational fear or hatred of Christians or Christianity. It mirrors the use of the word Islamophobia by Muslims. The extent of Christianphobia in the UK is debatable. One view: In many parts of the UK there is a new aggressive atheism that for the last decade has been sweeping all areas of UK society. It is being led by a number of aggressive academic atheists; who are encouraging the persecution, ridicule and mocking of Christianity and Christians. Their ultimate aim is to eradicate Christianity from all parts of society, including Education, Government departments mainstream media; TV, Radio etc. These atheists have created an environment where it is a fun sport to bully Christians and intimidate them if they dare to declare their Christian faith publicly especially in the work place or in public life. This attitude towards persecuting Christians is now known as Christianphobia. Another view: In the West, Christianphobia is a term used by certain ambitious members of the faith to encourage feelings of victimization and fear among their fellow co-religionists, over whom they can then influence. A "Christianphobe" is undefined, but typically an atheist with an interest in politics who asks demanding questions of the faithful. They may or may not be of an anti-theist persuasion, and here lies the problem; the term Christianphobe is used predominantly as a blanket smear against any non-Christian who takes issue with any aspect of Christianity.
Which country was the first to give women the right to vote?
At a national level, Grant Duchy of Finland(1883) was first to declare universal suffrage and allow anyone to participate in politic, women included, although it was a autonymous part of Russian Empire at that stage. The first independent country to give women the right to vote in national elections (not local or provincial) was New Zealand in 1893. Previous bills or amendments only narrowly failed in New Zealands parliament as early as 1878. Places with similar status which granted women the vote include Wyoming Territory (1869). Other possible contenders for first "country" to grant female suffrage include the Corsican Republic(1769), the Isle of Man (1881), the Pitcairn Islands(1838), Franceville(1889), but some of these had brief existences as independent states and others were not clearly independent. Sweden was first one to allow women to participate in elections in 1718, but only to guild members and only on local elections. Of currently existing independent countries, New Zealand was the first to give women the right to vote in 1893 when it was a self-governing British colony. Similarly, the colony of South Australia enacted legislation giving women the vote in 1894. Places with similar status which granted women the vote include Wyoming Territory (1869). Other possible contenders for first "country" to grant female suffrage include the Corsican Republic, the Isle of Man (1881), the Pitcairn Islands, and Franceville, but some of these had brief existences as independent states and others were not clearly independent.
Asked in Politics and Government, Communism
Was communism a threat with the domino theory?
The Domino Theory, as stated by President Eisenhower in regard to Southeast Asia, stated that the practice of Communism in one country would cause nearby countries to fall to the "spread" of communism, like a series of falling dominoes. However, the accuracy of this theory is still under debate, even today. On one hand, the theory is supported by the fact that South Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos all became Communist nations after America pulled troops out of Vietnam, thereby "preventing" the proliferation of Communism. This seems to support the theory, as without American intervention, several neighboring countries established Communist governments, all one-after-the-other. However, on the other hand, Communism did not spread any farther than that, even though Eisenhower had claimed that it would. The fact is, other countries in the region, such as Indonesia and Thailand, remained untouched. The American government was worried about a unified Communist block that would extend through Asia via the Domino Theory, but this was also disproven when two Communist nations, Cambodia and Vietnam, waged war against each other, thereby shattering beliefs that Communism in Southeast Asia was a unified network of countries.
What is the color of the New Democratic Party of Canada?
How can one create a government recognized religion?
That depends on the country you live in, how powerful you are and how much money you have. The US government doesn't "recognize" religions in any official manner other than, perhaps -- and I stress "perhaps" -- by the IRS granting religious groups and their legal entities tax-exempt status, pursuant to section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code. Granting tax-exempt status, though, does not amount to official government recognition, as that phrase is most commonly understood; and, in fact, the US government officially "recognizing" any religion would, itself, be a violation of the First Amedment to the US Constitution's "separations" (of church and state) clause. One cannot, then, create a "government recognized religion"... at least not in the United States. There is a form a "government recognition" of religions in the military... when it comes to a person becoming a military chaplain. The US military has official lists of recognized religions and denominations. No person may become a military chaplain unless s/he has the approval of his/her denomination; and said denomination is on the military's list of recognized religions and denominations. And any national church's or denomination's getting on that list is a big deal... takes some serious work on the part of the denomination. So I suppose that that amounts to the government "recognizing" religions, but I've always felt that if someone with enough time, energy and money challenged it in Court as a First Amendment violation, and was willing to take it all the way to the US Supreme Court, then said someone might actually win. The secular humanists (atheists) are (or at least were) in just such a battle with the military. They want to be recognized on that list so that there can be secular humanist chaplains... which, to me, seems an oxymoron, but, hey... that's just me.
Who becomes president if the president dies?
If the president Obama dies then Joe Biden is the president. See if the president dies then the vice president will be president. The answer depends on the country/organization. In the case of the President of the United States, the Vice President becomes president if the president dies or resigns. In some countries the Vice President becomes acting president. In other countries a new election must be held, or a new president appointed. In other countries, the Speaker of the House of elected representatives becomes president. If the President of the United States dies, or is unable to perform his duties, the Vice President becomes President for the remainder of the current term. Quick Answer: The Vice President of the United States is the first person in the presidential line of succession, becoming the new President of the United States upon the death, resignation, or removal of the president, should he or she accept the position. Upon ascendancy to the office of President, the former Vice President-now-President must nominate a new Vice President as per Section 2 of the 25th Amendment ratified in 1967, " Whenever there is a vacancy in the office of the Vice President, the President shall nominate a Vice President who shall take office upon confirmation by a majority vote of both Houses of Congress." If however only the Vice President dies while in office or is unable to fulfill the duties of the office, the President remains the President and appoints another Vice President. If both the President and the Vice-President die or cannot fulfill their duties the Speaker of the House of Representatives becomes President.
What were two key elements of the Madisonian model?
Is conservapedia.com a joke?
Oddly enough it is not. It is a forum for conservatives to spread their take on the world. It seems to be information filtered through the glasses of conservatism. Much like Fox News vs MSNBC (conservative politics vs liberal politics) it is merely a website boasting a standpoint. While I would not use their articles as unbiased report, I would use them as informative and an insight into how today's conservative culture is seeing the world around them. **But I do know that the more liberal one is in their world view the more of a joke it will seem, and vice versa.** Also, note that the site generally is Conservative from a religious and social standpoint, not a political one (though, the distinction can be hard to make). That is, the site concentrates on social and religious conservatism, not economic or political (theory) conservatism.
How is the number of electoral votes determined for each state?
Electoral votes in the Electoral College determine the President of the United States. Every state and DC are awarded a certain number of electoral votes with which to elect the President. Each state has electoral votes equal to the total of the 2 representative the state has in the U.S. Senate plus the number of representative the state has in the House of Representatives.
Asked in Politics and Government
What was a cause of the Yamasee War in Carolina?
Yamasee War in Carolina The cause of the Yamasee War was that the colinists were taking to much land and never gave any back. Correct Answer: It is a little more in depth than that. The South Carolina government known as the Lord Proprietors had a agreement with the Yamassee in a form of a treaty to keep all of their coastal land in between the Combahee and the Savannah river. No one was to encroach on the Yamassee land or pass through according to the Treaty. The only buildings that could be built were churches! Constant violations by South carolina citizens forced the Yamassee to attempt a peaceful resolution with appointed agents that represented South Carolina. Enraged that nothing would come from their meeting with the Indian agents, the Yamassee went on a war path of destruction, killing hundreds of South Carolina citizens with the aide of other tribes from various regions. This war was considered one of the most bloodiest compared to King Phillips. (Yamassee War of 1715) more information on the Yamassee can be found on their official website yamasseegov.org or go into google books and type in Yamassee
Asked in Politics and Government
What does geography literacy mean?
Asked in Politics and Government, Monarchy
What countries have a king or queen?
Monarchies around the world Africa Lesotho - King Letsie III Morocco - King Mohammed VI Swaziland - King Mswati III Asia Bhutan - King Jigme Khesar Namgyal Wangchuck Brunei - Sultan Haji Hassanal Bolkiiah Cambodia - King Norodom Sihamoni Japan - Emperor Akihito Malaysia - Tuanku Abdul Halim Thailand - King Bhumibol Adulyadej Europe Andorra - Princes Nicolas Sarkozy and Joan Enric Vives Sicilia Belgium - King Albert II Denmark - Queen Margarethe II Liechtenstein - Prince Hans Adam II Luxembourg - Grand Duke Henri Monaco - Prince Albert II Netherlands - King Willem-Alexander Norway - King Harald V Spain - King Juan Carlos I Sweden - King Carl Gustaf XVI United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland - Queen Elizabeth II Middle East Bahrain - King Hamad bin Isa al-Khalifa Jordan - King Abdullah II Kuwait - Emir Sabah Al-Ahmed Al Jaber Al-Sabah Oman - Sultan Oabus ibn Sa'id Qatar - Emir Sheik Hamad ibn Khalifa al-Thani Saudi Arabia - King Abdullah bin Abdulaziz al-Saud United Arab Emirates - Sheik Khalifa bin Zayed Al Nahyan Other Tonga - King George Tupou V. That's 31 unless I've mis-counted. Countries with Constitutional Monarchies with Ceremonial Monarchs Andorra Antigua and Barbuda Australia Bahamas Barbados Belgium Belize Cambodia Canada Denmark Grenada Jamaica Japan Lesotho Luxembourg Malaysia Netherlands New Zealand Norway Papua New Guinea Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Solomon Islands Spain Sweden Thailand Tuvalu United Kingdom Countries with Constitutional Monarchies with Active Monarchs (The prime minister is the nation's active executive but the monarch still has considerable political powers that can be used at their own discretion.) Bahrain Bhutan Jordan Kuwait Liechtenstein Monaco Morocco Tonga United Arab Emirates Countries with Absolute Monarchies Brunei Oman Qatar Saudi Arabia Swaziland Currently, 44 Sovereign nations in the world have monarchs acting as heads of state, 16 of which are Commonwealth realms that recognize Queen Elizabeth II as their head of state. All European monarchies are constitutional ones, with the exception of the Vatican City. Countries include England, Cambodia, Japan, Jordan and Malaysia.