We all know that a balanced diet is important. We need to eat the right amount of fruits, vegetables, protein, and grains to live a healthy life. But certain types of foods can also be beneficial for joints. If you suffer from osteoarthritis, then you know that inflammation, stiffness of the joints, or other types of arthritis pain can bring lots of discomfort and pain. The knee is one of the most common joints affected by osteoarthritis pain as wear and tear takes its toll over time. Knee pain doctors can do a lot in the way of providing treatment for osteoarthritis pain, but eating specific food rich in certain types of nutrients can also improve joint health. Be aware of what foods can help ease arthritis pain and do your part to follow a joint healthy diet for positive results for joint health and knee pain relief from osteoarthritis knee pain. Here are some diet recommendations to follow if you want to reduce osteoarthritis symptoms and increase joint mobility and health.
Foods That Reduce Inflammation
Inflammation is one of the biggest stressors on the knee joints. It can lead to joint stiffness and overall discomfort. Vitamin D along with Omega 3 fatty acids are two nutrients that help reduce inflammation for knee pain relief. Foods rich in these types of nutrients include fish like salmon or cod, nuts and seeds such as walnuts or flax seeds, or certain types of healthy oils like coconut oil or olive oil. Other fruits and vegetables with a low glycemic that can be beneficial for reducing inflammation include pears, apples, oranges, asparagus, artichokes, and cauliflower. The Mediterranean diet full of these types of foods lends itself nicely to a diet focused on reducing osteoarthritis knee pain. Other ideas for incorporating anti-inflammatory foods such can include making smoothies packed with kale, oranges, apples, or even spices like turmeric or ginger that can also reduce inflammation. Focusing on your diet can be just one small way that you can control joint health to bring about knee pain relief.
Foods to Avoid
On the opposite end of the spectrum, there are types of foods that can be damaging to joint health. Knee pain specialists recommend that you avoid foods that can increase inflammation such as dairy, sugar, alcohol, soda, fried foods, salt, white flour, or red meats. If you eat a lot of fast food or processed foods, foods that are high in trans fats or Omega 6 fatty acids, you may be contributing to inflammation instead of working to alleviate it. Work with a knee pain doctor to relieve osteoarthritis knee pain, but also do your part to reduce inflammation by watching what you eat. An anti-inflammatory diet can go a long way towards providing knee pain relief.