Historically, people of the Sumas (Sum-Aht) and Chilliwack (Ch.ihl-kway-uhk, Chilukweyuk) tribes of the Stó:lo, Salish First Nations resided in the region around Sumas Lake. The Chilliwack traded and affiliated with the Salish tribes on the Nooksack River of Washington State by way of the Old Nooksack trail meandering between Vedder Mountain and Sumas Lake, and by way of Columbia Valley and Cultus Lake.
Settlement of the area by Europeans accelerated with the arrival of the Hudson Bay Company's traders (circa 1800), the Cariboo Gold Rush (circa 1858), the construction of the Collins Overland Telegraph Line (1865), the Colony of British Columbia joining Canada (1871) as a province, the incorporation of the Municipality of Chilliwack (1871), the completion of the B.C. Electric Railroad from New Westminster to Chilliwack (1910), the Sumas Lake Reclamation project (1924), and Mennonite immigration into Yarrow (1928).
The tracks of the B.C. Electric Railroad divided what came to be Yarrow: Yarrow Proper west of the tracks, the Vedder River Flats east of the tracks and north of Vedder Mountain up to the Vedder River, and Majuba Hill south of the tracks on Vedder Mountain.
While the settlement of Yarrow Proper waited for Sumas Lake to be drained in 1924, the settlement of the Vedder River Flats was facilitated by the relocation of the Yale-Westminster Highway (c. 1908 - c. 1920) along Vedder Mountain from Majuba Hill to Vedder Crossing, known at first as Yale Road, and subsequently as Vedder Mountain Road.
Yarrow Pioneers: Vedder River Flats
The land east of Sumas Lake, overshadowed by Vedder Mountain, cut and ravaged by the Vedder River, was a rugged area. During the late summer, fall, and early winter, sizeable runs of spawning salmon invaded Sumas Lake, the Vedder River, and their tributary creeks. Huge flocks of geese and ducks populated Sumas Lake, while pheasant and grouse inhabited the thickets of pussy willows, poplar trees, and blackberry bramble patches. Deer, bear, coyote, bobcat, and cougar roamed the mountainside and flats covered by hefty cottonwood, maple, hemlock, fir, and cedar trees. Yarrow pioneers cleared these lands to develop farms for livestock and produce.
The Hudson Family
Edward (c. 1865-1940) and Esther Hudson (1869-1956), born in London, England, were early pioneers on the Vedder River Flats. They were married in Vancouver in 1907. The Hudsons and their son, Edward Jr., relocated to a fifteen-acre property south of Duncan Road, clearing the land, building a house, and establishing a farm.
Being somewhat isolated, the residents of the Vedder River Flats and Majuba Hill generally socialized amongst themselves in homes, or at parties and dances in the Vedder Mountain and Majuba Hill Schools.
The Brown Family
Ernest William Browne was born in Shropshire in 1871, and in 1889 immigrated to Vancouver, where he worked at whatever he could find for some years. He changed his name to Robert Brown because of the disfavour Englishmen faced in the job market at that time (his name sounded and looked just too English), started working on coastal boats around the turn of the century, and obtained his Master Mariner certificate in 1907.
Elizabeth Hudson, born in London, England in 1883, served a long apprenticeship as a seamstress, fitter and tailor. She immigrated to Vancouver with her uncle, Edward Hudson, in 1907, where she met Robert Brown. They married in December 1908. She worked at her trade until their daughter, Annetta, was born in 1917.
Chester Brown writes, “In 1918, my parents, Robert and Elizabeth Brown, bought 15 acres on Browne Road, west of the Hudson’s homestead on Duncan Road. Soon after this purchase, through a long-term payment agreement with the Soldier Settlement Board, they bought the adjoining 20 acres to the south, next to Browne and Yale Roads. They cleared a few acres on the 15-acre parcel and built a tiny house, to which they added over the next few years.
Because dad’s work was based in Vancouver, my mother raised two kids, kept a cow, a pig, chickens and a large garden all on her own, an amazing achievement for a woman raised in London with no rural experience.
“To the east of Yarrow, a dozen or so families lived on the Browne and Ford Roads, and a few more along the Yale Road east of Ford Road as far as Vedder Crossing, about three and a half miles from Yarrow. The one-room Vedder Mountain School served these families until 1926, when it was closed. For the 1926-1927 school year, these children were trucked, first to Majuba Hill for a half term, and then to Atchelitz School. From 1927 to 1929, students in grades 6 through 8 from Majuba Hill and east along Yale Rd were trucked to Sardis School. Starting in 1928, younger students from Majuba Hill attended the new Elementary School located at the south-west corner of present day Yarrow Park.”
“Our neighbours in the earliest years included the Duncans, across the wagon road (Duncan Road) and immediately north of us; Hudsons, directly east of us; Mortons, east of Duncans; George Rowtasch, the Swiss farmer, west across Browne Road; Martins and Simmons on the neighbourhood’s largest farms on their road (now Lumsden Road); and Latties south of Yale Road at Browne Road junction. Later, the Currence family bought Latties; Nickels bought Duncans; Johnsons bought Hudsons; Downings bought the property north of Duncans; and Nowells bought west of George Rowtasch. Roy Rexford built a little house in the “V” between Yale Road and Martin and Simmons’ Road (now Lumsden Road).”
“In 1930, we moved to the Johnson’s (Hudson’s) 15-acre property, which we bought for $5,000. The house built by my mother’s uncle, Edward Hudson Sr., was situated south of the “S” curve of Duncan Road.”
“Yale Road traversed the valley west of Sumas Lake, crossed the BCE rail line a mile or so southwest of Belrose Station, followed the lower slopes of Vedder Mountain to a half mile east of Yarrow, and then continued along its present route next to the mountain to Vedder Crossing. This road provided the only overland, road route up the Fraser Valley south of the Fraser River.”
“The BC Electric Railway provided passenger and freight transport from Vancouver/New Westminster to Chilliwack and beyond to the Fraser River and the old Yale Road. There were stations at Yarrow and Belrose on both ends of Majuba Hill, and a flag stop south of the Vedder River Bridge at the end of Martin and Simmons’ Road. To shop in Chilliwack, we flagged the BC Electric Interurban train. Usually, we shopped for day-to-day staples at Bill Siddall’s store, at Yarrow Station along Yale Road.”
“Our friends included classmates from the Majuba Hill and other area schools that my sister, Annetta, and I attended. From among our circle, Margaret Maitland and Annetta remained fast friends throughout their lives.”
“In 1931, we sold the 15-acre Browne Road property to a Mennonite family. The 20-acre property’s ownership, at Browne Road junction, reverted to the Soldier Settlement Board in 1935. Subsequently, George and Katie Wiens purchased this property.”
“For my first year of High School in Chilliwack, I lived in a house owned by the Maitlands in Chilliwack. Parents of Yarrow students staying in this house rotated in providing care for us. Thereafter, I cycled the 10 miles to Chilliwack from Duncan Road, regardless of the weather. The road to Chilliwack could be dangerous. On one occasion on my way to school, a car driven by someone travelling to Vedder Crossing from Chilliwack struck me in Sardis, and I spent some time recovering from my injuries in the Chilliwack General Hospital. However, I persevered to get my education, despite the hazards presented by inclement weather, road conditions, and careless drivers.”
“In 1935, I moved to the Okanagan. My parents lived in Yarrow until 1938, after which they moved to Burnaby. My sister, Annetta, changed her name to Adrian, trained as a nurse in New Westminster, and married an electrical engineer by the name of Alton Hurt. After serving with the Canadian Navy during the war in the Pacific and Eastern Mediterranean Zones, I attended UBC.”
“Having obtained a degree in geography at UBC, I worked in Saskatchewan for a while. After I married, I worked for the federal government in Ottawa until my retirement in 1976.”
The Derksen and Wiens Families
In 1928, Mennonite settlers arrived in Yarrow to purchase parcels of land Chauncy Eckert subdivided from his Knox Farm purchase. Many of these settlers came from farms in Alberta, Saskatchewan and Manitoba.
As the availability of lots from Eckert’s Yarrow subdivision diminished, settlers spilled onto the Vedder River Flats and up Majuba Hill, acquiring existing farms or subdivided acreage.
Elmer Wiens writes, “In 1929, four of my Grandfather Julius Derksen’s brothers, Johann, Henry, Gerhard, and Peter, lived in Yarrow. Meanwhile, my grandparents and their children worked their wheat farm in Blumenhof, Saskatchewan, south of Swift Current.”
“In 1936, the Derksen family relocated to Yarrow, acquiring property on the west side of Ford Road [now Giesbrecht Road] contiguous to the Vedder River.”
“The Derksens raised chickens, milked dairy cows, and grew potatoes, corn, and berries on their Vedder River farm. The family income was supplemented with work in the hop yards and tobacco fields on Sumas Prairie. During the 1930s and ’40s, many young women of Yarrow found employment in Vancouver as caregivers and domestics, commuting by way of the BC Electric Interurban trains. For a while, Katie Derksen worked as a nanny for a ‘wealthy Eaton family.’ “
“My Aunt Sara married George Siemens on March 28, 1937 in the Yarrow, MB Church. After farming in Saskatchewan for a few years, Uncle George and Aunt Sally bought the farm east of Browne Road adjacent to the Vedder River, and west of the Derksen farm on Ford Road. My Uncle Jake died on December 30, 1938, and was buried in the Yarrow Cemetery at the end of Alder Road [Hare Road].”
“On March 16, 1939 my parents, Katie Derksen and George Wiens, married in the Yarrow MB Church.”
George and Katie purchased and operated the 23-acre farm at the northeast corner of Browne Road and Vedder Mountain Road, formerly owned by Mr Robert Brown. Along with dairy cows, chickens, and hogs, they harvested strawberries, raspberries, potatoes, and corn.
George and Katie’s children — Raymond, Elmer, Luetta and Alfred — enjoyed playing in the barns and fields, and fishing for trout in the salmon stream Street Creek flowing through the farm. Chester Brown fondly recalls fishing this same stream during the 1920s and ’30s, when the Browns owned the property.
The Wiens children also liked to visit their Siemens cousins at the end of Browne Road, and their Wiens(z) cousins in Yarrow.
Each fall, the family picked hops on Sumas Prairie, getting up before dawn, returning home in the evening to finish farm chores. Weigh-up-time determined the essence of a day picking hops. The picked hops accumulated in one’s basket were dumped into sacks and weighed. This measure of the day’s labour was punched onto a ticket, redeemable for money at the end of hop-picking season.
Elmer Wiens continues, “In 1944 my Uncle Julius joined the Canadian Armed Forces.”
Following the 1946 spring flood, my grandparents moved to Yarrow onto a few acres, just west of the Yarrow MB Church; my Siemen’s cousins moved to a 100-acre farm on Sumas Prairie.
Yarrow pioneers suffered brutal hardships from the flooding of the Vedder and Fraser Rivers ensuing from the annual, spring snow melts on British Columbia’s massive mountains. The severe flood in May and June of 1948 was the outcome of a number of concurrent circumstances. Cool weather during the spring delayed the thawing of the substantial accumulation of snow in the mountains until late May. Over the Victoria Day weekend, temperatures spiked, rapidly melting the mountains’ snow pack, substantially raising the water levels of the Fraser and Vedder Rivers. At the same time, the moon’s position in relation to the earth and the sun (lunar perigee on May 15; full moon on May 22) caused unusually high tides that slowed the flow of the Fraser River, backing up the Vedder River. Consequently, between May 28 and June 3, a number of dykes were breached, flooding large tracts of land in the region of the confluence of the Fraser and Vedder Rivers.
Today, the Derksen Vedder River farm is the Vedder River Campground, operated by the Cultus Lake Parks Board.
Elmer Wiens writes, “My father, George Wiens, built a dam on our creek for irrigation purposes. Street Creek was fed by the runoff from Vedder Mountain, and a yearlong spring on the Dyck farm east of us on Vedder Mountain Road. Each fall, various species of salmon spawned in our creek. The coho and steelhead fry remained in the creek for almost a year, while the pink and chum fry left for the ocean soon after hatching.”
“There was always something happening on our farm. We could watch Dad milking the cows in the early evening, check out the new chicks in the chicken barn, help gather eggs, peer over the pen railing as the hogs gulped down their victuals, or look for snakes in the lumber pile.”
“My friend, Abe Dyck from Ford Road and I fished our stream, and he let me ride his bicycle up and down Browne Road after school. The Penner boys from up Lumsden Road — John, Bernie, and Martin — visited us on Sunday afternoons and evenings. Martin Dueck lived just north of us on the Brown family homestead. Our 2nd cousins, the Derksens and Peters, lived near the corner of Lumsden and Bergman(n) Road next to the Klaassens.”
“Riding with my brother Ray to and from Yarrow School on the yellow school bus driven by Andy, I also got to know Lenora Janzen, Elsie Bergmann, Annie Reimer, Rosella Nickel, Ted Schmidt, Bob Peters, Wilfred Derksen, Dennis and Gerry Klaassen, Ed, Veronica, and John Barkowsky, Bill Thiessen, and Eric and Fred Ewert. Having an older friend from ‘The Bush’ saved my butt in a number of differences of opinion on the schoolyard.”
“School was a lot of fun, except for differences of opinion with our Grade 1 teacher, Mrs. Dwyer. For example, our mail at home was delivered to a roadside mailbox from a central post office in Sardis. Consequently, our postal address was: Brown Road, RR#2, Sardis B.C. When Mrs. Dwyer asked me where I lived, I of course said Sardis, B.C. However, Mrs. Dwyer was confident that I lived in Yarrow, causing me to question her intellect.”
“In the spring of 1953, my parents sold our farm to the Gross family, and we moved to a three-acre hobby farm in Yarrow at 1012 Central Rd., next to the G.G. Baerg family. My mother used the proceeds from the sale of the irrigation equipment from the Browne Road farm to buy each of us children a bicycle.”
“That fall, Yarrow School moved to the Pink School on Wilson Road with classes from Grades 1 to 9. On the first day of school, we gathered at the old school in downtown Yarrow, and then we all marched along Central and Poplar Roads to our new school in the morning, Indian summer sunshine. They had painted the doors to the classrooms red, yellow, or blue. My girlfriend, the cute Brown girl who sat beside me at our desk in Grade 1, and between Rob and me in Grade 2, didn’t return to our school that year. Our Grade 3 teacher until Christmas, Mrs. Sharples, assigned me to sit behind Rita, who always wore such neat belts that year. My lost Roy Rogers lunchbox was replaced by a new Lone Ranger one. It was a wonderful day!”
Yarrow Pioneers: Majuba Hill
The Siddall Family
Siddall’s General Store, Post Office, and house were located at Wilson Road’s junction with Yale Road on the Vedder Mountain side of Yarrow Station. Knox’s farm sits across the railway tracks and to the left (west) of Wilson Road heading due north. Yale Road (Majuba Hill Road) runs to the left (west) and to the right (east). Today, Yale Road running east is a heritage site called the “Old Yale Wagon Road,” known locally as “Lovers Lane.” Chilliwack Mountain rests in the distant background, south of the Fraser River.
In 1927, William and Ella (Eva Elmina) Siddal succeeded James Hounsome as postmasters. Yale Road was the main highway, and Siddall’s store prospered with the influx of immigrants after Sumas Lake was drained.
Yarrow Pioneers lived far away from commercial entertainment in Chilliwack, New Westminster and Vancouver. A few lines from a poem by Ella Siddall to her friend Elizabeth Brown capture a Yarrow Pioneer’s evening.
In the post office all day, nights by the fire,
Listening to the radio Will never seems to tire.
But I’m not content to just sit and think,
I hustle with dinner, dishes piled in the sink.
I get out my knitting and take down a book
A few pages I turn, at the pictures I look.
Restless in the evenings when I’ve nothing to do,
But the washing, or ironing, or mending to sew.
But, the thing I hate most is having to cook,
When the library van’s left a really good book!
William and Ella Siddall’s children were Vivian and Arthur.
The members of the Knox family were prominent citizens of the community of Yarrow, built on the one thousand acres of land Joseph and Margaret Knox sold to C.E. Eckert. Joseph and Margaret had two children, George Marshall and Mary Elizabeth. George Marshall married Henrietta Kirkpatrick; their children were Ethel and Edith. Mary Elizabeth married James Cameron; their children were Muriel and Gordon.
Ella’s Siddall’s poem to her friend Elizabeth Brown describes her visit to her Knox friends and neighbours.
Our neighbours, the Knoxs, live over the track,
Their house renovated with nothing to lack.
The bathroom, laundry, and pantry fresh made,
New covers on floors in the whole house are laid.
The kitchen’s cupboards are painted white,
The florescent lighting makes everything bright.
New dining room set, and china cabinet too,
New living room chesterfield, large, bright and blue.
Walls in shades delicate fairly are tinted,
I tell you, my friend, nothing was stinted.
The dwellings of Majuba Hill and Yarrow’s pioneers were often rough and ready, constructed from logs and cedar shakes cut from local timber. Lumber was hewn by hand, cut at a small sawmill on Majuba Hill, or brought in by train to Yarrow Station and then dragged by a team of horses to the building site. Outbuildings were similarly, but more roughly built.
Bill and Ella Siddall provided postal services from the Wilson-Yale Road junction until 1948, when Bill Siddal built a new Post Office east of the Yarrow Elementary School in downtown Yarrow.
The Wiensz Family
Elmer Wiens writes, “In 1943 my Wiensz grandparents sold their Saskatchewan wheat farm and relocated to a farm on Majuba Hill. This farm, overlooking Yarrow, was situated on the edge of the plateau on the north side of Old Yale Road, above and west of Eckert Road’s terminus with Vedder Mountain. The creek flowing through the farm entered a canyon along Old Yale Road, where the road bends to mount the plateau known as Majuba Hill, when one negotiates the road travelling east to west.”
“Grandfather Wiensz cooled the milk from his cows in the shed straddling the creek. This milk-cooling shed was down from the house, and next to the driveway leading up to Yale Road. Using a wooden wheelbarrow he built, grandfather transported the cans of milk to a platform beside the road to be picked up each morning by the FVMPA truck. Because there was no bridge across the creek, cars splashed through the driveway gravel-ford beside the footbridge, next to the shed.”
“Whenever we visited, I brought my fishing rod and worms with me so that I could fish off the footbridge. However, I was not allowed to fish the pond surrounded by blackberry bushes directly below the farmhouse, because these trout were Uncle Alvin’s.”
“Along with dairy cows, Grandfather Wiensz raised strawberries, raspberries, and vegetables on the Majuba Hill truck farm. He delivered the fruit and vegetables to the Yarrow Growers Co-operative for processing and marketing. Before he purchased a car in the mid 1940s, he delivered his produce to the co-op with a horse-drawn wagon.”
“In 1944 Uncle Henry Wiensz joined the Canadian Military Forces. After his training, the military transferred him overseas where he served at the front as a motorcycle dispatch rider in the liberation of Holland.”
“The extended Wiensz family enjoyed gathering at the Majuba Hill Farm for Sunday afternoon dinners, conversation and fellowship.”
“As a civilian again, Uncle Henry worked for many years for the Canadian Postal Service in Vancouver. The next picture shows Henry Wiensz visiting our grandparents, Maria and Peter Wiensz, with his new Ford Coop.”
“In the background, one sees Grandfather’s cow barn, and the original barn overlooking Yarrow Proper on the plain below Vedder Mountain. Peter and Nettie Wiens’ property lies due north on the slope between Grandfather’s farm and the BCE Railway tracks, at the southern end of Ratzlaff Road. “
Elmer Wiens concludes, “In 1952 my grandparents sold their Majuba Farm to the Spenst family, and moved to Clearbrook, B.C, where they had purchased a house and acreage west of the Clearbrook MB Church on the north side of Old Yale Road. “