Fused Glass Jewellery Course - Taster Day
If you want to get started making your own unique fused glass jewellery, this is the taster course for you. Working with System 96 Fusing Glass, you will develop a basic understanding of glass fusing, and consider the design process, experimenting with colour and shape to create distinctive pieces. You can expect to create a number of experimental glass pendants which will be fired in our electric kilns. Individuality will be encouraged throughout the day and you will be shown a number of techniques including how to apply metal inclusions and the process of layering dichroic glass to make your kiln glass jewellery really stand out!
There will be a maximum of 8 students to ensure individual attention.
This is a LEVEL ONE course - Suitable for beginners.
What does the course cover?
Your tutor will begin with an introduction to glass fusing, including cutting skills and technical information. This course is suitable for complete beginners so don't worry if you have never tried anything like this before!
Throughout the day students will experiment with dichroic glass, using metal wire and inclusions. The course will encourage students to think creatively about how the jewellery will be worn and students will be shown how to create holes and fittings incorporated as part of the fused piece. You will also look at the different bails and jewellery findings that can be attached to the fused glass pieces after they have been fused.
We aim to give students a thorough taste of jewellery making skills, and the opportunity to try as many techniques as possible. There will also be a microwave kiln demonstration, which offers a low cost alternative to Kiln Firing that you can use at home. Course jewellery will be fired overnight using our excellent Kilncare Glass Kilns ready for you to collect the next day. Alternatively, we can post these out to you at no extra cost.
On completion of the course you will receive a Guild Membership card which entitles you to 10% off your next course as well as other benefits.
What do I need to bring?
Nothing but yourself and a sturdy pair of closed-toed shoes. All of your glass, materials and use of tools are included in the price.
We will provide a delicious cold lunch from Pret a Manger as well as light refreshments throughout the day. Please let us know in advance if you have any special dietary requirements. We will do our best to cater to everyone but this cannot always be guaranteed.
What are the course times?
The course starts at 10am and runs until approximately 4pm. There is a chance that it may overrun depending on progress. Duration: One day.
We will try to make our courses accessible to all however if you have any disabilities or physical limitations of any kind we ask that you discuss it with us before booking.
Looking for a gift?
Why not buy a course as a unique gift? If you're unsure of a suitable date you can buy a voucher and let them choose their own! Vouchers are valid for 12 months from date of purchase and need to be used to book a specific date within that time. A booking is not confirmed until the voucher has been validated against a specific date.
For cancellations made 4 weeks in advance we offer a full refund or one free date change. For cancellations made 3 weeks in advance we offer a 75% refund or one free date change. For cancellations made 2 weeks in advance we can only offer a 50% refund. If we receive less than 2 weeks’ notice we are unable to offer a refund or date change on course places. If a date change has been requested we cannot offer a refund on a subsequent cancellation.
- * * * * *13/09/2015
What a fantasic day!By Claire Banks
we started with the basic glass cutting and went on to cutting circles ,layering glass , using gorgeous dichroic glass , using stringers and noodles , and enamels and inclusions! we all made a piece with the microwave kiln and fixed bails and lots of samples- some of which look quite professional and I am extremely proud of them ! Katherine was an excellent tutor and was very patient assisting my arthritic mother with her circle cutting and gave lots of inspiring creative advise. This course in june was the start of my fusing adventures and I have since done the fusing and slumping course and a personalised day I can highly recommend courses here
- * * * * *21/03/2013
Fantastic Day!By Carrie
What an amazing day! Loved every minute of it. We had great access to all sorts of amazing glass, with loose guidance as to what pieces we were to make. This meant we had the education, but the creativity to make pieces for ourselves. Various techniques were shared, then we were let loose! Just fantastic. My pieces have arrived in the post today, and I am thrilled with the majority of them! Now I know what I'm doing, and have seen the outcomes, I'd actually be keen to repeat the course as it's all trial and error! Super lunch, super tutor in Simon, and a super company. Can't wait for my lampwork bead course next! THANKS!