Prime Minister Boris Johnson says that the UK will leave the EU on October 31 deal or no deal.
Of course Brexit had been due to happen on March 29 but that came and went so nobody can be 100% sure when it will take place.
Cornwall has been one of the areas of the UK which has benefited most from EU funding over the past 20 years due to it being recognised as one of the poorest, not just in the UK, but in Europe as a whole.
But how did Cornwall get its European funding and what has it done for the Duchy?
In 1999 Cornwall was granted Objective One status which gave access to funding from the EU as one of the poorest regions in Europe.
Prior to this Cornwall had been included with Devon and so it was not clear just how Cornwall and the Isles of Scilly compared with the rest of Europe.
After a long campaign the EU recognised Cornwall and the Isles of Scilly as a region in its own right and granted it Objective One status.
That first Objective One programme - which ran from 2000 to 2006 - provided £350 million for Cornwall and the Isles of Scilly.
It was followed by the Convergence Programme - from 2007 to 2013 - which provided an additional £415m.
That money has been used for a wide range of things including The Eden Project, superfast broadband, Cornwall Airport Newquay and the dualling of the A30.
So with four weeks to go until Brexit we look at some of the key projects which have received EU funding since 1999.
1. The Eden Project
When it was suggested that a disused China Clay pit could be transformed into a world-class tourist attraction and environmental charity many scoffed.
But thanks to bold decisions and a whole lot of funding from the National Lottery, South West Regional Development Agency and the EU it became a reality.
Since opening in 2001 Eden has welcomed more than 18 million visitors and has boosted the local economy by £1.7 billion. It is known all over the world and employs more than 400 people.
EU funding: £26 million.
2. Cornwall Airport Newquay
The airport has long been seen as a key to bringing business into Cornwall and encouraging investment in the county.
Previously part of RAF St Mawgan the airport received European funding to help pay for the transition to a full civilian airport.
The money was used to pay for the airport terminal as well as a raft of other facilities needed to operate as a fully functional airport.
EU funding: More than £40m.
3. Combined Universities in Cornwall (CUC)
CUC was formed in the early 2000s with higher education providers in Cornwall coming together with the aim of creating a standalone university for Cornwall.
It was formed in a bid to fight back against the "brain drain" from Cornwall with young people having to leave the county to pursue university education.
EU funding: £173.2m.
4. Superfast Cornwall
Superfast Cornwall was launched in 2011 with the aim of providing superfast broadband to homes and businesses across Cornwall.
The initial programme to 2015, which was funded by the EU and BT, saw more than 12,000 businesses connected and 4,500 jobs created or safeguarded.
An extension programme from 2016 to 2018 enabled another 10,000 premises to be connected to superfast broadband.
Cornwall is now considered to have some of the best superfast broadband links in the world.
EU funding: £53.5m.
5. A30 improvements
European funding has been provided for the dualling of the A30 on Goss Moore and is also being made available for the planned dualling between Carland Cross and Chiverton Cross.
The improvements on the road have provided a huge benefit to businesses and visitors in Cornwall.
EU funding: £20m+.
6. Innovation centres
Three innovation centres have been built in Cornwall and all received funding from the European Regional Development Fund.
Pool Innovation Centre, Tremough Innovation Centre in Penryn and the Health and Wellbeing Innovation Centre at Treliske support growth, knowledge and innovation-led businesses at every stage of development, especially those in the media, creative, eco, environmental and the health and wellbeing sectors.
7. Newlyn Fish Market
The market has been billed to become the best in the South West if not the country after winning £1.3m of European funding for a major refusbishment.
Newlyn Harbour bosses have said that the funding will provide improved facilities for existing users and open up new selling platforms.
8. Aerohub Enterprise Zone
This project is providing employment and workspace on land around Cornwall Airport Newquay.
Some of the phases have already been completed with more planned to be developed.
EU funding: £4.4m.
9. Cornwall Business Start-up
Cornwall Business Start-up delivers bespoke support to new enterprises in Cornwall and the Isles of Scilly.
Run by Oxford Innovation it provides businesses with a start-up plan and access to expert coaches, mentors, training and resources to achieve it.
EU funding: £5.9m.
10. Cornwall New Energy
Cornwall New Energy aims to develop the local energy market and ensure that enterprises and communities will benefit from more local ownership and operation of energy generation and supply.
The project will support businesses and social enterprises to generate renewable energy, support the development of new low carbon products and services and work to develop or find markets.
EU funding: £2.7m
11. Cultivator Business Support
Based in Redruth, Cultivator Business Support will work with businesses in the creative industries — from start-ups to established enterprises — to help them achieve their growth potential.
Support will include specialist coaching, mentoring and targeted investment.
This project is aligned to Cultivator Skills which will provide advanced skills for businesses in the creative sector. Together, they offer an integrated programme of skills and business development for the creative sector.
EU funding: £2m
ESF (European Social Fund) investment: £998,975
12. Engagement and activity for the unemployed
Focusing on those who are most disadvantaged and furthest from the labour market, this project provides tailored support to address worklessness.
Flexible, personalised packages of support will be provided to enhance engagement, work readiness and provide in-work support to ensure employment can be sustained.
The project is delivered by Reed in Partnership, Lizard Pathways, Groundwork and St Loyes.
EU funding: £12.9m
13. Unlocking Cornish Potential (UCP)
Unlocking Cornish Potential works with businesses and graduates in Cornwall to pair them together.
The programme is funded through the European Social Fund (ESF) and European Regional Development Fund (ERDF).
In the past two years alone UCP's programmes have created 353 new jobs in Cornwall.
The average salary for jobs supported by UCP is £23,546, while the maximum has been £65,000. The project ensures that jobs have a minimum salary of £18,000.
EU funding: £8m+
14. Export for Growth
'Export Essentials' enables more small and medium sized businesses to export for the first time and 'Extend Your Global Reach' helps enterprises to compete in new markets.
EU funding: £2.4m
15. Family and Community Essential Skills
This project focuses on supporting those who are facing in-work poverty to help them progress and increase their pay and working hours, or obtain higher paid jobs and move out of poverty.
It will also provide support for people who have recently been made redundant. The project is delivered by Careers South West.
ESF investment: £540,111
16. Financial Readiness Project
Oxford Innovation's Financial Readiness Project is aimed at small and medium-sized enterprises in Cornwall and the Isles of Scilly that need support to secure finance.
Businesses will be offered workshops on how to make appropriate financial choices, one-to-one support and will benefit from the development of a financial support network. Specialist support will also be provided to investors in the region.
ERDF investment: £2,984,900.
17. Hall for Cornwall
QuayWorks, a creative hub providing office and meeting space for businesses in the creative sector, will be constructed as part of the redevelopment of the Hall for Cornwall.
This project will help advance the development of the creative industries and support the sector to contribute to job creation and economic growth.
EU funding: £2.1m.
18. Integrated Territorial Investment (ITI) Support Team
This team supports the delivery of the Growth Programme in Cornwall and the Isles of Scilly by working with the managing authorities to develop calls; helping organisations from the private, voluntary, community and social enterprise sectors to access the programme; publicising the programme's opportunities and successes and monitoring and evaluating progress.
EU funding: £3m
ESF investment: £1.9m.
19. Invest In Cornwall
This will be done through the Cornwall Brand initiative and by attracting and supporting businesses in certain smart specialisation sectors (marine renewables and aerospace and related advanced engineering).
It will also encourage those involved in international business to work together and support existing overseas-owned businesses in Cornwall.
EU funding: £1.7m.
20. Isles of Scilly Technical Assistance
Working with the islands' public, private and voluntary, community and social enterprise sectors the technical assistance team helps organisations develop projects that are eligible, compliant and good value.
21. Isles of Scilly Voucher Scheme
This scheme, managed by the Council of the Isles of Scilly, makes investments of between £1,000 and £100,000 in small and medium sized enterprises on the islands. It aims to generate long term, sustainable business growth and to create higher value jobs.
ERDF investment: £1.4m.
22. Jubilee Pool Geothermal Heat Project
This project will use renewable geothermal energy to heat a section of Jubilee Pool, Penzance's art deco lido. A geothermal well will be drilled next to the pool making heat available throughout the year.
The project will act as a high profile demonstrator for geothermal heat in Cornwall and encourage the roll out of other geothermal projects on a commercial basis.
ERDF investment: £1.5m.
Launchpad is a graduate start-up programme run by Falmouth University that aims to give participants the skills to develop a project from inception to sustainable, high-growth potential company in just two years.
It will support graduates to develop new products and processes in response to market demand, focusing on the digital games and interactive technology sectors.
EU investment: £9.8m
24. Outset Cornwall
Outset Cornwall provides tailored support for individuals who want to start their own business or who have recently started up. The project aims to increase the number of business start-ups and help new enterprises survive and grow.
Support is delivered through Outset, the Spark programme at Truro & Penwith College and the Engine Room which delivers through Cornwall Neighbourhoods for Change, RIO – the Real Ideas Organisation and the School for Social Entrepreneurs.
EU investment: £3.4m.
25. Local Manufacturing Advisory Programme
The Local Manufacturing Advisory Programme will support manufacturing businesses improve and grow.
The project will offer information, diagnostic and brokerage support to identify growth needs; consultancy support; grant funding for small capital and revenue projects and workshops and seminars to provide businesses with the tools they need to improve their processes.
It is delivered by the South West Manufacturing Advisory Service.
EU investment : £124,932
26. Skills for Young People
This project will provide skills development for young people who are not in education, employment or training (NEET) or who are at risk of becoming NEET.
Managed by Careers South West and delivered by a range of partners, the project aims to bring young people closer to work or further learning.
ESF investment £1.3m.
27. St Erth Multi Modal Hub
This project will develop the area around St Erth railway station as a transport hub serving West Cornwall.
It will connect the railway mainline, A30 trunk road, St Ives park-and-ride service and the bus network, making public transport more attractive and commercially viable.
EU funding: £5.4m
28. Superfast Business
Superfast Business will enable businesses to better understand and exploit the opportunities offered by superfast broadband that can help them develop new products or services, reach new markets and improve business performance.
Support will be provided by experienced advisers, online, face to face, through workshops and through project support.
ERDF investment: £3m