The National Coursing Club, the governing body of greyhound coursing, is responsible for drawing up the rules under which affiliated meetings are conducted.
The place where everyone gathers before going to the actual field where the coursing takes place.
The field where the coursing takes place.
The area from which hares will be driven on to the running ground by beaters holding flags. “The Beat” also describes the “beaters” as a whole.
At most meetings all the hares are driven by beaters. The running ground is often walked-over before coursing to clear any hares sitting on the field.
WALKED UP COURSE
The crowd walks across a field with a slipper in the middle, putting up hares to be coursed as it goes. Some meetings are completely or partially “walked-up”.
The official in a red coat responsible for releasing (slipping) the dogs in pairs simultaneously.
A hide for the slipper.
The official, mounted and in full hunting dress, who decides the result of each course.
Officials who control the running of the meeting.
Official who signals to the crowd the results of the courses etc with flags.
COURSING INSPECTOR NCC
Official who ensures that the hares have every opportunity to escape.
Quickly secure the hare from the greyhounds if the hare is caught and ensure that it is dead.
An artificial escape hole for hares, (pronounced “suff”).
Any of the natural escape routes by which the hares leave the field. All hares coursed under NCC Rules are living in a wild and natural state. They are coursed over ground not restricted in any way and regularly use the escape routes during their everyday lives.
Sometimes runners are withdrawn from their courses, either because of absence, injury or weariness. Their opponent still has to run a course – a “bye” – so that it will have run the same number of courses as the next opponent. The dog may run alone or accompanied.
The run from slips until the hare is turned for the first time. (Worth a maximum of three points to the faster dog.)
When a dog forces the hare to turn through more than 90 degrees. (Worth 1 point.)
When a dog forces the hare to turn through less than 90 degrees. (Worth 1/2 point.)
Where a dog starts a length behind his opponent, passes him in a straight run or on the outside circle, gets a clear length in front of him, and turns the hare. (Worth a maximum of 3 points.)