A good workout likely isn't a cure for insomnia.
A new study out of the Feinberg School of Medicine at Northwestern University found that one exercise session doesn't help a person sleep better immediately, but may help more over the long term.
"The message here is that exercise is not a quick fix, which I don't really think is discouraging at all," said study author Kelly Baron, director of the Behavioral Sleep Medicine Program at Northwestern. "Our previous work found that exercise over a 16-week period is very effective in promoting sleep, on par with any kind of medication. But like with weight loss or any sort of behavioral change, it doesn't happen immediately. You have to measure progress over months, not day-to-day."
The researchers looked at the sleep habits of 11 sedentary middle-aged and elderly women diagnosed with insomnia. They started a four month exercise regimen, and found that one exercise session during the day didn't improve sleep.
Mediterranean Diet Lowers Diabetes Risk
A Mediterranean and low carb diet may help reduce the risk of type 2 diabetes, according to a new study published in the journal Diabetologia.
The Mediterranean diet is high in fish, fruits, vegetables and whole grains and is low in meats, cheeses and sugars.
In the study, researchers tracked more than 22,000 people in Greece for 11 years, and 2,300 of them developed diabetes during that time. People whose diets were high in carbs were 21 percent more likely to develop diabetes than those with a lower carb intake.
More Siblings Means Divorce is Less Likely
People who grow up with brothers and sisters are less likely to get divorced, according to new research out of Ohio State University.
Every sibling a person has reduces the divorce risk by 2 percent. Study authors determined that brothers and sisters upped a person's interpersonal and relationship skills. Only children were both less likely to get married and more likely to get divorced.
More than 57,000 American adults were surveyed at 28 points between 1972 and 2012, and researchers found that just 4 percent had grown up without any siblings. Of the 80 percent who married at some point during the period studied, 36 percent had been through a divorce.
Take our Dementia Risk Factor Quiz
Though the onset of symptoms is often the first sign of dementia, researchers are uncovering more risk factors for dementia. A new study in JAMA Internal Medicine found that men had a greater chance of dementia if they had more than three risk factors.
Erinn Connor is a staff writer for Health Matters With Dr. Sanjay Gupta