Dental Myths Debunked!
Menlo Park Dentist Dr. Derrick Sakata
- “It doesn’t matter what time of day I brush.”
Brushing at certain times of the day does have an impact on your oral health. Brushing your teeth at night prevents food particles from sitting on our teeth which contributes to tooth decay over time. Brushing teeth in the morning fights bad breath and decay. It is recommended that you brush right after consuming foods that are high in sugar and carbohydrates to prevent cavities.
- “Diet sodas are okay to drink because they don’t have sugar in them.”
The acid in diet soda eats away at enamel which can cause tooth sensitivity. Some people tend to slowly sip their sodas throughout the day, which is actually more hazardous. The bacteria in your mouth begins to work with the acid from the soda and attacks your enamel. Other beverages like orange juice can cause similar damage. The best alternative is water, vegetable juice and milk.
- “You only need to go to the dentist if your teeth hurt.”
You might be aware of the saying “prevention is better than cure.” What is relatively less heard of is that diagnosing and curing a tooth problem at an earlier stage is much easier and more cost-effective than if it were to be addressed later. Altogether, prevention saves you both time and money in the long-run.
- “Oral health is not connected to the rest of the body.”
There are many correlations between your mouth and body. Tooth decay and periodontal disease can cause bacteria to enter the bloodstream and cause other issues in your body.
Studies show there is a link between periodontal disease, heart disease, diabetes, cancer and more.
Be Proactive About Your Dental Care
Menlo Park Dentist Dr. Derrick Sakata encourages you to seek preventative care to keep your teeth healthy. Putting off regular dental check-ups will likely lead to problems. A little time dedicated to caring for your teeth each day can save you time and money in the future.
If you’re experiencing problems or have questions about your oral health, request an appointment by calling (650) 324-9272 today!