Junior American Citizens Contests
NSDAR Junior American Citizens Committee offers a variety of contests for students to participate in to help enrich their understanding and appreciation of history and to promote good citizenship.
American History Essay Contest
Do you know a budding writer in Grades 5, 6, 7, or 8? DAR offers the American History Essay Contest that should grab their attention. The topic this year is “The Voyage of the Mayflower.” 2020 marks the 400th anniversary of the voyage of the Mayflower and the founding of the Plymouth Colony. Student writers should imagine they are a voyager on the Mayflower and tell what they would have packed. Then, considering the completion of the two month journey, they should explain if they would have made different choices and why. Final essays must be submitted to the chapter chair by December 15, 2019. For more information please contact Therese Rice-Dietrich, Sierra Nevada Chapter American History Committee Chair, at firstname.lastname@example.org.
Christopher Columbus Essay Contest
Any student in Grades 9, 10, 11, and 12 may write an original essay on “A Sailor’s Experiences as Part of Christopher Columbus’ First Expedition to the Americas.” He and his men explored the Caribbean for five months after arriving there in October. The student should imagine being a sailor who accompanied Columbus on this voyage and has now returned to Spain. The writer must describe the sailor’s impression of Christopher Columbus and his perception of the purpose of the expedition. The essay must contain experiences about the voyage, details of the places and people that were encountered, and what is seen as the significance of the discoveries made. The final essay is due to the chapter chair no later than December 15, 2019. These essays are judged and awarded from the National Italian American Foundation. They encourage participants to write essays from a positive standpoint. For more information please contact Therese Rice-Dietrich, Sierra Nevada Chapter American History Committee Chair, at email@example.com.