The use of automated systems is integral to various markets and industries, including science, building, hydraulics, broadcasting, manufacturing, and more. If you’re considering setting up an automated system for your company, or need repair services for a broken component, a company that employs certified, trained professionals can assist you. There are an assortment of advantages to the use of quality automation systems, and your company could likely stand to benefit from greater production and reduced costs across the board.
Role of Automation in Industry
Manufacturing and industrial automation is, essentially, the use of computerized and robotic systems to complete productions within a company. Automated task completion in many different types of work environments began with the production of feedback controllers in the 1930s. Automation systems are comprised of a broad array of devices and components which work together to complete a specific task, such as assembly or quality control. There are various upsides to the use of automated systems, especially when it comes to meeting industry and market demands, increasing productivity, and generating higher revenues.
Advantages for Companies
For the companies that implement them, the use of automated systems provides two profitable benefits. For one, automated systems allow for faster, more precise production and task completion. Human error is inevitable, especially in a factory or plant where many tasks need to be completed repetitively and on a tight schedule. Robotic and computerized systems are designed and programmed for strict accuracy and quality control. Secondly, automation allows companies to save on employee costs. Because fewer workers are required, fewer funds need to be set aside for salaries, benefits, and paid vacations.
Programmable Logic Controllers
Many different types of components are needed to keep an automated system functioning optimally. One of the most important parts in industrial automation systems is programmable logic controllers (PLCs). PLCs are computer control systems that can be programmed using a number of languages to monitor input and output devices in automated systems. To complete tasks, PLCs generally execute four steps on loop, including input, program, and output scans, as well as housekeeping. Housekeeping involves relaying valuable information to terminals, allowing the system to be improved upon if necessary.
For standard-compliant products and expert services, contact Five Star Electric. To purchase PLCs or another automation component, visit http://vfd.com/automation/ .