Squat is an exercise that combines many muscle groups, and that is simulated as “the king of exercises”. So, we should also learn more about this exercise, because understanding the mechanical structure of the Squat exercise will help you reduce injury and improve efficiency.
You can easily realize that any fitness lesson cannot be missed with the Squat exercise – the prince of the exercises. Because of its popularity, the more we have to understand how it works.
Stretch and shrink
When bearing the thigh, the operation process is divided into two phases. The contraction stage is the stage when the muscle exerts force to overcome the resistance, which in turn causes movement and this is when you stand up. Stress is the muscle phase under pressure, but not greater than the opposite force. Then, the muscle will relax, this is when you lower your body. In the Squat exercise with the participation of many joints and muscles, stretching plays the role of “braking” to reduce the speed of movement, while protecting the body from injury.
The regions involved in the Squat exercise
Both the up and down stages of the Squat exercise use both the large and small muscles of the lower body. These muscles include the anterior thigh muscles (also called quadriceps muscles), the back thigh muscles, large gluteal muscles, inner leg muscles and external leg muscles, posterior tibialis and countless other muscles in the foot area and ankle. Only in one movement that mobilizes too much capital is needed for daily living, Squat exercise is considered the best exercise to improve the quality of life.
Stress phase (Lowering people)
At this stage, gravity generates a strong pulling force. If you carry extra weight, the bigger the gravity. To counteract gravity as well as protect the joint from injury, the big buttocks as well as the rear thigh muscles relax at the hip area, the anterior thigh muscles relax at the knee, and the leg muscles, folds and tibial muscles first relax in the ankles. When these muscles relax, they create a force to control the speed and range of the stretch phase.
Shrinking stage (Raising people up)
In contrast to the stretch period, during this period, the upper muscle groups instead of stretching out to shrink to create force against gravity, lift the body up. The contraction rate occurs at the same time to ensure joint safety, avoiding injuries while rotating the legs. Because the big buttock muscles and the back thigh muscles attach to the pelvis, the abdominal muscles and lower back muscles in the upper body will create a contraction force to fix the pelvis and keep the upper body still.