Power Generation and Structural Change: Quantifying Economic Effects of the Coal Phase-out in Germany
IWH Discussion Papers,
In the fight against global warming, the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions is a major objective. In particular, a decrease in electricity generation by coal could contribute to reducing CO2 emissions. Using a multi-region dynamic general equilibrium model, this paper studies potential economic consequences of a coal phase-out in Germany. Different regional phase-out scenarios are simulated with varying timing structures. We find that a politically induced coal phase-out would lead to an increase in the national unemployment rate by about 0.10 percentage points from 2020 to 2040, depending on the specific scenario. The effect on regional unemployment rates varies between 0.18 to 1.07 percentage points in the lignite regions. However, a faster coal phase-out can lead to a faster recovery. The coal phase-out leads to migration from German lignite regions to German non-lignite regions and reduces the labour force in the lignite regions by 10,000 people by 2040.
East Germany Three Decades After the Wall Came Down: What has Been Achieved and What Should Economic Policy Do?
The persistent difference in productivity between East and West Germany not only results from the relative absence of large firms based in the East as many believe. Companies of all sizes exhibit an East-West productivity gap. The gap is larger in urban regions. Scarcity of skilled labour has emerged as the new barrier to business development. In order to boost productivity, economic policy should avoid additional subsidies that are conditional on creating jobs. Additionally, the potential of East German urban areas should be better explored. Mitigating the shortage in qualified workers requires in-migration of skilled labour from abroad, supported by an open mindset and environment.
United country – three decades after the Wall came down
The Berlin Wall, once the symbol of the divided Germany, has now been gone for longer than it ever existed. But the differences within the country are still visible. However, recent research suggests that different economic development does not always follow the former inner-German border. Apart from the west-east divide, differences also emerge between the south and the north or between the cities and the country.
21.02.2019 • 4/2019
Einladung: Pressekonferenz zur Publikation „Vereintes Land – drei Jahrzehnte nach dem Mauerfall“ am 4. März 2019 in Berlin
Wie steht Deutschland 30 Jahre nach dem Fall der Berliner Mauer wirtschaftlich da? Eine neue Veröffentlichung des Leibniz-Instituts für Wirtschaftsforschung Halle (IWH) zieht Bilanz, wie sich die Bundesrepublik im internationalen Vergleich entwickelt hat, wie es um die innere Einheit des Landes bestellt ist – und welche Herausforderungen noch zu meistern sind.
Read press release
East Germany Rearguard Only investments in education will lead to a further catch-up ...
DPE Faculty A B C D E F G H I J...
Demographic Change Dossier ...
The New Europe
The new Europe The financial crisis is largely over, yet confidence in the ECB and EU...
Wie können wir den Wettbewerb im Dienstleistungsbereich ankurbeln – ein Tagungsbericht ...