Jordan Trips by TigerPaw Adventures!
The sandy desert which includes the Wadi Rum, and the rocky ravines and outcrops of the Baida, along with willow dotted valleys as well as the narrow rocky defiles around Petra’s ancient Nabatean Kingdom are some of this land’s unique features.
To experience modern Middle Eastern Arabic culture Jordan is ideal in these turbulent times, for the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan enjoys a tranquil which evades many other Middle Eastern countries. Jordan is the only Arab country where Palestinians can become citizens. The differentiation between Jordanians, Bedouins, and Palestinians is clear in this society. Jordanians are defined as residents who have lived east of the Jordan River since before 1948. Palestinians are defined as residents whose birthright extends back to areas west of the Jordan River. People of Bedouin descent are considered to be of the purest Arab stock. The Dead Sea and Israel border Jordan, a land replete with hills, mountains and sandy desert. In biblical times, the country that is now Jordan contained the lands of Edom, Moab, Ammon, and Bashan. Together with other Middle Eastern territories, Jordan passed in turn to the Assyrians, the Babylonians, the Persians, and, about 330 B.C, the Seleucids. Conflict between the Seleucids and the Ptolemies enabled the Arabic-speaking Nabataeans to create a kingdom in southeast Jordan. In A.D. 106 it became part of the Roman province of Arabia and in 633–636 was conquered by the Arabs. In the 16th century, Jordan submitted to Ottoman Turkish rule and was administered from Damascus. Taken from the Turks by the British in World War I, Jordan (formerly known as Transjordan) was separated from the Palestine mandate in 1920, and in 1921, placed under the rule of Abdullah ibn Hussein.
In deserts with little vegetation and water, Bedouin families have lived in the traditional way for thousands of years. They are used to roaming freely and paying little attention to borders though this is changing due to developments in the neighborhood. Bedouins from the core of the army, occupying key positions, even though their political influence is diminishing. Palestinians are typically referred to as educated, hard-working people, and their influence in Jordan has resulted in a greater emphasis on education and the development of a richer, global economy. Jordanians who no longer espouse the Bedu nomad lifestyle are gradually accepting the standards of the modern Arab world.
An ancient legend tells of an Arabian shepherd who six thousand years ago put his supply of milk in a pouch made from a sheep’s stomach before making a journey across the desert.
The rennet in the lining of the pouch, combined with the heat of the sun, caused the milk to form curds, and cheese was discovered. Bedouin farmers keep herds of goats and sheep whose milk is used to produce cheese and yogurt. A popular cheese is called halloumi (similar to feta), made from goat or sheep milk and often served in a sandwich of pita-style bread or cubed in salads. Rice, legumes, olives, yogurt, flat breads, vegetables (cauliflower, eggplant, potatoes, okra, tomatoes, and cucumbers), lamb or chicken, and fruits (apricots, apples, bananas, melons, and oranges) form the basis for most meals. Main dishes of rice with spices are eaten almost daily. The main meal typically is served during the middle of the afternoon. A covering is placed on the floor, with a large tray of rice and meat placed in the center surrounded by small dishes of yogurt and salad. Torn pieces of bread are folded in half and used to scoop the food. The left hand is never used to feed oneself.
When people visit family and friends, tea, Turkish-style or Arabic-style coffee, or fruit juice is served. Often this meal includes sweets, especially on holidays. The national main dish is Mansaf, which consists of lamb cooked in dried yogurt and served with seasoned rice on flat bread. Mansaf is always served on holidays and special family occasions such as visits to relatives or friends, engagements, and weddings.
Fine modern hotels and resorts are to be found in Jordan and the ancient and the modern are well juxtaposed.
Few of the trips we have organised in Jordan – Following tradition, we explore this desert landscape on horseback on the famous Arab warmblood. In true Lawrence of Arabia style, we are taken through unique desertscapes, on our fast steeds, to experience the natural drama of light and shadow and solitude that only a desert can create.
Currently offered trips
|TRIP CATEGORY||TRIP NAME||TRIP DATES||COST PP
|HORSEBACK HOLIDAYS||ADVENTUROUS RIDE FROM PETRA TO WADI RUM||ROUND THE YEAR||2190|
|HORSEBACK HOLIDAYS||THE NABATEAN ADVENTURE||ROUND THE YEAR||1096|
In the event you wish to enquire about a trip for this destination, in addition to the what is given above, it may just be worth your while to ask for a custom trip. We will create a great and viable package with whatever is on your wish list. To proceed, please Click here.