Bronchiolitis is a common lung infection in young individuals. The viral infection involves the lower respiratory tract and can present with signs of mild to moderate respiratory distress. The most common cause is respiratory syncytial virus (RSV). Bronchiolitis is a mild, self-limited infection in the majority of children but may sometimes progress to respiratory failure in infants. Bronchiolitis is managed supportively with hydration and oxygen. No specific medications treat the infection.
It is important to know that respiratory syncytial virus is just one cause of bronchiolitis. The infection can occur in individuals of any age, but overall, the most severe symptoms tend to be common in infants.
The most common virus associated with bronchiolitis is the respiratory syncytial virus. However, over the years, many other viruses have been found to cause the same infection, and they include the following:
RSV accounts for the majority of cases, although in about 30% of infants, there may be 2 viruses present at the same time.
Risk factors include:
Bronchiolitis is most common in children less than 2 years of age. During the first year of life, the incidence has been reported to be about 11% to 15%. Depending on the severity of the infection, there are at least 5 hospitalizations for every 1000 children younger than 2 years of age. Bronchiolitis is classically a seasonal disorder that is most common during autumn and winter, but sporadic cases may occur throughout the year. Some of the risk factors that have been identified for severe infections include the following:
The clinical features of bronchiolitis are primarily due to airway obstruction and diminished lung compliance. The virus infects the epithelial cells in the airways and induces an inflammatory reaction that leads to ciliary dysfunction and cell death. The accumulated debris, edema of the airways, and narrowing of the airways due to the release of cytokines eventually lead to symptoms and lowered lung compliance. The patient then tries to overcome the decreased compliance by breathing harder. Typical features include:
Once RSV is acquired, the symptoms of an upper respiratory tract infection appear and include a cough, fever, and rhinorrhea. Within 48 to 72 hours, the acute infection involving the lower airways will become evident. During the acute stage, the infant may develop small airway obstruction that leads to symptoms of respiratory distress. The physical exam will reveal crackles, wheezing, and rhonchi. The severity of respiratory distress may vary from infant to infant. Some infants may have mild disease with only tachypnea, but others may show severe retractions, grunting, and cyanosis. The course of the illness may last 7 to 10 days, and the infant may become irritable and not feed. However, most infants improve within 14 to 21 days, as long as they are well hydrated.
The diagnosis of bronchiolitis is made clinically. Blood work and imaging studies are only needed to rule out other causes. Ordering serology and other laboratory tests to identify the virus is only of academic purpose. The presence of the virus in the blood does not correlate with symptoms or the course of the disease. Laboratory assays in bronchiolitis are useful for epidemiological studies and have little practical application.
A chest x-ray should only be ordered if there is clinical suspicion of a complication such as pneumothorax or bacterial pneumonia. Urine cultures may be obtained in children who have no other source of infection and continue to spike temperatures. Concomitant urinary tract infections are known to occur in about 5% to 10% of cases.
The hallmark of management for children with bronchiolitis is symptomatic care. All infants and children who are diagnosed with bronchiolitis should be carefully assessed for adequacy of hydration, respiratory distress, and presence of hypoxia.
Children who present with mild to moderate symptoms can be treated with interventions like nasal saline, antipyretics, and a cool-mist humidifier. Those children with severe symptoms of acute respiratory distress, signs of hypoxia, and/or dehydration should be admitted and monitored. These children need aggressive hydration. The use of beta-adrenergic agonists like epinephrine or albuterol, or even steroids, has not been shown to be effective in children with bronchiolitis. Instead, these children should be provided with humidified oxygen and nebulized hypertonic saline. Ensuring that the infant is well hydrated is key, especially for those who cannot eat. Oxygen therapy to maintain saturations just above 90% is adequate.
Children who develop signs of severe respiratory distress may progress to respiratory failure. These children may require intensive care for mechanical ventilation or non-invasive support. A high-flow nasal cannula is an emerging modality of non-invasive support for children with bronchiolitis. Clinical trials are in progress.
Passive immunization against RSV is available with palivizumab for those who are at the greatest risk for severe illness. During the RSV season, this requires monthly injections of the drug, but this may not only be expensive but not also not practical for most infants.
Current recommendations by the American Academy of Pediatrics support the use of palivizumab during the first year of life for children with a gestational age less than 29 weeks, symptomatic congenital heart disease, chronic lung disease of prematurity, neuromuscular disorders that make it difficult to clear the airways, airway abnormalities, and immunodeficiency. Prophylaxis may be continued in the second year of life for children who require continued interventions for chronic lung disease of prematurity or those who remain immunosuppressed.
Bronchiolitis is a self-limited infectious process. It is commonly managed with supportive care, hydration, fever control, and oxygenation. When the disorder is recognized and treated, the prognosis is excellent. The majority of children recover without any adverse effects. Past studies suggest that infants with severe bronchiolitis will develop wheezing in the future, but this has not been borne out by longitudinal studies.
About 3% of infants will require admission to the hospital, and the mortality rates vary from 0.5% to 7%. The large variation in mortality is because of different risk factors and lack of availability of intensive care units in certain countries.
If an infant has been diagnosed with severe bronchiolitis, then a pediatrician and in infectious disease expert should be consulted regarding their management.
Bronchiolitis is a common presentation to clinicians and adds significantly to the cost of healthcare. To lower morbidity, the diagnosis and management of bronchiolitis are best done with an interprofessional team that includes the emergency department physician, nurse practitioner, pediatrician, primary caregiver, and infectious disease consultant. The diagnosis is clinical, and in most cases, the treatment is supportive.
While most children benefit from hydration, some may require antipyretics and a cool-mist humidifier. About 1% to 3% of children with bronchiolitis may require admission for more aggressive respiratory support.
The key is the education of the caregiver. Clinicians, including the pharmacist and nurse practitioner, should educate the caregiver with regards to:
When the infant is ill, the caregiver should be educated about when to bring him or her to the hospital/clinician and not seek alternative care remedies. Follow up of the infant is necessary to ensure that improvement is taking place. Only through open communication with the interprofessional team can the outcomes be improved and complications reduced.
When the disorder is recognized and treated, the prognosis is excellent. The majority of children recover without any adverse effects. Past studies suggest that infants with severe bronchiolitis will develop wheezing in the future, but this has not been borne out by longitudinal studies.
|||Polack FP,Stein RT,Custovic A, The syndrome we agreed to call bronchiolitis. The Journal of infectious diseases. 2019 Feb 19; [PubMed PMID: 30783666]|
|||Jo YM,Kim J,Chang J, Vaccine containing G protein fragment and recombinant baculovirus expressing M2 protein induces protective immunity to respiratory syncytial virus. Clinical and experimental vaccine research. 2019 Jan; [PubMed PMID: 30775350]|
|||Oz-Alcalay L,Ashkenazi S,Glatman-Freedman A,Weisman-Demri S,Lowenthal A,Livni G, Hospitalization for Respiratory Syncytial Virus Bronchiolitis in the Palivizumab Prophylaxis Era: Need for Reconsideration of Preventive Timing and Eligibility. The Israel Medical Association journal : IMAJ. 2019 Feb; [PubMed PMID: 30772962]|
|||Soudani N,Caniza MA,Assaf-Casals A,Shaker R,Lteif M,Su Y,Tang L,Akel I,Muwakkit S,Chmaisse A,Homsi M,Dbaibo G,Zaraket H, Prevalence and characteristics of acute respiratory virus infections in pediatric cancer patients. Journal of medical virology. 2019 Feb 14; [PubMed PMID: 30763464]|
|||Supino MC,Buonsenso D,Scateni S,Scialanga B,Mesturino MA,Bock C,Chiaretti A,Giglioni E,Reale A,Musolino AM, Point-of-care lung ultrasound in infants with bronchiolitis in the pediatric emergency department: a prospective study. European journal of pediatrics. 2019 Feb 12; [PubMed PMID: 30747262]|
|||Lodeserto FJ,Lettich TM,Rezaie SR, High-flow Nasal Cannula: Mechanisms of Action and Adult and Pediatric Indications. Cureus. 2018 Nov 26; [PubMed PMID: 30740281]|
|||Stobbelaar K,Kool M,de Kruijf D,Van Hoorenbeeck K,Jorens P,De Dooy J,Verhulst S, Nebulised hypertonic saline in children with bronchiolitis admitted to the paediatric intensive care unit: A retrospective study. Journal of paediatrics and child health. 2019 Jan 6; [PubMed PMID: 30645038]|
|||Kusak B,Grzesik E,Konarska-Gabryś K,Pacek Z,Piwowarczyk B,Lis G, Bronchiolitis in children - do we choose wisely? Developmental period medicine. 2018; [PubMed PMID: 30636229]|
|||Gold J,Hametz P,Sen AI,Maykowski P,Leone N,Lee DS,Gagliardo C,Hymes S,Biller R,Saiman L, Provider Knowledge, Attitudes, and Practices Regarding Bronchiolitis and Pneumonia Guidelines. Hospital pediatrics. 2019 Feb; [PubMed PMID: 30610012]|
|||Picone S,Fabiano A,Roma D,Di Palma F,Paolillo P, Re-comparing of three different epidemic seasons of bronchiolitis: different prophylaxis approaches. Italian journal of pediatrics. 2018 Dec 12; [PubMed PMID: 30541607]|
|||Clayton JA,McKee B,Slain KN,Rotta AT,Shein SL, Outcomes of Children With Bronchiolitis Treated With High-Flow Nasal Cannula or Noninvasive Positive Pressure Ventilation. Pediatric critical care medicine : a journal of the Society of Critical Care Medicine and the World Federation of Pediatric Intensive and Critical Care Societies. 2019 Feb; [PubMed PMID: 30720646]|
|||Luo G,Stone BL,Nkoy FL,He S,Johnson MD, Predicting Appropriate Hospital Admission of Emergency Department Patients with Bronchiolitis: Secondary Analysis. JMIR medical informatics. 2019 Jan 22; [PubMed PMID: 30668518]|