Definition of Indicating. Meaning of Indicating. Synonyms of Indicating
Here you will find one or more explanations in English for the word Indicating. Also in the bottom left of the page several parts of wikipedia pages related to the word Indicating and, of course, Indicating synonyms and on the right images related to the word Indicating.
Definition of Indicating
IndicatingIndicate In"di*cate, v. t. [imp. & p. p. Indicated; p. pr. &
vb. n. Indicating.] [L. indicatus, p. p. of indicare to
indicate; pref. in- in + dicare to proclaim; akin to dicere
to say. See Diction, and cf. Indict, Indite.]
1. To point out; to discover; to direct to a knowledge of; to
show; to make known.
That turns and turns to indicate From what point
blows the weather. --Cowper.
2. (Med.) To show or manifest by symptoms; to point to as the
proper remedies; as, great prostration of strength
indicates the use of stimulants.
3. (Mach.) To investigate the condition or power of, as of
steam engine, by means of an indicator.
Syn: To show; mark; signify; denote; discover; evidence;
evince; manifest; declare; specify; explain; exhibit;
present; reveal; disclose; display.
Meaning of Indicating from wikipedia
- Indicated airspeed
(IAS) is the airspeed
from the airspeed indicator
(ASI) on an aircraft, driven
by the pitot-static system. It uses the...
- (emergency position-indicating radio
beacons) are carried
and signal maritime distress SEPIRBs
- An engine-indicating
and crew-alerting system
(EICAS) is an integrated system
used in modern aircraft
to provide aircraft
crew with aircraft engines
- As Indicated
(foaled in 1990) is an American Thoroughbred racehorse
bred in Kentucky
and raced under
his name: "MD, D.Ph., D.Litt., etc.", indicating
of experience, education
and expertise. The character
and indicating equipment
for receiving, processing, controlling, indicating
the onward transmission
- A piezoelectric sensor
is a device
that uses the piezoelectric effect
to measure changes
in pressure, acceleration, temperature, strain, or force
that the Housemate
was directly nominated
for eviction. indicates
that the Housemate
was immune prior
to nominations. indicates
- userinfo subcomponent unless
the data after
is the empty string
no p****word). A host subcomponent, consisting
- Satellite emergency
position-indicating radiobeacon station
(sort: SEPIRS) is – according
1.94 of the International Telecommunication
Recent Searches ...
Related images to Indicating