News & Events Latest news Ground-breaking report reveals species need help 14th September 2016 Over the last 50 years, 56% of British native species have declined, while 15% are at risk of disappearing from our shores altogether, according to a ground-breaking report released today. The second State of Nature report, compiled by a range of partners including Amphibian and Reptile Conservation, makes for sober reading but shows there are ways we can help. The report shows more clearly than ever before that nature is in serious decline across the UK. Time is running out if the UK is to meet its global commitments to conserve nature. However, with the right leadership and specific action, there is still hope that we can pass on a healthier natural world to the next generation. How we protect and manage our land is key to reversing nature’s decline, and the decisions by the UK Government and devolved administrations arising from the recent EU Referendum result will be critical if we are to succeed in protecting and restoring nature. Our current understanding of the state of nature is due to the remarkable efforts of thousands of citizen scientists and researchers across the UK. There are still gaps in our knowledge that need to be filled but that should not stop us from taking action now to conserve nature. ARC has worked alongside hundreds of volunteers to produce the evidence about the status of our native amphibians and reptiles that fed into the State of Nature report. Whilst the broad results are negative, along with other wildlife organisations we believe that we can still make a difference. Please see the infographic for more information. You can also make a big difference by helping us – by volunteering on our reserves, monitoring species or managing your own garden or allotment for wildlife. If you would like to help then just get in touch with us, or have a look at our website And it’s not all bad news. ARC has already helped some of our rarest reptiles and amphibians to recover by taking significant practical steps forward with their conservation. In recent years we have reintroduced sand lizards, smooth snakes, natterjack toads and pool frogs back into their former range, to make up for the massive losses that these iconic species suffered over the last century. Our work with partners and volunteers has also bolstered declining populations in many parts of the UK. And, our publications, projects and training courses have helped land managers and volunteers right across Britain to make a real difference. To read the full State of Nature report, please see: www.rspb.org.uk/son Natterjack toad. Working with partners, ARC has returned this species to Wales, after it went extinct there in the 20th century. ©Chris Dresh.