Vitamin C. Everyone knows about it. Everyone even knows where vitamin C is found in abundance. Let’s take a look at how the vitamin works in your body and helps in its proper functioning. But before that, let’s talk about the fruits that are considered great sources of vitamin C.
If it sounds like a surprise inclusion, you may not be alone. The reason is simple; many people think that citrus fruits are the only source of vitamin C. Papaya is a very good source of vitamin C and also contains many other essential nutrients such as vitamin A, magnesium, potassium, etc.
Yet another not so familiar source of vitamin C, bell peppers are native to America and the Caribbean islands. Besides vitamin C, bell peppers are also an abundant source of vitamin B1, magnesium and phosphorous.
Broccoli, a favourite vegetable across the world, is a good source of vitamin C. It also contains other nutrients such as magnesium, calcium, omega 3 fatty acids, iron and more.
When it comes to naming a source of vitamin C, hardly anyone misses it. Oranges and all other fruits belong to the citrus family are rich sources of vitamin C.
Other major sources of vitamin C include pineapple, strawberries, kiwi fruit, cauliflower, etc.
The role of vitamin C in protecting your health
Vitamin C is known as an antioxidant. Let’s try to understand vitamin C’s role as an antioxidant further:
Antioxidants prevent chemical reactions caused by free radicals in the body. Vitamin C and other antioxidants prevent damage to the eye, to molecules circulating around the bloodstream and to the DNA in our cells.
The other key function of vitamin C as an antioxidant is its ability to transform iron into a state that is better absorbed in the intestine.
Vitamin C is essential to produce collagen – a protein that keeps the structure of the body together. The deficiency of collagen leads to loss of teeth, bleeding in the gum and weaker bones.
Vitamin C contributes immensely to brain health. Certain neurotransmitters that carry thoughts, feelings, and commands around the brain and in our nervous system depend heavily on vitamin C for their smooth functioning.
Vitamin C is essential to the smooth functioning of your body and mind and is found in abundance in nature in the form of fruits and vegetables. Include them in your diet and live a happy and healthy life.