Depression can be a crippling disorder that affects millions worldwide in today’s day and age. As the number of people that are affected by depression grows, so does the need for many therapies that can help them cope with sadness. One of these therapies that emerged to tackle depression, is music therapy.
Music is an integral part of our lives. We experience it every day. From our televisions, our phones, even in the shower when you decide to hum along. This everyday exposure can be taken advantage of and be used to help people with depression in the form of music therapy. This is because our familiarity with music causes our emotions to react to it in different ways. These reactions can all contribute to a more stable state of mind and improve your life when constantly experienced.
It has a calming effect on our minds and therapists have taken note of this effect. In music therapy, a person is exposed to calming music that can help them unwind and become more open to other methods that the therapist might use. Another reason as to why music has a calming effect on your mind is that endorphins and dopamine are released during a session.
Endorphins are the body’s natural painkiller while dopamine is the body’s pleasure chemical. Both play an integral role in keeping you from dropping into depression.
Your mind isn’t the only one that benefits from the effects of therapeutic music. Your body also calms down as the rhythm of the music can help ease your heart rate and your breathing. Music therapy also makes sure that your muscles become less tense as you listen. Music has even been shown to improve the sleep quality of people with insomnia.
Anxiety is an integral part of depression as it is the fear of what could happen in the future. Music is widely known as a great way to de-stress and combat anxiety. So the next time you feel like the world is crumbling around you, turning up the volume on your headphones is a great way to forget about all the pressure.
Every day you have to deal with daily tasks. Sometimes you just feel as though it doesn’t become worth doing anymore. Music can improve your motivation when dealing with these tasks. This doesn’t just mean chores or your job either. It also includes your relationships with other people. This creates a sense of fulfillment and a genuine connection with others. This, in turn, fights off depression and anxiety.
Whether you listen to music or sing along to calm yourself, you can expect music therapy to help you relax and forget about your depression. However, music therapy alone isn’t enough to completely cure depression. It works best when paired with other types of therapies like those offered by CNS Center Arizona. Contact us today for a consultation!
oiradmin November 25th, 2019