Low-carb diets are often used for weight loss. If you’re feeling dizzy and eating a low-carb diet, you may want to slightly boost your carb intake. However, dizziness can be caused by a variety of health conditions. Therefore, talk with your doctor if you’re experiencing dizziness on a regular basis to determine the cause.
Low Carb Diets and Dizziness
According to MayoClinic.com, drastically cutting your carbohydrate intake can cause dizziness. Low-carb diets can also make you feel tired, weak, constipated or have headaches. Some low-carb diets may contain as few as 50 grams of carbs daily, notes MayoClinic.com. Carbohydrates are your body’s main source of energy and needed in higher quantities than protein or fat. Aim to meet carb recommendations daily to reduce diet-related dizziness.
Minimum Carb Recommendations
The Institute of Medicine suggests that adults get at least 130 grams of carbs on a daily basis, pregnant women consume 175 grams and nursing women obtain at least 210 grams of carbs each day. These guidelines are the recommended dietary allowances, or RDAs, for carbs and estimated to meet the needs of most adults in each population group. Athletes may require additional carbs to avoid dizziness. Brown University suggests that most trained athletes consume at least 2.2 grams of carbs per pound of their body weight daily, or 286 grams per day for a 130-pound athlete.
Other Diet-Related Possibility
Just because you’re feeling dizzy doesn’t mean it’s from eating too few carbs. MedlinePlus reports that dizziness can occur from inner ear problems, dehydration, shock, using certain medications or heart problems. Dizziness can also happen if you eat too few calories. Avoid consuming fewer than 1,000 calories a day if you’re a woman and 1,200 calories daily if you’re a man – unless supervised by a doctor. If you’re eating recommended amounts of carbs, getting plenty of calories and drinking lots of water throughout the day, your dizziness may be more serious than diet-related dizziness.
Choose Healthy Carbs
You don’t have to severely restrict carbs and suffer through dizziness to maintain a healthy body weight. In fact, fiber – a type of carb –increases satiety and reduces your risk for obesity. A variety of healthy carbs are available to choose from. Examples include legumes, nuts, seeds, whole grains, fruits, vegetables, low-fat yogurt and low-fat milk. Avoid added sugars, sweets, sugary drinks, refined grains and other highly processed carbs.