It has been estimated that up to 85% of the adult population of the US has an over abundance of fungus, specifically Candida in their bodies.
Typically, Candida yeast infections are only mentioned in the medical community with immunodeficient patients such as those getting treatment for HIV, AIDS, or cancer. However, women who are otherwise healthy spend close to a billion dollars annually treating yeast related issues. So why is yeast overlooked as the culprit to ailments beyond the vaginal yeast infection in the medical community?
Yeast infections and fungal diseases do not lack sufficient scientific evidence and research to support the fact that they could be responsible for ailments beyond what the medical community wants to admit. But strangely, the overwhelming majority of the health-conscious population has very little knowledge of them. In fact, fungal diseases were even mentioned in the bible as the culprit to many devastating ailments that plagued the early populations. In 1963, a US doctor published a report in The Complete Home Medical Encyclopedia that estimated that one-half of the US population suffered from an “unrecognized yeast infection or fungal disorder”, so why is this information so hard for our traditional physicians to swallow?
Various compilations of research reports do support the fact that fungal infections could be the culprit to health concerns of the digestive, reproductive, circulatory, and integumentary (skin) systems. However, the view of modern medicine is that these reports are inconclusive, therefore are false. To date, no research seems to have been conducted to discredit the scores of research that support how rampant fungal infections are in today’s society, they are merely overlooked.
So why is fungus able to thrive in our bodies more so than ever before? Are all of our bodies immunocompromised? It stands to reason that environmental factors, increased antibiotic usage, diet, and other factors could play a role in this issue. Scores of those suffering from various symptoms and ailments such as: bloating, burning and chronic itching, depression, mood swings, eczema, psoriasis, asthma, allergies, leaky gut syndrome, fibromyalgia, chronic fatigue, and many others visit their doctors more in a month than the average adult would in a year. If their doctor was able to successfully diagnose the underlying issue, more often than not those visits would be unnecessary. What the doctors do not know or simply fail to recognize is that fungi, candida, and yeast infections often produce these common symptoms and diseases along with many others. Many common treatments for the aforementioned symptoms actually make matters worse by further suppressing our immune system thereby increasing yeast’s ability to thrive… Intervention with a proper diagnosis could yield results quickly and efficiently.
Syntol AMD and Candida Yeast Infections
Yeast thrives in extremely anaerobic (non oxygenated) conditions. Syntol contains a combination of probiotics, prebiotics and enzymes to be the first and only gentle yeast cleanse of its kind. Syntol facilitates an extremely oxygenated environment, preventing the growth of additional yeast colonies and providing the perfect conditions for indigenous bacterial growth. This is accomplished by the Lactobacillus family of microflora included in the formula, which have the ability to produce hydrogen peroxide as their byproduct. This acts as a poison to the yeast, effectively killing colonies of excessive yeast throughout the intestine.
In addition, Syntol is extremely effective at removing Candida yeasts that have already attached to the digestive tract. Candida albicans are composed of an outer protective protein layer. Under this shell, Candida is primarily composed of cellulose (their cell walls) and N-acetyl-glucosamine. Syntol uses the extremely potent blend of protease (protein digesting), cellulase and hemicellulase (cellulose digesting), glucoamylase and amylase (breaks down sugars), and serrapeptase. These enzymes strip away the Candida’s protective protein shell and begin digesting its cellular infrastructure. Syntol contains this powerful intestinal cleanse to assist in the removal of dead yeast and other bad bacteria from the body. This will protect the body from experiencing detox symptoms from toxins typically given off from the elimination of yeast.
Supplementing with Syntol can usually address most fungal issues. Additional support could be necessary for extreme fungal infections. Typically diets containing high amounts of raw vegetables and limiting sugar decrease the fungi’s ability to thrive. Understanding what may be the culprit of an ailment and what can be done naturally to address it is becoming more and more popular amongst health-conscious individuals. Because the symptoms of this particular ailment can be so widespread, it can be months, years, or in extreme cases even decades before one has pinpointed the underlying cause of their condition. When symptoms are managed, it is important to maintain a lifestyle that supports intestinal health in order to keep fungus and its harmful symptoms under control.
Buy Syntol AMD