Over the past 20 years the costs of natural disasters have escalated significantly, with the lives of over 800 million people disrupted. With the growth in world population, there is an urgent need to understand the potential threats posed by natural hazards and to ascertain the best ways of mitigating their damaging effects.
Part 1 Climatic and Atmospheric Hazards: Evaluation of climatic change through harmonic analysis; R. Rodriguez, M.C. Llasat, E. Rojas. Some characteristics of typhoons as revealed by the recent SSM/I microwave radiometry; G.V. Rao. Structure of prefrontal convective rainband in northern Taiwan determined from Dual-Doppler data; Y.-J. Lin, R. Pasken, H.-W. Chang. Part 2 Hydrological Hazards: Recent floods in Bangladesh - Possible causes and solutions; Md. Khalequzzaman. Meteorological factors associated with floods in the North-Eastern part of the Iberian Peninsula; M.C. Llasat, M. Puigcerver. Hydrological response to radar rainfall maps through a distributed model; I. Becchi, E. Caporali, E. Palmisano. Simulation and modelling of rainfall radar measurements for hydrological application; D. Giuli, L. Baldini, L. Facheris. Part 3 Storm Surges: Storm waves in the Canadian Atlantic - a numerical simulation; M.L. Khandekar. Storm surge mitigation through vegetation canopies; M.B. Danard, T.S. Murty. Numerical simulation and prediction of storm surges and water level in Shanghai harbour and its vicinity; Z. Qin, Z. Sher, K. Xu, Y. Wang, Y. Duan. Part 4 Geological Hazards: Mass movements in hilly areas (with examples from Nigeria); A.E. Scheideger, D.E. Ajakaiye. Characteristics and mitigation of the snow avalanche hazard in Khagan Valley, Pakistan Himalaya; F.A. de Scally, J.S. Gardner. Seismic hazard analysis with randomly located sources; M.S. Yucemen, P. Gulkan. Regional fracture analysis south of latitude 20 N of Egypt and their influence on earthquakes; A.F. Kamel. Seismic hazards in Bulgaria; I. Stanishkova, D. Slejko. Comparison of different approaches to seismic hazard assessment; L. Peruzza, D. Slejko.
There are currently no reviews for this product. Be the first to review this product!