Inspiring others to join us in
caring for animals and
the natural world
Join the efforts
How You Can Help
Join our efforts to provide a healthier habitat for all.
Select a sustainable practice below to learn more
Help Save Orangutans
Without our help orangutans could be extinct in the wild within 10 years. Humans are part of the problem because palm oil is used in over 50% of all grocery store items, including peanut butter, snacks, beauty products, shampoo, makeup and more. As demand for palm oil increases, plantations expand causing orangutans to lose their homes and even their lives.
How you can make a difference
It’s almost impossible to completely avoid palm oil, however, you can ensure the products you’re purchasing are sustainably produced. Download a phone app where you can scan the barcode to view the company’s conservation status.
For more information, please visit:
To learn more about palm oil in products and how to shop sustainably, view our Sustainable Shopping guide below.
Reduce, reuse and recycle tips
Every little bit helps create a healthier habitat for all.
Ways to reduce waste:
Reduce your carbon footprint:
Reuse old t-shirts for dusting
Use cloth napkins instead of paper
Unplug appliances when not in use
Drink from reusable coffee mugs
Use sponges and rags instead of paper towels
Use a refillable water bottle
Use lemon juice or baking soda instead of chemical cleaners
Use a broom instead of hose or blower to clean driveway
Power down computers overnight
Recycle the non-recyclables:
TerraCycle is a company based in New Jersey that specializes in upcycling or recycling household plastics, including empty toothpaste tubes, potato chip bags, juice drink pouches and cereal bag liners. TerraCycle’s goal is to eliminate all plastic household waste by recycling the “non-recyclable.” Through these efforts, TerraCycle is able to divert millions of pounds of waste from landfills and incinerators each month.
Seafood Watch Program
It's more than see food and eat it.
With demand for seafood growing, the ocean’s supply of fish is shrinking. Fortunately, there’s something we can all do to help stop this disappearing act.
Look for the Seafood Watch Guides to help you select seafood that’s plentiful and comes from environmentally responsible sources. Your wise choices will help protect the oceans – and keep fish in the picture.
Learn more about the Seafood Watch Program and the Seafood Watch app below.