The following paragraph is taken from An Introduction To Music Therapy Theory And Practice Third Edition.
Davis, W.B., Gfeller, K.E., & Thaut, M.H. (2008) An Introduction To Music Therapy; Theory And Practice, Third Edition. Chapter 6, 162-163.
"Rhythmic Speech Cuing (RSC). This technique uses rhythmic cuing to control the inititaion and rate of speech. RSC can be performed using only a simple metronome or a beat embedded in music, and has demonstrated success in the treatment of indivudals affected by fluency disorders such as stuttering, cluttering, and dysarthria (Pilon, McIntosh, & Thaut, 1998; Thaut, McIntosh, McIntosh, & Hoemberg, 2001). Stutterers may increase their fluency by speaking rhythmically or by using strong melodic inflections. Some clutteres may be able to declerate their rapid and unintelliglbe utterances by using similar techniques. Further, RSC has been documented to increae the intelligibility of speech in dysarthric patients....."
Pilon, M.A., McIntosh, K.W., & Thaut, M.H. (1998). Auditory vs. visual speech timing cues as external rate control to enhance verbal intelligibility in mixed spastic-ataxic dysarthric speakers: A Pilot Study. Brain Injury, 12, 793-803.
Metronome, singing, and board pacing were used as external rate control techniques for the purpose of comparing the effectiveness of auditory and visual speech timing cues for reducing speech rate and increasing intelligibility in three traumatically brain injured mixed spastic-ataxic dysarthric speakers. A single system design with baseline reversal (ABACAD) was used in this preliminary investigation. Results demonstrated statistically significant (p < 0.05) changes in increased speech intelligibility during all three pacing conditions for the two more involved subjects. Differences between treatment conditions were not statistically significant. However, auditory metronome cuing showed the best results for the two subjects who benefited from rate control. Lower baseline intelligibility was strongly correlated with higher benefit from rate control. Furthermore, the two auditory rhythmic pacing conditions exhibited a close synthronization effect between the frequency rate of the cue and speech rate. Significant correlation coefficients between decreased speech rate and increased intelligibility were only found for the two more involved subjects. These findings suggested a differential benefit of slowing speech rate to improve intelligibility contingent upon severity of speech deficits.
Thaut, M.H., McIntosh, G.C., McIntosh, K. W., & Hoember, V. (2001). Auditory rhythmic enhances movement and speech motor control in patients with Parkinson's disease. Functional Neurology, 16, 163-172.