Sometimes it’s the simple ideas that are the “brightest” of all. Thanks for visiting my bright idea post this month. I’ve joined up with 130 bloggers to share a few ideas that are sure to make your teaching life just a little easier.
Today, I’d love to share a cute little activity that can be used throughout the year and kids love it! It’s called: Musical Masterpiece and it’s all about using the Arts to teach students to accept others and appreciate their differences through artistic expression.
Have you ever created a Musical Masterpiece? This is a super fun activity to do with all ages and it teaches acceptance of others and their ideas and talents. Here’s what you will need:
A set of instructions written down on a chart for student to see so they are clear with the process.
Blank white paper
Here is the basic idea of a Musical Masterpiece: Put on some Music for students to enjoy. Classical is always a favorite in my classroom. Have students begin drawing ANYTHING. Turn the music off after 5-10 minutes. Students take their pencil and move to another desk in the classroom. The music starts and then students begin to ADD to the drawing already started. Keep doing this until students have moved to several different desks.
Then, instruct students to pick out three colors of pencil crayons. Begin the process again but this time coloring. Make sure you leave a little time at the end for the original student to add some finishing touches drawing and coloring touches to their work so that they feel some ownership to their original drawing while also feeling like it’s a part of a group effort.
Before you begin this lesson, be sure to have a discussion about everyone being different and unique and that everyone has different skills. Their job is to add to what is already there and feel good about their own contribution.
The beauty of this lesson is that you are using Art (drawing and coloring) and Music to teach students about Art but more importantly about acceptance of each other.