Goals and Philosophy
Internet computing has already developed into a vast area that no
one individual can hope to understand fully. However, because of its
obvious practical importance, many people need to understand enough of
Internet computing to be able to function effectively in their work.
This need is not addressed by any existing source. Typical books and
articles concentrate on narrow topics. Existing sources have the
- Those targeted at practitioners tend to discuss specific tools or
protocols but lack a discussion of the concepts and how they relate
to the subject broadly.
- Those targeted at managers are frequently superficial or
concentrated on vendor jargon.
- Those targeted at students cover distinct disciplines
corresponding to college courses, but sidestep much of current
practice. There is no overarching vision that extends across
- Those targeted at researchers are of necessity deep in their
specialties, but provide only a limited coverage of real-world
applications and of other topics of Internet computing.
For this reason, this handbook was designed to collect definitive
knowledge about all major aspects of Internet computing in one place.
The topics covered range from important components of current practice
to key concepts to major trends. The handbook is an ideal
comprehensive reference for each of the above types of reader.
- An exhaustive coverage of the key topics in Internet computing.
- Accessible, self-contained, yet definitive presentations on each
topic, emphasizing the concepts behind the jargon.
- Authored by the world's leading experts.
Audience and Needs
Our intended readers are people who need to obtain in-depth,
authoritative introductions to the major Internet computing
- Practitioners who need to learn the key concepts involved
in developing and deploying Internet computing applications and
systems. This happens often when a project calls for some
- Technical managers who need quick, high-level, but
definitive descriptions of a large number of applications and
technologies, so as to be able to conceive applications and
architectures for their own special business needs and to evaluate
- Students who need accurate introductions to important
topics that would otherwise fall between the cracks in their
course-work, and which might be needed for projects, research, or
- Researchers who need a definitive guide to an unfamiliar
area, e.g., to see if the area addresses some of their problems or
even to review a scientific paper or proposal that impinges on an
area outside their specialty.