Boost Your Ratings and Reviews for More Authority

Thanks to the internet, anyone can publish content online. It’s getting to be a crowded space, but those who have authority will be able to build their brand and increase their profits more easily. 

Authority at a Glance
What is meant by authority? It can mean different things. Authority operates on several levels. There is domain authority, page authority, and professional authority.

Domain Authority - Domain authority relates to your domain traffic. Is your URL a frequently visited site that attracts not only new but repeat visitors? Or do they visit once and click out?

Page Authority - Page authority is often measured by search engine results. Is your page in the top 10 on the Search Engine Results Pages (SERPs) delivered by Google and other top search engines?

Professional Authority - Regarding professional authority within your niche, name recognition would often measure your level of authority. Would your name garner instant recognition from fellow experts in your niche?

If you’re struggling with all three of these areas, paying attention to your ratings and reviews can help improve your authority and garner more sales. 

Ratings and Reviews at a Glance
Your reputation has a lot to do with your authority level, whether you are looking at domain authority, page authority, or professional authority. One of the easiest and most effective ways to boost your authority is to make it a point to give your ratings and reviews a little TLC. However, before you can get to work on that, you need to know more about ratings and reviews, as well as where to find them.

Ratings and reviews can be found on "review sites" such as Yelp, as well as other places online such as social media sites and even on your own website. If you are a brick-and-mortar business, you know just how your ratings can encourage or discourage people's visiting habits. Some rating sites will also allow people to post reviews. Again, reviews can make or break a business, especially if they are not accurate. A malicious poster can trash the reputation you’ve worked so hard to build with just the click of a mouse. Conversely, a high rating and good review can build consumer confidence and make those who read the information more willing to give your business a chance.
