What is Crew?
Crew is a ritual, a coming together, and an expression of a close-knit community. Crew brings students together in a consistent and supportive group. Character education, adventure, and team building are intentional parts of Crew, and through these, we ensure success for all students. Crew is a structure in which students feel a sense of belonging, a place where they can be their best selves while lifting up their peers to achieve more than they think possible.EL Education
Crew: in spirit
The spirit of crew drives all members of a school community to work together as a team, to pitch in, to help others. We are all getting up the mountain together–individual success is not enough.
Crew: in structure
The structure of Crew–regular meetings to support everyone’s learning and growth–makes time for students to build meaningful relationships with peers and their Crew leader, to reflect on and monitor academic progress, and to focus on character development.
Crew: what it looks like
Whenever possible, students in Crew sit or stand in a circle so they can see and hear each other without the interference of furniture. A circle allows Crew members to be equally vulnerable, joyfully connected, and supportive of one another.
Crew: what Crew Leaders do
Crew leaders incorporate greetings, stories, appreciations, apologies and other activities that foster students’ sense of relationship, belonging, and self-efficacy. We create opportunities for collaboration and competition in a joyful, supportive environment (e.g. through the use of team building initiatives and cooperative problem-solving games). We debrief initiatives by helping students reflect on skills and mindsets that can be applied beyond the activity.
Crew: what it sounds like
In crew, positive behavior is celebrated. Concerns about behavior (discourtesy, bullying, exclusion or not following norms) are addressed in Crew, often through restorative justice circles or other conflict mediation strategies.
Crew: what it’s for
Crew is an engine for equity and inclusion, a place where all students feel they belong and can succeed. “It’s your family. They make sure you stay on track as a scholar and as a person.” – EL Education Chief Academic Officer Ron Berger.
Crew: where the name comes from
The term “crew” comes from the words of Kurt Hahn, whose work in education inspired the EL Education motto, “We are crew, not passengers.”