Multiply Mixed Numbers (Grade 5)
Videos and lessons to help Grade 5 students learn to solve real world problems involving multiplication of fractions and mixed numbers, e.g., by using visual fraction models or equations to represent the problem.
Common Core: 5.NF.6
Suggested Learning Targets
- I can solve problems that multiply fractions and mixed numbers.
- I can explain or illustrate my solution using fraction models or equations.
Common Core for Grade 5
More Lessons for Grade 5
Multiply mixed numbers using pictures - 5.NF.6
In this lesson you will learn how to solve mixed number multiplication problems. You will use pictures and repeated addition to prove that you can compute with the standard algorithm.
5.NF.6 - Multiply Mixed Numbers (Area Model)
This video explains how to multiply mixed numbers using the area model.
Multiplying a Mixed Number by a Mixed Number using an Area Model.
5.NF.6 - Multiply Mixed Numbers (Distributive Property)
This video explains how to multiply mixed numbers using the distributive property and the meaning of mixed numbers. It uses equations to represent the problem , as is called for in the Common Core Math Standards of 5.NF.6.
Multiplying Mixed Numbers Using the Distributive Property.
5.NF.6 - Multiply Mixed Numbers (Writing as Fractions)
This video shows how to multiply mixed numbers by first writing them as fractions and then multiplying fractions. This is actually an effective method, known as a "smart" cut, provided you have fluency with multiplying and dividing multi-digit numbers.
In this video, you will see two strategies to multiply a fraction by a mixed number - the area model and the multiplication smartcut.
Multiplying Mixed numbers by converting to improper fractions.
Multiplying Mixed Numbers
Example: Riley's cookie recipe calls for 3 2/5 cups of sugar. She wants to make 4 1/3 batches. How much sugar will Riley need?
Rotate to landscape screen format on a mobile phone or small tablet to use the Mathway widget, a free math problem solver that answers your questions with step-by-step explanations.
You can use the free Mathway calculator and problem solver below to practice Algebra or other math topics. Try the given examples, or type in your own problem and check your answer with the step-by-step explanations.