After the fall of the Empire, Naboo became a New Republic planet.
Naboo was blockaded by Nute Gunray and the Trade Federation during the years of the Republic on the orders of Palpatine (Darth Sidious). However, when the Jedi Qui-Gon Jinn and Obi-Wan Kenobi became involved and brought then-queen Padmé Amidala to speak before the senate on the blockade and its effects, this set in motion events that would to the Battle of Naboo. In the battle that followed, queen Padmé and the Jedi united the Naboo and Gungans to destroy the droid armies controlling the planet and the ship in turn controlling them. This alliance brought peace to the Naboo and Gungans. For the rest of the reign of the Republic, Naboo was an active representative in trying to end the Clone Wars.
When the Galactic Republic fell and was replaced by the Galactic Empire, Naboo became an Imperial world. For the most part, Palpatine was content to leave the planet mostly alone, although he built a garrison there and placed hidden weapons in orbit.
When the Empire fell at the Battle of Endor, Leia Organa visited the world, hoping that Naboo would support the creation of a New Republic. Queen Sosha Soruna agreed wholeheartedly, as her entire world felt shame of the actions of Palpatine, its most sinister resident. However, a Climate Disruption Array stationed in orbit placed by Palpatine began to ravage the planet. Luckily, Leia, queen Soruna and pilot Shara Bey destroyed the satellites, saving the world from destruction. Afterwards, Naboo became one of the first worlds to join the New Republic.
Naboo is a lush world of beautiful green pastures, rolling hills, and vast meadows. It also has immense swamps and forests, and is home to many types of creatures; Shaaks grazed on the plains while predatory Veermoks stalked the forests and swamps where Fambaas, Kaadu, Nunas, Ikopi and Falumpasets roamed. The seas and swamp waterways are home to many types of fish and leviathan monsters that dwelled in the deep; Rays, Mees, Tees, Laas, and Doos swam past the underwater bubble cities of the Gungans, while stalking them are predators like the Opee Sea Killer, Colo Claw Fish, and largest of all, the Sando Aqua Monster. The planet's core is hollow and filled with caverns and watery passages, allowing travel, though dangerous, from one area of the planet to another by going through the center of the planet.
- ↑ "Star Wars highlights female heroes in Forces of Destiny — first look". Entertainment Weekly. (April 13, 2017)
- ↑ "New Battlefront II Details and Talking with Eugene Byrd of LEGO Star Wars: The Freemaker Adventures". YouTube. (June 7, 2017)