Open source software is becoming more popular and its price is certainly drawing raves.
Open source software is software that is distributed along with its source code. This is usually done free and it is done with the purpose of allowing the improvement of the software be driven by the general user and developer base. This way, the software can definitely apply to user needs and interests as well as draw closer to perfection in the most efficient way possible. Many organizations have adopted the open source philosophy in order to produce the premier software of their markets and many nonprofit organizations have coalesced in support of open source software. Even governments have heralded their support of open source software and some have even gone as far as to initiate mandates that render the distribution of open source software all but compulsory.
Free? Free? Free?
Corporations benefit from open source software as it gives them the capacity to penetrate the market in one of the most effective and cost-efficient ways. These entities can garner loyalty, market presence, and increased stability with the proliferation of open source as opposed to proprietary software. Developers benefit from open source software in that they have the capacity to learn and perfect their methods as well as apply their methodologies and innovation to other large-scale enterprises. This can benefit them as both something they can put on their resume as well as something that they can apply to later projects. Individual users benefit from open source software in that they desires and needs are what drives the development of software that is usually free, especially during its initial stages.
Managing Free Software?
Open source management is usually handled cooperatively, but can also be taken care of through several software tools. On one hand, the Open Source Initiative and the debian-legal mailing list offer networking solutions to open source software management, while on the other, individual teams and firms can track the development of open source software through tools created for that purpose. There is a multitude that is available on the market, many of which also happen to be open source.
The Asian open source software movement has been gaining steam almost at a faster rate than in the Western World. Not only are there many organizations that are dedicated to the development and distribution of open source software, many Asian governments have spearheaded initiatives to make open source software the most-used software development approach. These initiatives have largely been due to a desire to become technologically independent of proprietary software from United States-based corporations. As a result of these pursuits, though, many essential sectors of Asian society, including education and healthcare, have been improved through open source software.
Open source software differs from free software or “freeware” in that it is distributed with the source code and with the intention to initiate the gradual improvement of such software. As a result, open source software is often distributed to a larger segment of the market and is not normally used as an advertising method, while freeware is. Accordingly, open source software is available to and can be used by absolutely anyone.
The development of open source software is contingent on each respective program or platform’s developers. Alternately, its presentation, purpose, and distribution are based on the open source philosophy, which may alter how the software is initially presented. For example, while proprietary software is often produced as a “finished version,” open source software is presented as a work-in-progress, with the expectation that members of the market base will work to gradually improve the software.