Migraines and Headaches Treatment
Constantly suffering from migraines and headaches is not normal, and although over the counter painkillers may provide temporary relief, a better understanding of these conditions may provide a long-term solution for living headache and migraine free.
What are Headaches and Migraines?
Headaches and Migraines are not synonymous terms. Headaches are pain and discomfort in the head, while migraines are typically felt on one side of the head. Tension headaches feel as though there is an elastic band around your head, creating pressure and pain. Migraines are characterized with sharp pain, blurred vision, dizziness, and sensitivity to light.
The Causes of Headaches and Migraines
Headaches and Migraines may be caused by lifestyle conditions such as eating particular foods, dehydration, or a lack of nutrients. If your suffer from frequent headaches and migraines, the cause may also be attributed to alignment of the body.
When the body is out of alignment due to repetitive strain, posture, and developmental issues, pressure is placed on nerves causing muscles to tighten, and ultimately triggering a sharp pain to the head.
The Symptoms of Headaches and Migraines
The symptoms of a headache typically include sensations of tightness and pressure, tenderness, and dull aching pain. Headaches are typically an annoying disturbance causing irritability, but do not entirely impair an individual’s ability to function.
Symptoms of a migraine however, are more severe. Migraines typically include pounding sharp pains on one side of the head. The intensity of this pain causes symptoms such as blurred vision, sensitivity to light, vomiting, sensitivity to sound, lightheadedness, and irritability.
The Treatment of Headaches and Migraines
If you’re experiencing chronic headaches and migraines, a chiropractor can assess your condition and determine the treatment best for you.
If the cause of the condition is bodily alignment, a chiropractor will adjust the alignment of the body. Adjustments are non-invasive treatments that provide immediate relief by relieving pressure on the nervous system. Adjustments also promote long term physical health, and prevention of future headaches and migraines.
If the condition is related to lifestyle, the chiropractor will provide an assessment of common triggers such as diet and physical activity and prescribe accordingly.
Schedule an Appointment Today
Contact Michigan Chiropractic Specialists today for an appointment.