By Robert C. Post
This quantity within the Greenwood Technographies sequence covers city mass transit - that's, the applied sciences that let towns to maneuver huge numbers of individuals round. quite a few hundred years in the past, the dimensions of towns used to be constrained by the point it took humans to maneuver from one a part of the town to a different. the improvement of successive applied sciences has endlessly altered the city panorama. From horse-drawn omnibuses to subways to present light-rail, this quantity highlights the technological and social struggles that experience followed urbanization and the necessity for an effective and within your budget technique of transportation in towns.
Read Online or Download Urban Mass Transit: The Life Story of a Technology (Greenwood Technographies) PDF
Similar transportation books
That will comprehend the place you're, you wish an exceptional clock. The stunning connection among time and place is explored in Time and Navigation: The Untold tale of having from right here to There, the significant other booklet to the nationwide Air and area Museum exhibition of an identical name.
Today we use smartphones and GPS, yet navigating has now not regularly been really easy. The oldest "clock" is Earth itself, and the oldest technique of conserving time got here from staring at adjustments within the sky. Early mariners just like the Vikings comprehensive impressive feats of navigation with out utilizing clocks in any respect. Pioneering seafarers within the Age of Exploration used useless reckoning and celestial navigation; later techniques reminiscent of sextants and marine chronometers honed those innovations by way of measuring range and longitude. whilst explorers became their attractions to the skies, they outfitted on what were realized at sea. for instance, Charles Lindbergh used a bubble sextant on his record-breaking flights. global struggle II resulted in the advance of latest flight applied sciences, particularly radio navigation, due to the fact that celestial navigation used to be now not fitted to all-weather army operations. those sorts of navigation have been prolonged and improved whilst explorers begun guiding spacecraft into area and around the sun procedure. Astronauts mixed celestial navigation know-how with radio transmissions. the advance of the atomic clock revolutionized area flight since it may degree billionths of a moment, thereby permitting challenge groups to navigate extra thoroughly. Scientists and engineers utilized those applied sciences to navigation on the earth to strengthen space-based time and navigation prone reminiscent of GPS that's used on a daily basis through humans from all walks of life.
While the heritage of navigation is one among consistent switch and innovation, it's also considered one of amazing continuity. Time and Navigation tells the tale of navigation to assist us comprehend the place we have now been and the way we received there in order that we will be able to comprehend the place we're going.
No matter if you’re a first-time customer doing the grand travel or a pro vacationer making plans a multi-country itinerary, Frommer’s Europe through Rail is a needs to. The reliable guidebook of Rail Europe, this trouble-free quantity has every little thing you’ll have to plan a profitable educate journey through Europe, from descriptions of the easiest scenic strains and high-speed rail routes to unique info on reservations approaches and all the rail passes on hand to viewers.
This quantity of Advances in smooth Computing comprises the permitted and striking papers provided on the Lakeside convention 2010 in Carinthia, Austria. the subject of the Lakeside convention 2010, facts and Mobility – Transporting details into clever site visitors and Transportation prone, was once selected to underline the significance of data and mobility in shipping and to debate present actions during this area.
This assortment includes eighty one papers describing techniques within the improvement of sustainable transportation structures. within the face of ongoing demanding situations corresponding to traffic jam, environmental degradation, and emerging strength expenses, transportation pros search for new techniques, equipment, and applied sciences to handle problems with investment, making plans, building, and upkeep of transportation amenities of every kind.
- Human Transit: How Clearer Thinking about Public Transit Can Enrich Our Communities and Our Lives
- A dictionary of transport analysis
- Lascars and Indian Ocean Seafaring, 1780-1860
- Transportation Planning, Policy and Analysis
- Elements of Shipping (8th Edition)
- Union Pacific: Volume I, 1862-1893
Extra resources for Urban Mass Transit: The Life Story of a Technology (Greenwood Technographies)
But the history of technology is full of evidence that invention is easy compared to the process of rendering an invention practical in economic terms. Or even easier than conceiving that it might have a practical use. The reference to “electric shocks” in the compressed-air prospectus is suggestive. ELECTRICAL PIONEERS In 1799 Alessandro Volta (1745–1827) discovered that electric current was “excited by the mere contact of conducting substances of different kinds,” what came to be called electrodes and electrolytes.
ELECTRICAL PIONEERS In 1799 Alessandro Volta (1745–1827) discovered that electric current was “excited by the mere contact of conducting substances of different kinds,” what came to be called electrodes and electrolytes. This was the basis of the electric battery. Twenty years later, Hans Christian Oersted (1777–1851) discovered that a magnetic needle was deflected at right angles to a wire carrying an electric current, and in 1820 Andr´e Marie Amp´ere (1775– 1836) described the “mutual interaction” between current-carrying wires.
Within a short time, he also had electric streetcars operating in Scranton, Pennsylvania, and Appleton, Wisconsin. These lines were frequently shut down for repairs, however, whereas Daft had managed to keep an electric railway in Baltimore in continuous operation for more than a year. LEO DAFT AND THE BALTIMORE UNION P A S S E N G E R R A I L WAY In addition to his knowledge of electrical technology, Daft had the practical sensibility of a successful businessman, having operated an electrical manufacturing and supply business in Greenville, New Jersey, since 1881.
Urban Mass Transit: The Life Story of a Technology (Greenwood Technographies) by Robert C. Post