Encouraging greater participation of girls in education in Ghana will help reduce
adultery in society
number of maternal health care centres
population growth rate
A good layout and enforcement of Town Planning laws can help reduce
influx of immigrants.
emergence of slums.
Which of the following features is not part of the physical environment?
Productivity increase in Ghana can be achieved through
showcasing Ghana's rich culture
frequent absence from work
application of modern technology
. lack of supervision
The following activities bring disgrace to the people and Ghana as a whole except
the chieftaincy institution.
female genital mutilation.
The evolution of the earth causes
day and night.
differences in length of day and night. C
differences in time between two places.
rise and fall of oceans tides.
The first political party formed in the Gold Coast was the
Convention People's Party (CPP)
National Liberation Movement (NLM)
United Gold Coast Convention (UGCC)
United Party (UP)
A constitution popularly approved by the people ensures
reduction in crime
The Supreme Court of Ghana
interprets the constitution and the laws of Ghana
makes and implements laws
remands criminals in custody
runs courses for judges and magistrates
A major way of spreading HIV and AIDS is through
Eating in public places
indiscriminate sexual relations
shaking hands with infected persons
production of goods
production of services
profit made out of production
Ghana co-operates with other nations to
adopt common code of conduct
create more jobs
foster friendly relationship
increase tax revenue
The savanna vegetation zones produce cattle because of the
When the sun is overhead on the Tropic of Capricorn, areas in the southern hemisphere experience
Which of the following was established to find causes of the 1948 riots?
Justice Annan Committee
Industries which are controlled and managed by the state are called
Which of the following international organizations is the largest financial contributor to Ghana's developmental projects?
African Union (AU)
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
United Nations Organization
Which of the following tourist attractions is mostly associated with Kintampo in the Bone East region
Which one of the following may cause unemployment in Ghana?
Greater use of locally made goods.
Reduction in tax on imported goods.
Development of inter-regional trade.
Extension of electricity to rural communities.
The person who combines the factors of production such as land, labour and capital is called
The integrity of the nation can be defended by
cleaning the environment
educating the youth
Which of the following can aid economic independence of a nation?
Giving more aid to needy countries
Generating enough revenue locally
Increasing imported goods
Defending the 1992 constitution
Private businesses can ensure their continuous survival mainly through
exporting their products.
making more profits.
paying less tax to the government.
production of quality goods.
One major reason for Ghana's corporation with international bodies is that, she
has the resources to help others in times of need.
respect her colonial masters.
does not want to be isolated in times of future needs.
needs to expand her foreign exchange.
Which of the following activities is a duty of a citizen of Ghana?
Attending religious meetings
. Instigating mass boycott of development
Owning huge property
Defending the 1992 constitution
Ghana lies between latitudes
1o North and 11o North.
5o North and 11o North.
11o North and 15o South.
5o North and 11o South.
Which of the following practices is the best way of conserving Ghana's forest?
Growing of cover crops
Replanting of trees
Promoting the use of charcoal
Which of the following factors is one of the major reasons for Ghana's cultural diversity
Which of following activities is the most outstanding contribution of Ghana to the United Nations Organization?
Donation of relief items
Payment of dues
Settlement of refugees
Provision of troops for peace
Improvement in tourism is important for the rapid development of the nation because, more
local tourists will leave the country.
infrastructure will be provided.
local tourists will not visit places of interest.
tour guides will be unemployed
The physical environment of Ghana be protected through
recycling of waste materials.
re-directing river channels.
practicing traditional farming.
burning of traditional waste.
The period which marks the beginning and the end of adolescence is
12 - 19 years
10 - 19 years.
10 - 14 years.
15 - 19 years.
The scale on the map is 200,000. If the distance on the map is 2 cm, find the actual distance on the ground?
Protecting national property is the obligation of
the fire service
An effect of the slave trade on Africans was that they
acquired much wealth
abandoned their religion
The Head of the Traditional Government in Ghana is
District Chief Executive.
The safest place to save money is the
A major reason for developing a good layout settlement is to reduce
free movement and ethnic conflicts
overcrowding and criminal activities
rural-urban migration and street hawking
truancy and illiteracy rate
Which of the following should be the basis for signing Foreign Agreement in Ghana?
Business Executive interest
For Ghanaians to come out of negative influence of colonial mentality, they should
develop high sense of self-reliance.
stop foreigners from coming into Ghana.
develop taste for European goods.
adopt foreign cultures.
Highlight five ways of ensuring political stability in Ghana.
Solution will be uploaded soon.
What is a State Enterprise?
What is a Private Enterprise?
Suggest four ways by which the state can promote private enterprises.
A state enterprise is a business owned and controlled by the Central or State or Local to provide public services.
A private enterprise is a business setup by individuals with the aim of making money
1. Financial support guarantees
2. Suitable economic environment for business
3. Legal and regulatory support
4. Patronizing made-in-Ghana goods and services
5. Trade fair supports
6. facilitation of business network access
7. business-friendly political environment
8. Ensuring production of quality goods and services
Draw a diagram showing the traditional government structure in Ghana.
State four duties of a chief in the community.
Highlight four duties of an Assembly man in your community.
1. A Chief is a custodians of tradition
2. A Chief serves as an intermediary between the traditional area and the federal government.
3. A Chief make sure the customs and rituals are followed
5. Ensures that peace prevails in the area by settling disputes and conflicts
6. A Chief makes bye law
7. Organizes Festivals
1. Raises public awareness of the District Assembly's programs
2. mobilizes the populace in support of community work
3. provides the District Assembly with information about the community's ideas, opinions, and problems.
4. gives the populace feedback on the decisions made by the District Assembly
5. Participate in District Asembly meetings
6. launch development initiative
List five examples of natural disasters.
Outline five ways by which the physical environment can be protected from degradation.
Solution will be uploaded soon
Use the sketch map of the world to answer this question
Identify the continents labelled I, II, III, IV and IV
What do the following conventional signs represent on a map?
With the aid of a diagram, describe how day and night are caused.
I - Asia
II - Austria
III - North America
IV - Africa
V - South Africa
i. F - Farm
ii. Trignometrical Station
iii. Ct. H - Court House
day and night occur due to rotation of earth on its own axis. Part of earth which faces the sun experiences day, while part of earth away from Sun getting no light, experiences night
List four major ethnic groups in Ghana
Explain three factors that promoted the ethnic migrations into Ghana
Solution will be uploaded soon. Thank you.