Internet Technologies Course And Certification
What is Internet Technologies?
Internet Technologies consists of the softwares, hardwares and protocols used in the connection of two or more devices to share information either within a small network or as part of a larger network.
The Internet is a vast network of networks that spans the entire globe. Data is transferred from computer to computer, and from network to network, using packet-switching technology and a suite of Internet protocols called TCP/IP, after its two most important protocols.
Internet Technologies allows users to access information and communication over the World Wide Web (Web browsers, FTP, e-mail, associated hardware, Internet service providers, and so forth).
Examples of Internet Technologies:
Some of the examples of Internet Technologies are:
1. Local Area Networks (LANs),
2. Wide Area Networks (WANs),
6. Voice and Data Integration,
7. Wireless Integration,
8. Dial-up Technology,
9. Cable Access Technology,
10. Network Security and Network Management.
Internet Technologies Basics
The Internet is a worldwide collection of computer networks that began as a single network that was originally created in 1969 by ARPA. Internet is usually referred to as Super Information Database and below are some basics things to know on Internet Technologies:
1. Internet is a worldwide global system of interconnected computer networks.
2. Internet uses the standard Internet Protocol (TCP/IP).
3. Every computer on the internet is identified by a unique IP address.
4. IP Address is a unique set of numbers (such as 22.214.171.124) which identifies a computer location.
5. A special computer DNS (Domain Name Server) is used to give a name to the IP Address so that the user can locate a computer by a name. For example, a DNS server will resolve a name https://www.siitgo.com to a particular IP address to uniquely identify the computer on which the website is hosted.
6. The Internet is accessible to every user all over the world.
Advantages of Internet Technologies:
Some of the advantages of Internet Technologies
1. It offers ease of communication.
2. It facilitates information sharing.
3. It improves learning such as the introduction of online education, social learning, elearning etc.
4. File sharing is effortless and convenient.
5. It offers Social Networking.
6. It offers E-Commerce.
7. It offers Online Advertising.
8. It makes information more open and accessible.
9. It offers online payments and transactions.
10. It provides job opportunities.
11. It provides avenue for self-employment such as e-business.
Types of Internet Technology Connections:
1. Analog: Dial-up Internet Access
This is also known as dial-up connection. In this type of connection a modem is connected to your PC, then the computer dials a phone number via the modem and connects to the network which is provided by your ISP. Dial-up connection is an analog connection because data is sent over an analog telephone network.
2. ISDN - Integrated Services Digital Network
ISDN is a communication standard, designed for sending data, voice and video over telephone lines. The ISDN speed can range from 64 Kbps to 128 Kbps .
3. B-ISDN - Broadband ISDN
Broadband ISDN transfers data over fiber optic telephone lines.
4. DSL – Digital Subscriber Line
DSL uses existing 2-wire copper telephone lines connected to the premise so that service is delivered simultaneously with wired telephone service. DSL has two two main categories for home use, they are ADSL and SDSL.
5. ADSL - Asymmetric Digital Subscriber Line
ADSL technology supports data rates from 1.5Mbps to 9 Mbps when receiving data known as the downstream rate and from 16 to 640 Kbps when sending data known as the upstream rate.
6. ADSL+2 - ADSL Extension
ADSL Extension provides users with significantly faster speeds including download speed when compared with regular ADSL connections.
7. SDSL - Symmetric Digital Subscriber Line
SDSL technology allows more data to be sent over existing copper telephone lines. SDSL sends digital pulses in high-frequency area of telephone lines/wires.
8. VDSL - Very High DSL
Very High DSL is also called VDSL. VDSL is simply a DSL technology that is designed to provide faster data rates over short distances, so that the shorter the distance, the faster the connection rate.
9. Cable - Broadband Internet Connection
Broadband Internet Connection is made possible through the use of cable modems that is designed to operate over cable TV lines. Cable or Broadband Internet uses TV channel space for data transmission. Cable or Broadband Internet speed can range from 512 Kbps to 20 Mbps.
10. Wireless Internet Connections
Wireless Internet Connection is one of the most used and modern Internet connection types. Wireless Internet Technology offers an always-on connection which can be accessed from anywhere — as long as you are geographically within the network coverage area or the base station area.
11. T-1 Lines – Leased Line
T-1 lines is a dedicated phone connection supporting data rates of 1.544Mbps.
12. Bonded T-1
A bonded T-1 is two or more T-1 lines that have been joined (bonded) together to increase bandwidth. Where a single T-1 provides approximately 1.5Mbps, two bonded T1s provide 3Mbps or 46 channels for voice or data.
13. T-3 Lines – Dedicated Leased Line
T-3 lines are designed to support data rates of about 43 to 45 Mbps. T-3 lines are used mainly and mostly by ISPs - Internet Service Providers for connecting to the Internet backbone.
14. OC3 - Optical Carrier
This is used to specify the speed of fiber optic networks conforming to the SONET standard. Speed can range from 155.52 Mbps upward.
15. Internet over Satellite
Internet over Satellite (IoS) allows users to access the Internet via a satellite placed in the space. A satellite is normally situated at a fixed point above the earth's surface.
In the Full course, you will learn everything you need to know about Internet Technologies with Certification to showcase your knowledge.
Internet Technologies Course Outline:
Internet Technologies - Internet Introduction/Overview
Internet Technologies - Intranet Introduction/Overview
Internet Technologies - Extranet Introduction/Overview
Internet Technologies - Reference Models
Internet Technologies - Domain Name System
Internet Technologies - Services
Internet Technologies - Connectivity
Internet Technologies - Protocols
Internet Technologies - E-Mail Introduction/Overview
Internet Technologies - E-Mail Protocols
Internet Technologies - E-Mail Working
Internet Technologies - E-Mail Operations
Internet Technologies - E-mail Features
Internet Technologies - E-Mail Etiquettes
Internet Technologies - E-mail Security
Internet Technologies - E-mail Providers
Internet Technologies - Websites Overview
Internet Technologies - Websites Types
Internet Technologies - Website Designing
Internet Technologies - Websites Development
Internet Technologies - Website Publishing
Internet Technologies - Website URL Registration
Internet Technologies - Website Hosting
Internet Technologies - Website Security
Internet Technologies - Search Engine Optimization
Internet Technologies - Website Monetization
Internet Technologies - WWW Overview
Internet Technologies - Web Pages
Internet Technologies - Web Browsers
Internet Technologies - Web Servers
Internet Technologies - Proxy Servers
Internet Technologies - Search Engines
Internet Technologies - Internet Collaboration
Internet Technologies - Collaboration Overview
Internet Technologies - Mailing List
Internet Technologies - Usenet Newsgroup
Internet Technologies - Online Education
Internet Technologies - Social Networking
Internet Technologies - Internet Security Overview
Internet Technologies - Data Encryption
Internet Technologies - Digital Signature
Internet Technologies - Firewall Security
Internet Technologies - HTML
Internet Technologies - CSS
Internet Technologies - PHP
Internet Technologies - Video Lectures
Internet Technologies - Exams and Certification