Another bombardment from the ships at port obliterated the watchtower. The collapse spewed white stone and rubble into the marble streets. Soldiers, the defenders of the city, vanished with a unified cry. But from the maelstrom of dust and detritus, flew a singular figure. She was clad in a silver breastplate and white skirts. Chainmail sang on her limbs, and the glint of her blade caught the light. The captain of the city guard emerged unscathed.

Unscathed, at least, save for the eyes that fell upon her. The pirate queen had been seeking this very moment, ever since her ships laid siege to the city. The city's fall and the triumph of her forces meant plunder, more plunder than anyone could have dreamt in all the long months at sea. But to duel the renowned captain of the city in single combat? There lay the only path to glory.

A shot rang out. Plaster ruptured from the wall beside the captain's brow. Her gaze swiveled and met the pirate queen's. The shot was merely an invitation, and the pirate queen smiled grimly as she tossed aside her pistol, seeing that the invitation had been accepted. The captain of the guard threw her spear. The bolt of silver shot almost unseen through the air, glinting once as it caught the high noon sun. Instinct alone compelled the pirate queen to weave and duck. The spear caught the privateer behind her, skewering him on the spot.

With a careless laugh, the pirate queen shouted, "She's mine!" And she threw herself into the fray. With long and limber strides, the two warriors met in single combat. Saber greeted Longsword in a wild burst of sparks. The captain darted forward, arm straight, aiming to stab the pirate queen with her thrust. The saber twisted and deflected the sword point. The queen scuttled backward, lobbing taunts to cover her retreat.

The captain reset her stance, laying the blade high and flat, tip outward to thurst or deflect. Her face was grim as she strafed in a wide circle. The pirate queen moved back in, wrist and saber spinning in a cocksure display of dexterity. With a disorienting roar, she pulled a sudden slash from the spinning of her blade. It was merely a feint, which she spun around again into a slash from another direction. A deflection. The fight was on.
