Cervical cancer can be prevented by yourself, starting from changing your thinking that you might fall in one of the risk groups, and placing an importance on prevention. This can be done easily and directly to the point with HPV Vaccine or Pap test.
It is well known that an important cause of cervical cancer comes from HPV. This disease can be handled if it is found in the initial stage. Many people might think that cervical cancer can only occur in those who have multiple sexual partners and it should not occur if they are married and live with only one man. In fact, women in relationships can also get HPV. Therefore, women in relationships, whether married or not married, should receive a pap test.
• Pap test, such as pelvic examination to detect an abnormality of the cervical cells in the initial stage before spreading into cancer. If found in the initial stage, it can be completely cured.
• HPV vaccine prevents the cause of cancer, which is the infection of HPV.
Human Papilloma Virus (HPV) is a virus that causes many types of diseases to the sexual organ, which can occur in both females and males. Contracting HPV can occur from exposure, such as sexual relationship or severe exposure around the sexual organ, which can develop the disease around the sexual organ and anus. More than 40 species of HPV and most infections can be cured by themselves. Only some infections can remain for a long time, which is related with the development of cancer. HPV can be divided into 2 groups, which are:
Low severity species of Level 6 and 11 can cause genital warts, which can occur in both men and women. For high severity species of Level 16 and 18, 70% of them is the cause of cervical cancer and other cancers, such as anal cancer. At present, there is a vaccine that can prevent the infection of HPV. The vaccine contains protein that resemble HPV shells. The vaccine is safe and protects against the development of the disease.
There are 2 types of HPV vaccine.
• 2-species type, which can provide prevention for females only. In females, there is cervical cancer, vagina cancer, and vulvar cancer.
• 4-species type, which can provide prevention for both females and males. In females, there is cervical cancer, vagina cancer, vulvar cancer, anal cancer, and genital warts. In males, there is anal cancer and genital warts.
Getting to know HPV vaccine
HPV vaccine is a vaccine that is used to prevent and reduce the risk of cervical cancer. It is a vaccine that provides maximum benefit for females in no sexual relationship. Getting your daughter vaccinated before entering adolescence is the ideal time and very beneficial for children in the future. Also, by getting children vaccinated early on, it can create a better immunity than in adults because children have never had a sexual relationship. As such, children can be vaccinated from 9 years old and above. However, adults who have been in a sexual relationship or have been infected with HPV can still receive the HPV vaccine as it can benefit them in terms of prevention and prevention against species that they’ve never been infected with. The vaccination will be given in 3 needles within 6 months. After the first injection, the following injection must be given in the 2nd month. Then the last vaccine must be given in the 6th month. The immunity from the vaccine can provide protection for at least 5 years and a booster shot can be received after.
Is a pap test needed after the vaccination is given?
Though receiving the vaccination, females must receive a pap test regularly from the time they begin having a sexual relationship because the vaccine cannot prevent infection from all species. Therefore, a pap test is needed to enhance the efficiency of preventing cervical cancer.
Paolo Hospital Phaholyothin Tel : 0-2271-7000