To improve the role definition of individuals involved with their key major accounts the Company’s leadership model was modified.
The PDRC model defines conditions that must be present within a partnership. Components of the model are:
Purpose: defines with the partnership is trying to achieve and why the partnership exists.
Direction: defines how the partnership will get to the desired state.
Regulation: defines how the partnership will stay on track.
Capability: defines the resources required to achieve the partnership purpose.
Values: defines the underlying beliefs which must be common to both organizations before partnership relationship can be developed.
Top management is accountable for creating and then ensuring that the vision, strategy, commitment, and growth statements are understood by both organizations. The steering committee is accountable for developing the mission, plans, conformance and sustain statements, consistent with top management’s vision, strategy, commitment, and growth statements. The steering committee is also accountable for ensuring that the mission, plans, conformance and sustain statements are understood by both organizations. The operating committees are accountable for developing goals, methods, control, and operate statements consistent with top management’s and the steering committee statements. They are also accountable for ensuring that their goals, methods, control, and operate statements are understood and carried out by both organizations.
1. Top management tasks
First, top management must ensure that the values and Lisa both organizations are so similar that a partnership relationship can be created, sustained and grown.
Second, top management must create a vision of the partnership. The vision is a picture of the desired state, requires nonlinear thinking, and may use metaphors, similes, symbols or analogies. It defines a reason for being. It answers the following questions: what is the partnership trying to achieve? Where’s the partnership going? Why does a partnership exist?
The PDRC model requires five sections to be present in the vision picture. The sections include: the overall business aspects of the partnership; the desired communication behavior; conflict and its resolution in the partnership environment; patterns of thought desired in the partnership; how the leaders show motivated and energized partnership Associates.
After creating the vision, top management shall create corresponding strategies. Each will define pathways to enhance the partnership’s relative competitive position. Strategies will be focused outward, and be market related. They define how the partnership will get to the desired state. They answer the question: how? There should be at least five strategies corresponding to the five dimensions of the vision detail outlined in the paragraph above.
From the strategies top management will create corresponding statements of commitment. The statements will explain to others in each organization how top management will conduct auditing to keep the partnership on track. The question of how top management will ensure the partnership is moving in the desired direction will be answered here.
Finally, top management will address growth of the partnership. Officially stated in terms corresponding to each of the five dimensions, how top management expects each organization to provide for the resources required to remain proactive to the business environment, and how greater and faster responses than the competition can be achieved.
2. Steering committee tasks
The steering committee will go through much the same exercises top management, but addressing mission, plans, conformance, and sustain questions consistent with top management’s vision, strategy, commitment, and growth statements.
The last five mission statements will be created by the steering committee. These mission statements define why the different elements of the partnership exist and who is served by the proper handling of these elements. The statements are focused on the business environment, especially customers, suppliers and other constituents of the partnership. The elements covered by the mission statements are: overall business purposes the partnership; communication behavior; partnership conflict and its resolution; patterns of thought; leadership motivation.
The steering committee will develop plans to implement top management strategies. They will define how the things identified by top management will be done, and in what order. These plans will include steps and schedules.
Similarly, the steering committee will develop conformance and specifications corresponding to top management statements of commitment. These specifications will be relative to the needs of the business environment, comparable to fitness for use.
The final task of the steering committee is to ensure that the partnership can sustain itself. They will create and implement statements corresponding to top management’s growth ideas. These statements will define resources required for the partnership to thrive over time.
3. Operating Committee’s tasks
The operating committees will carry out programs and projects consistent with the partnership vision, mission, strategies and plans. Each operating committee will define goals for itself which contain specific, measurable targets. A minimum five goals are needed, addressing each of the five areas found in the vision and mission statements.
The operating committees will also define the procedures and processes required to carry out each of the plans of the steering committee.
Likewise internal operating committee feedback systems that identify deviations within the partnership programs and projects will be developed. These control statements are focused inward.
The operating committees will also define the resources required to effectively do day-to-day tasks that they are charged with.
You must be logged in to post a comment.