Components of species diversity: species richness and relative abundance
Species diversity is determined not only by the number of species within a biological community—i.e., species richness—but also by the relative abundance of individuals in that community. Species abundance is the number of individuals per species, and relative abundance refers to the evenness of distribution of individuals among species in a community. Two communities may be equally rich in species but differ in relative abundance. For example, each community may contain 5 species and 300 individuals, but in one community all species are equally common (e.g., 60 individuals of each species), while in the second community one species significantly outnumbers the other four.
These components of species diversity respond differently to various environmental conditions. A region that does not have a wide variety of habitats usually is species-poor; however, the few species that are able to occupy the region may be abundant because competition with other species for resources will be reduced.
Trends in species richness may reveal a good deal about both past and present conditions of a region. The Antarctic continent has few species because its environment is so inhospitable; however, oceanic islands are species-poor because they are hard to reach, or, as is the case with the Lesser Sunda Islands in south-central Indonesia, because they are of rather recent origin and organisms have not had enough time to establish themselves.
Global gradients also affect species richness. The most obvious gradient is latitudinal: there are more species in the tropics than in the temperate or polar zones. Ecological factors commonly are used to account for this gradation. Higher temperatures, greater climate predictability, and longer growing seasons all conspire to create a more inviting habitat, permitting a greater diversity of species. Tropical rainforests are the richest habitat of all, tropical grasslands exhibit more diversity than temperate grasslands, and deserts in tropical or subtropical regions are populated by a wider range of species than are temperate deserts.
Another factor affecting the species richness of a given area is the distance or barrier that separates the area from potential sources of species. The probability that species will reach remote oceanic islands or isolated valleys is slight. Animal species, especially those that do not fly, are less likely than plant species to do so. The Lesser Sunda Islands are similar to eastern Java in climate and vegetation, but they have far fewer strictly terrestrial animals. This situation is attributed to the fact that, whereas Java has been connected to a larger landmass in the past, the Lesser Sundas have not. While plants and seeds have been blown across intervening seas, few species of animals that do not have wings have reached these islands.
Species adaptations to ecological habitats
Neither an environment nor an organism is a static entity. Hence, changes in either will disrupt the relationship that has evolved between the two. Small changes in an organism may actually improve the interaction—a random genetic mutation allowing a plant to utilize a nutrient that has been present but previously unusable by the plant will increase the organism’s ability to survive. Changes of an extreme nature, however, are almost always maladaptive. Small environmental variations may present a challenge that organisms can meet by mounting a physiological response or, if they are mobile, by removing themselves to a less stressful area. Catastrophic disruptions, however, may create an environment no longer hospitable to the organisms, and they may die out as a result.
Although the distribution patterns of species are dictated by environmental conditions, the actual range of a species is not identical to its potential range—namely, the area that is ecologically compatible with its needs. For example, the biogeographic regions of the world are related to climatic factors, but they are not coterminous with them. Thus, desert biomes, which are located at latitudes of 30° N and S, and tropical rainforest biomes, which arise around the Equator, can be found in most phytogeographic kingdoms and zoogeographic realms.
The effects of geologic changes on biotic distributions
The theory of plate tectonics, formulated in the 1960s, is now firmly established. Its explanation of the dynamic nature of continental landmasses has been important not only within the field of geology but also within the field of biogeography; it has entirely revolutionized the interpretion of the dispersal of flora and fauna (see also plate tectonics: Plate tectonics as an explanation for Earth processes). The slow movement of continents has been used to explain both the isolation and intermingling of populations. Prior to the acceptance of this idea, land bridges and sunken continents were invoked as the means by which continents were linked in the geologic past. While land bridges, such as the Bering Strait land bridge that connected western North America to Asia, have existed and contributed to the dispersal of organisms, they no longer are believed to have been as ubiquitous and instrumental in this process as once was thought. Such hypothetical land bridges as Archhelenis, which purportedly connected South America and southwestern Africa, are now regarded by most experts as relics of the fertile imaginations of early biogeographers.
Test Your Knowledge
During much of the Mesozoic Era (251 million to 65.5 million years ago), the continents formed a single mass that has been named Pangaea. In the Early Cretaceous Epoch (145.5 million to 99.6 million years ago), the Tethys seaway formed and split Pangaea into a northern continent, Laurasia (encompassing Eurasia and North America), and a southern continent, Gondwanaland (including South America, Antarctica, Africa, India, and Australia). Notwithstanding transient and shifting epicontinental seaways, flora and fauna essentially were able to move freely within the Northern and Southern hemispheres but not between them. During the Late Cretaceous and throughout much of the Cenozoic, Gondwanaland split up and its component parts drifted apart, some of them forming connections with Laurasia, which remained more or less a continuous landmass. According to this model, Australia has remained separate from other continents since the Eocene Epoch (55.8 million to 33.9 million years ago) and had been in contact only with an already polar Antarctica from the Late Cretaceous onward, which helps to explain its remarkably distinct flora and fauna. The life-forms of South America are only less distinctive than those of Australia. Separated from other continents since the Eocene, South America did not have a permanently established connection with North America until the Pliocene (5.3 million to 2.6 million years ago). Only then was some interchange, especially of faunas, permitted. Africa had achieved proximity to Laurasia by the Paleocene Epoch (65.5 million to 55.8 million years ago) and has remained in tenuous connection to Eurasia ever since, so that its present flora and fauna are much more similar to the rest of the Old World tropics. India had formed a broad connection with Laurasia in the Paleogene Period and so has no strongly distinctive (paleoendemic) organisms.