4 August 2022
EMBL and UW researchers plus additional collaborators have constructed a complete map of fruit fly embryonic development using machine learning. This research is foundational to better understanding overall embryo development in other species, including humans.
10 May 2022
EMBL’s Head of Genome Biology announced as Fellow of the Royal Society for her exceptional contributions to science.
25 February 2022
Researchers from the Furlong group at EMBL have come up with a way to observe the development of fruit-fly embryos simultaneously at the genetic and cellular levels, generating a high-resolution and integrated view of how different cell lineages form.
9 December 2021
EMBL Senior Scientist and Head of the Genome Biology Unit is among the researchers honoured for outstanding work by the German Research Foundation (Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft, DFG).
19 August 2020
Discoveries at EMBL will help researchers to interpret one of the most common types of experiments in genomics and medical studies.
15 July 2019
Does rearranging chromosomes affect their function? EMBL scientists reveal uncoupling of 3D chromatin organisation and gene expression.
14 March 2018
EMBL scientists show how chromatin usage in individual cells reveals developmental trajectories
30 January 2018
EMBL scientists show that some promoters can act as enhancers and vice versa
13 March 2017
ERC grantee Eileen Furlong shares her vision for the next ten years
13 February 2017
EMBL scientists discovered that common mutations can change the shape of gene promoters
12 January 2017
New mechanism revealed
2 July 2014
Surprising finding: enhancers find their targets long before activation in Drosophila embryos
2 February 2012
If you wanted to draw your family tree, you could start by searching for people who share your surname. Cells, of course, don’t have surnames, but scientists at the European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL) in Heidelberg, Germany, have found that genetic switches called enhancers, and the…
8 January 2012
As an embryo develops, different genes are turned on in different cells, to form muscles, neurons and other bodily parts. Inside each cell’s nucleus, genetic sequences known as enhancers act like remote controls, switching genes on and off. Scientists at the European Molecular Biology Laboratory…
4 November 2009
Embryonic development is like a well-organised building project, with the embryo’s DNA serving as the blueprint from which all construction details are derived. Cells carry out different functions according to a developmental plan, by expressing, i.e. turning on, different combinations of genes.…
No matching posts found