What are the six Bhagas?
The disyllable Bhaga indicates the six properties, dominion, might, glory, splendor, wisdom, and dispassion. In the former, it denotes wisdom, energy, power, dominion, might, glory, without end, and without defect.
What are the 64 qualities of Krishna?
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has attempted to give evidences from various scriptures about all sixty-four qualities present in the person of the Supreme Lord.
- Beautiful Bodily Features.
- Auspicious Characteristics.
- Wonderful Linguist.
How many types of Krishna are there?
Firstly, it was professed that Shri Krishna manifests himself through four forms —svayamrupa (in which he himself abides), avesharupa (in which his part abides), shaktisvarupa (in which his power abides), and tadekatmarupa (with whom he identifies himself).
Which Veda is associated with Krishna?
|Title means||Name of the god Krishna|
What are the 6 qualities of god?
Is Bhagwan a god?
Bhagwan is a Hindu term that refers to “god” or “lord,” particularly Krishna and other Vishnu incarnations, as well as Shiva. It is also a title of honor bestowed upon a guru or some other revered individual.
What are 64 Vidyas?
The mastery of over 64 kinds of skills is called chatushashti Kalas. They are: Geet vidya: teja tribhuvan. Vadya vidya: playing on musical instruments.
What are 16 Kalas?
16 Kalas of Lord Krishna: 1. Daya – Compassion 2. Dhairya– Patience 3. Kshama – Forgiveness 4.
How many avatars did Krishna have?
|Position||Krishna, Buddha (common list)||Balarama, Krishna (Vaishnavites in South India)|
|10||Kalki (prophesied 10th avatar who ends the Kali Yuga)|
What is the eternal form of Lord Krishna?
Goloka (Sanskrit: गोलोक), or Goloka Vrindavan (गोलोक वृन्दावन, IAST: Goloka Vṛndāvana), is the eternal supreme abode of the Hindu god Krishna and his consort Radha. In the Bhagavata Purana, Krishna is portrayed as the highest person who resides in Goloka.
What are the 6 opulences of Lord Krishna?
6 Opulences of Krishna 1 Beauty 2 Knowledge 3 Strength 4 Wealth 5 Fame & Renunciation More
What are the opulences of the god Krsna?
Krsna has six opulences which are always present—knowledge, wealth, fame, strength, beauty and renunciation. He has these opulences in totality.
Who is the god of the six opulence?
Bhagavan, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is defined as one who is full of six opulence, ie, who has full Strength, Fame, Wisdom, Wealth, Beauty and Renunciation. When Krishna was personally present on this planet 5000 years ago, He demonstrated His SIX OPULENCE OF KRISHNA personally – Strength, Fame, Wisdom, Wealth, Beauty and Renunciation.
How many palaces did Krishna have on Earth?
Nor can anyone claim that no one is richer than Him. We understand from the Shrimad-Bhagavatam however, that when Krishna was present on this earth He had 16,108 palaces where His near and dear ones lived, and each palace was made of marble and bedecked with jewels.