|Over 35||Morbid obesity|
Body Mass Index (BMI) is a measurement of body fat based on height and weight.
Knowing your BMI can assist you identify any potential health risks that you might be developing or facing.
You can calculate your BMI using this simple formula i.e BMI = Weight (kg) / Height (m)².
Ideal BMI for men & women
The ideal BMI for both men & women is between 18.5 to 24.9. People with BMI less than 18.5 are considered underweight, whereas people with BMI of 25 and over are considered overweight. Those with BMI of 30 and above are considered obese.
Risks associated with being Overweight
Obesity increases the risk of heart attack, stroke, certain types of cancers, paralysis etc. According to a study, obese people have 55% higher risk of developing depression & other mental health conditions like bipolar disorder & panic disorder
To avoid the risks of obesity, it is advised for obese people to lower their BMI into a healthy range.
Risks associated with being Underweight
Risks associated with being underweight include malnutrition, vitamin deficiency, anemia, osteoporosis, and a weakened immune system. Women who are underweight have a lower chance of getting pregnant than those who are at healthy weight.
Keep in mind that your BMI is not the only indicator of health and fitness level. It is always best to check with a healthcare professional to determine whether you are at proper weight or not. Learn about the factors that could affect your weight other than diet & lifestyle.
Apart from BMI calculator, you can assess your Body Mass Index & other essential body compositions using Smart Bluetooth Weighing Scale.
14 Essential Parameters: Apart from just bodyweight, this smart digital scale also offers readings of 13 other essential body compositions whic...View full details
Smart Step-on Technology: This digital weighing scale comes with step-on technology which means the scale shows immediate reading as soon as st...View full details
Compact Design: This analog weighing scale is designed with a handle that makes it easier to carry anywhere & anytime easily. High Quali...View full details
Weight Auto-Lock: It has a Weight Auto-lock feature which allows you to get accurate measures despite those active babies who refuse to stay stil...View full details
Baby Weighing Tray: The contoured design of the baby weighing tray is safe to lay your infants while taking the measurement. Height Meter: T...View full details