What About Eating Moldy Food
Fun fact of the day
Did you know what the antibiotic Penicillin is actually derived from mold?
Dr. Alexander Fleming accidentally discovered that a species of mold called Penicillium can cure patients of infectious diseases. Taking it one step further doctors couldnt perfect the antibiotic, and it was mold found on a cantaloupe which sealed the fate of this medical breakthrough.
Think about where this world would be today with Penicillin
All throughout human history, illnesses that are now looked at as minor, people were dying from until Penicillin hit the mainstream.
That being said, dont go thinking you can eat that moldy loaf of bread and be cured of any illness or disease!
In all likelihood, if you were to eat food with mold on it and are healthy, you may get mildly sick, but in most cases, it probably will not be fatal.
Disclaimer: Dont be the jackass to find out!
How Do Molds Affect People
Exposure to damp and moldy environments may cause a variety of health effects, or none at all. Some people are sensitive to molds. For these people, exposure to molds can lead to symptoms such as stuffy nose, wheezing, and red or itchy eyes, or skin. Some people, such as those with allergies to molds or with asthma, may have more intense reactions. Severe reactions may occur among workers exposed to large amounts of molds in occupational settings, such as farmers working around moldy hay. Severe reactions may include fever and shortness of breath.
In 2004 the Institute of Medicine found there was sufficient evidence to link indoor exposure to mold with upper respiratory tract symptoms, cough, and wheeze in otherwise healthy people with asthma symptoms in people with asthma and with hypersensitivity pneumonitis in individuals susceptible to that immune-mediated condition.
In 2009, the World Health Organization issued additional guidance, the WHO Guidelines for Indoor Air Quality: Dampness and Mould pdf iconexternal icon pdf icon. Other recent studies have suggested a potential link of early mold exposure to development of asthma in some children, particularly among children who may be genetically susceptible to asthma development, and that selected interventions that improve housing conditions can reduce morbidity from asthma and respiratory allergies.
Cheeses Made With Mold
The mold used in making these cheeses is safe for consumption. However, if other mold that is not part of the manufacturing process is present, these items should be discarded just like any other red flag food item. Some blue cheeses may be hard enough to be treated as a Yellow Flag item . However, if you are unsure where to draw the line, remember: when in doubt, throw it out.
Note that while the mold that forms the blue veins inside blue cheeses is harmless when deprived of oxygen inside the cheese, the same strain of mold can form harmful mycotoxins if allowed to grow on surfaces exposed to air. Be careful of cross-contamination with these cheeses and keep them wrapped in cellophane while storing them.
You May Like: Can You Sue Your Landlord For Black Mold
What Causes Black Mold
Molds are an important part of our environment. They decompose dead plants and animals. All types of mold will grow if the conditions are right. Mold grows and spreads quickly in the right conditions, which include:
- Moisture level at or over 70%
- Adequate food source
- Temperatures that range from 40 to 100 degrees F
Mold can grow anywhere in your house that provides these conditions. The most likely places mold will grow are:
- Anywhere that there has been a water leak.
- Damp rooms without adequate ventilation, such as bathrooms.
- Basements where humidity tends to be higher.
- Any areas with a lot of water condensation.
- Any areas where flooding has occurred.
How Do Molds Get In The Indoor Environment And How Do They Grow
Mold is found both indoors and outdoors. Mold can enter your home through open doorways, windows, vents, and heating and air conditioning systems. Mold in the air outside can also attach itself to clothing, shoes, and pets can and be carried indoors. When mold spores drop on places where there is excessive moisture, such as where leakage may have occurred in roofs, pipes, walls, plant pots, or where there has been flooding, they will grow. Many building materials provide suitable nutrients that encourage mold to grow. Wet cellulose materials, including paper and paper products, cardboard, ceiling tiles, wood, and wood products, are particularly conducive for the growth of some molds. Other materials such as dust, paints, wallpaper, insulation materials, drywall, carpet, fabric, and upholstery, commonly support mold growth.
You May Like: How To Clean Mould On Ceiling
Addressing Moisture And Mould In Your Home
Health Canada considers indoor mould growth to be a significant health hazard. The word mould is a common term referring to fungi that can grow on building materials in homes or other buildings. Damp conditions and mould growth in homes increases the risk of respiratory allergy symptoms and exacerbate asthma in mold-sensitive individuals. It is important to know how to identify, address and prevent moisture and mould in your home.
People living in homes with mould and damp conditions are more likely to have:
- eye, nose and throat irritation
- coughing and phlegm build-up
- wheezing and shortness of breath
- worsening of asthma symptoms
The level of concern depends on the extent of mould, how long it has been present and the sensitivity and overall health of the residents. Some people are more susceptible than others. For example, infants, children, the elderly and those with health problems such as breathing difficulties are more at risk from mould and dampness.
Any respiratory health concerns should be discussed with a physician if you suspect that these could be caused by poor indoor air quality. Your physician is best suited to determine if your symptoms may be related to environmental factors or some other underlying cause.
Health Canada recommends controlling dampness indoors and cleaning up any mould regardless of the type of mould presentFootnote 1.
Signs Of A Black Mold Infestation
It is difficult to see and identify black mold. The first clue that it may be present in your home comes from the symptoms of exposure, such as nasal congestion or coughing. However, only a trained professional can accurately diagnose whether black mold is present by having a professional analysis completed.
Another way to tell is a musty smell. Most species of mold and mildew cause a musty smell throughout your home, and the highest concentration of that smell likely has the most
If you can physically see the mold in your home, in most cases its bad enough that you probably need to call a professional mold removal team.
Also Check: Mold In My Bathroom Ceiling
Which Food Will Mold Fastest
Storage conditions will have a significant effect on how quickly a given food turns moldy. However, all things being equal, food with a high moisture content will mold first. Thus, in the fridge, fruits such as strawberries or cucumber might get moldy before other foods. Stored at room temperature, natural bread can get moldy quite quickly.
How Do You Get Mildew Out Of Fabric
To get mildew out of fabric, feel free to use distilled white vinegar or borax. Avoid bleach, it can harm and/or discolor the fabric. Once you rub or spray your chosen cleaning product into the fabric, youll need to wash said fabric at the highest temperature possible.
Once done, let the fabric dry. Dont throw the fabric in the dryer. After that process, all the mildew should be out of the fabric.
You May Like: Installing Vinyl Stair Nose
Associations With Human Disease
Despite the association of Stachybotrys with animal and human disease, early researchers were unable to fulfill Koch’s postulates with the fungus. There was no evidence that the fungus itself was a pathogen, and scientists could not transmit infection or disease by injection of tissue from affected animals . At most, injection of the fungus caused a local response but no systemic invasion . It was only with the identification and application of Stachybotrys toxins that the nature of the disease process was understood.
What Can Cause Mold Poisoning
Too much ingestion or inhalation of black mold spores and toxins can result in mold poisoning. The symptoms include eye and skin irritation, sneezing, coughing, fever, rashes, tremors, headaches, fatigue, congestion, watery eyes, and bleeding of the lungs.
Now, after knowing the facts about black molds, its good to be knowledgeable about its prevention.
Also Check: Black Mold In Shower Grout
How Do I Know If My House Has A Moisture Problem
One of the best ways to tell is by checking the humidity. A home with high humidity likely has a moisture problem. Musty smells suggest mold, mildew or rot. Household odors that linger may indicate too much moisture in the air. Frost and ice on cold surfaces from condensation can be a sign of excess moisture in the air as well.
What Kills Black Mold Instantly
White distilled vinegar is an affordable, natural solution to removing black mold. Its antibacterial acidic characteristics are exactly what you need to get the job done. Pour the undiluted vinegar into a spray bottle to apply to the area, or just go for it and pour that vinegar right onto the mold stains.
Don’t Miss: How To Kill Mold In A Basement
How To Remove Mold From Wood
Mold commonly grows on wooden surfaces, as wood is very good at absorbing water. Add to this moisture warm temperatures and mold spores , and its the perfect storm for a mold infestation. Read our guide to learn how to easily remove mold from wood.
The good news is that if the affected area is no larger than ten square feet and you arent dealing with toxic black mold, you can eliminate the mold yourself using everyday household cleaners. But dont delayholding off on this project will give the mold colony a chance to expand, and prolonged exposure can be bad for your health.
What if youre dealing with black mold? It can be difficult to distinguish toxic black mold from other species that are black in color, so its best to call in a professional in this situation. Toxic black mold is particularly harmful when inhaled, so you shouldnt touch it.
Can You Sleep In A House With Mold
Because of the risks that come with mold exposure, it can be unsafe to sleep in a house with mold, particularly in the affected areas because you put yourself at risk of mold allergies. This becomes especially concerning if you are sensitive to the mold. When mold grows indoors, it can often be found in the bathroom.
Also Check: Get Mold Out Of Grout
Can Mold Grow In Your Lungs
The mold spores can colonize inside lung cavities that developed as a result of chronic diseases, such tuberculosis, emphysema, or advanced sarcoidosis. The fibers of fungus might form a lump by combining with white blood cells and blood clots. This lump or ball of fungus is called an aspergilloma or mycetoma.
Mold Reactions: Who’s At Risk
For people sensitive to mold, inhaling or touching mold spores can cause allergic reactions, including sneezing, runny nose, red eyes, and skin rash. People with serious mold allergies may have more severe reactions, including shortness of breath. In people with asthma who are allergic to mold, breathing in spores can also cause asthma attacks.
In addition to people with allergies and asthma, others who may be more sensitive to the effects of mold include:
- Infants and children
- People whose immune systems are compromised due to HIV infection, cancer, liver disease, or chemotherapy
- People with chronic lung disease
Recommended Reading: How To Get Mold Off Of Bathroom Ceiling
Older Model Blind Cords
Research has found that about one child a month dies after becoming entangled in cords from blinds and shades. While headway has been made to get corded blinds off the market, if theyre in your home, be sure to remove them ASAP. Especially on floor-to-ceiling windows with very long cords, they pose a major danger.
Can Black Mold Spores Travel In The Air
Yes. Mold spores are airborne and can attach themselves to peoples skin, clothing, shoes, shopping bags, furniture, carpets, and even pets. Once spores enter your home, they can settle onto any surface and start to multiply. They can also enter your house through open doorways, open windows, and HVAC systems.
Mold spores are microscopic and are virtually found everywhere. They are naturally found in the air we breathe, both indoors and outdoors. Since spores are tiny and lightweight, they become airborne easily, every time we vacuum or walk on the carpets or even sit on our couch.
Don’t Miss: How To Get Rid Of Mold On Bathroom Ceiling
Extent Of Mould Growth
It is important to determine the extent of the mould problem in your home to help you decide on the clean-up procedure. An area of mould is considered small if it covers one square metre or less. There should be no more than three patches of mould, with the total area staying within one square metre. Many small patches of mould in one area or throughout your home are a sign of moisture problems that need to be investigated and corrected right away.
If ignored, small mould areas may become larger over time, so it is important to clean them up before the problem gets bigger. A small amount of mould may be cleaned up using proper procedures and protective equipment.
The area of mould is considered medium if there are more than three patches of mould , but the total area is less than three square metres. In this case, assessment by a qualified professional is recommended but in most cases a medium amount of mould may be cleaned up using proper procedures and protective equipment .
An area of mould is considered large if a single patch of mould is larger than three square metres. Health Canada does not recommend that an unqualified person clean up large areas of mould. You may need a professional assessment to determine why the mould is there in the first place and how to clean it up.
Getting Rid Of Pink Mold
If youre healthy and have only a small patch of pink mold to deal with in an easily accessible area, you can do the removal job yourself. Other times, its better to call a professional, such as when:
- You have a respiratory condition such as asthma,
- The mold covers an area larger than 3 sq. ft.,
- The mold is in your heating and ventilation ducts,
- The mold appeared after a sewage leak.
In any of these cases, contact a licensed mold remediation specialist. Getting rid of mold in your HVAC ducts requires determining the cause of the mold, so youll also need to consult an HVAC professional.
If you decide to remove the mold yourself, wear gloves, goggles, and an N-95 particulate respirator mask to prevent the skin, eye, and lung irritation mold can cause. Soap and water alone wont kill mold, but many common household cleaners do. You can get rid of pink mold in three basic steps.
Vacuum first Vacuum up as much of the mold as you can with a vacuum cleaner fit with a HEPA filter. This cuts down on the amount of spores that will end up in the air while youre cleaning.
Choose your cleaner Bleach solution is effective for killing nearly all types of mold. Use 1.5 cups of bleach in 1 gallon of water . Other options for killing mold are 1 cup of borax in 1 gallon of water, undiluted vinegar, or 3 percent hydrogen peroxide. Use these cleaners separately to avoid dangerous chemical reactions.
Read Also: Mold Off Bathroom Ceiling
A Qualified Environmental Lab Took Samples Of The Mold In My Home And Gave Me The Results Can Cdc Interpret These Results
Standards for judging what is an acceptable, tolerable or normal quantity of mold have not been established. Sampling for mold can be expensive, and standards for judging what is and what is not an acceptable quantity of mold have not been set. The best practice is to remove the mold and work to prevent future growth. If you do decide to pay for environmental sampling for molds, before the work starts, you should ask the consultants who will do the work to establish criteria for interpreting the test results. They should tell you in advance what they will do or what recommendations they will make based on the sampling results. The results of samples taken in your unique situation cannot be interpreted without physical inspection of the contaminated area or without considering the buildings characteristics and the factors that led to the present condition.
Where Does Mold Grow
Most people assume that if you have mold in your home, everybody will get sick and that is just full-fledged misconception.
This is going to blow your mind
..But chances are you have mold in your home no matter how clean of a person you may be.
Yes, you read that correctly
YOU HAVE MOLD IN YOUR HOME!!!!
Ok, now you can relax as I will break it down for you.
There are some mold spores present in all outdoor and indoor environments. Although, it is much more prevalent in hot/humid environments.
For example, if you live in a state like Florida or Louisana, every time you walk out of your home you are likely breathing in an abundance of mold spores.
While if you live in a state like California or Arizona, youre likely not breathing in much mold spores if any at all.
Look at this tree for example:
That, my friend, is mold.
Is it going to kill you?
Unless you have an immune system deficiency, then you have a better chance of learning about winning the lottery at the same time as getting struck by lightning in a graveyard with Elvis Presley being resurrected. Well, not really but you catch my drift!
Mold is everywhere, including in your home, on your clothes, in your carpet, and just about anything porous.
Read Also: Basement Mold Cleaner