Intro to Biotechnology
Transcript Intro to Biotechnology
Intro to Biotechnology
BY C. KOHN, WATERFORD WI
The mapping of the genomes of different species was
made possible as a result of recombinant DNA
Recombinant DNA: when genes from two different species are
combined and introduced into a cell
Sections of DNA were introduced into E. coli bacteria
which then reproduced and copied the genes.
However, recombinant DNA
can be used to create much
more than a sequenced
Recombinant DNA has made the science of
Biotechnology: the manipulation of the genetics of organisms
to make useful products
Biotechnology is not necessarily a new science
Selective breeding of livestock and the use of microbes to make
wine are ancient examples of biotechnology
However, with the use of
recombinant DNA and other
has changed modern life.
Making Recombinant DNA
The production of recombinant DNA from multiple
sources is relatively the same whether you intend to
sequence a genome or produce Bt corn.
First, a gene must be cut using a restriction enzyme
(a chemical scissors for DNA that always cuts at the
same sequence of bases)
Copies of DNA always yield the
same restriction fragments when
exposed to a restriction enzyme
(meaning DNA copies are always
cut in a predictable way).
Making Recombinant DNA
If a restriction enzyme cuts DNA in such a way that a
single-stranded portion remains, this is called a
Sticky ends are important because they allow the
addition of new genes so long as they have the
complementary sequence to the
E.g. a new gene would have to have a
TTAA sticky end to ‘fit’ inside these
Creation of Recombinant DNA
1. A restriction enzyme cuts DNA
2. Restriction fragments are created
3. A new gene with complementary sticky ends is
4. DNA ligase (an enzyme) permanently seals the
new gene into the genome.
Even if a new gene has complementary sticky ends, a
DNA ligase enzyme is necessary to “cement” the new
gene into the genome.
Without DNA ligase, the bond is only temporary.
DNA Ligase is the “super glue” that makes a bond permanent
Once DNA ligase has formed a permanent bond with
the new gene and the original genome (the “vector),
we have recombinant
A cloning vector is the
DNA that carries the
Creating Clone Libraries
If you recall, recombinant DNA was used to
sequence the human genome.
Sections of human DNA were inserted into
E. coli chromosomes to replicate the human
By cutting the bacterial genome and inserting the
human DNA, we were creating recombinant DNA.
Each time the bacteria divided, they
reproduced the same human gene.
Later, the human gene could be removed
using the same restriction enzyme to cut the
bond created by DNA ligase.
The DNA, now copied, could be better studied and
sequenced using the Sanger method.
Uses of Recombinant DNA
Recombinant DNA provides many uses beyond
sequencing a genome.
One of the industries most affected by biotechnology and the use of
recombinant DNA is agriculture.
Bt Corn is perhaps the most famous examples of a
GMO: a plant or animal that
has been genetically modified
through the addition of a
small amount of genetic
material from other organisms.
Right: control vs. Bt corn
In a GMO, genetic material from another organism is
inserted into the plant or animal genome. These genes
can come from any living source, including bacteria,
fungi, and other organisms.
In the case of Bt Corn, an inserted gene for a natural
insecticide came from Bacillus thuringiensis, a
bacterium found naturally in the soil.
B. thuringiensis bacteria naturally produce a toxin (the Bt delta
toxin) which kills specific predatory insects during the larval stage.
It does not other insects in the way broad-spectrum insecticides do,
making it an ideal replacement to synthetic chemical pesticides.
Bt was actually available as a separate pesticide since 1960 and has an
excellent safety record, making it an ideal choice as a GMO.
Production of Bt Corn
Production of Bt Corn was relatively straightforward:
The gene for the Bt toxin was sequenced and
The gene was removed from the B. thuringiensis
genome using a restriction enzyme.
The genome of corn was spliced using the same
The gene was inserted and made permanent using
The modified corn genome was inserted into a
corn cell nucleus.
The corn cell, when it divided, produced the Bt
gene along with the rest of the corn’s genome.
Bt in action.
Because Bt corn has the gene for the Bt toxin, it
produces this protein just like any other protein in a
When an insect ingests the Bt toxin protein produced
by the corn, the Bt toxin binds to the stomach wall of
Within hours the stomach wall
is broken down by the toxin.
Is It Safe?
Bt corn was approved by the USDA for human consumption in
1995. Is it safe?
This might be a good question, given the Bt toxin kills insects by
destroying their intestinal tracts
“Delta endotoxins and VIPs produced by the currently
available events all are rapidly broken down in the stomach
and thus are not potential food allergens.” – Colorado State
i.e. your own stomach will rapidly break down the toxins before they can
Bt corn is considered generally safe a not a threat to
It is regulated by both the EPA and FDA for human and environmental
It has been used for over 15 years with no record of serious issue.
Does this mean it is safe?
Bt & Monarchs
Concern has also been raised about the
impact of Bt corn on monarch butterflies.
Research by the USDA’s Agricultural
Research Service has shown that other
than an early version of Bt Corn (which
has since been replaced), the impact on
monarchs is negligible and insignificant.
Plus, the alternative to Bt corn is the use of
chemical pesticides, which are far more harmful
Rice is one of the most widely consumed grains in the
However, rice is not a rich source of many vitamins, including
Vitamin A deficiency is a major problem in many
countries, leading to blindness and other health
Golden rice was an early attempt
to use GMOs to solve a major
nutritional problem in
Some plants naturally produce β-carotene, which
our own bodies use to produce Vitamin A
Golden rice is a genetically modified version of rice
that helps the body produce Vitamin A
through increased levels of β-carotene
Rice endosperm (the white starchy inside)
does not naturally produce β-carotene
Selective breeding therefore would not have
worked to produce a breed of rice that makes
Producing Golden Rice
Agronomy researchers identified the pathway necessary
for a plant to produce β-carotene as well as the enzyme
proteins that fulfilled this role.
A special kind of bacterium,
tumafaciens, was used to
insert β-carotene genes from
daffodils into the rice genome.
Agrobacterium can transfer DNA
between itself and plants
Galls (stem growths) on plants are
naturally caused by Agrobacterium
Using Agrobacterium, the genes for the entire β-
carotene protein pathway were inserted into the rice
The β-carotene genes also turned the white
endosperm of the rice into a
This is why it is now called
Current research is aiming to create farm animals that
are engineered to be pharmaceutical “factories”
In other words, these GM animals would produce medical substances
in their bodies the same way they produce any other kind of protein.
Most of this kind of research focuses on milk-production
as a source of the production of medical pharmaceuticals.
For example, these Argentinean
cows were engineered to produce
insulin in their milk (along with
all other milk proteins)
Ideally, diabetic patients would
not need to take insulin shots –
they’d only need to drink a glass
Genetically Modified Organisms have also been sought
for their potential benefit to the environment.
One major area of research is the use of GMOs to clean
up toxic waste sites and oil spills.
Some bacterial strains have been developed that can degrade some
compounds found in oil spills into a more neutral and less harmful
Other microbes are being engineered to break down
wastes that are not currently biodegradable (such as
plastics), or extract toxic heavy metals such as copper,
lead, and nickel.
GM organisms are currently being developed to convert
cellulose (in plant cell walls) into a easily-convertible
form for the greater production of environmentally
sustainable biofuels (such as ethanol and biodiesel).
Cellulose is the most widely abundant
organic molecule on the planet and
absorbs CO2 from the atmosphere.
If a microbe could be developed to efficiently
convert cellulose into a source of fuel, we could
eliminate our dependence of fossil fuels and
other non-renewable sources of energy.
At the same time, the effects of climate change
could be minimized by removing CO2 from the