Sort by: featured
Grows in Zones
What is a Holly Bush?
Holly Bushes are popular for their glossy leaves and berries that are often used in holiday decorations. These evergreen shrubs are widely used in the home landscape. Holly, or Ilex, is a hardy group of primarily evergreen shrubs and trees. Hollies are tough plants that require minimal maintenance. Holly berries are a main food source for many birds and other wildlife. So, you get to bird watch while you admire those colorful berries atop a deep green foliage backdrop! The varieties of Holly Bush are extremely diverse and offer plants of all shapes and sizes perfect for just about any landscape plan!
How to Prune a Holly Bush | When to Prune a Holly Bush
Most hollies can be pruned heavily or not at all. Heavy pruning is best saved for winter while light trimming can be done anytime. Remove dead or broken branches when you notice them. Trim a Holly Bush Hedge in late spring after new growth has emerged yearly to keep your hedge looking nice and tidy.
When to Plant Holly Bushes
Holly Bushes grown in mild climates can be planted any time of year. Avoid Holly Bush planting in summer in hot climates or supplement with plenty of water. Plant no later than early or mid-fall in colder climates to give your Holly plant plenty of time to establish before winter.
How to Care for a Holly Bush
Most Hollies grow in full sun or part shade and are adaptable to just about any soil. Holly Bushes should be watered well when planted and kept moist with a deep watering at least once per week for the first 2 to 3 months. Add 1 to 2 inches of mulch to help hold in moisture and protect the roots. Pine bark or pine straw are great choices for evergreen plants. Once established Hollies are drought tolerant. Fertilize your holly shrub when planting and once yearly in spring with Espoma Holly Tone.
How to Plant Holly Bushes
Start by watering your Holly Bush thoroughly in its pot. Then, dig a hole 2 times as wide and not quite as deep as the root ball is tall. Put your shrub evenly in the hole. The top of the root ball should be slightly higher than the existing soil line. Backfill with the soil you dug out. Water deeply until the water begins to pool on the surface of the ground. Water daily for the first week, 3 times per week the 2nd and 3rd week, and 1 to 2 times weekly thereafter for the first 2 to 3 months until your Holly is established.
Where to Buy Holly Bushes
For the best quality and selection, buy your Holly Bush online at PlantingTree. We ship them quickly to your home from our North Carolina nursery. PlantingTree is a family-owned online garden center that offers a huge selection of high-quality trees and plants for sale online. Scroll up to browse our current supply of Holly Bushes for sale.