As Student Growth is becoming a pivotal part of teacher evaluation, teachers need to become data experts. Baseline data, formative assessments, and artifacts and evidence will be central to measuring student learning. Standardized and district-created tests yield data that can be sorted and separated. Teachers collect daily data from students in the form of student work, exit tickets, and observation. For some great ideas for formative assessment strategies, visit this link.
So, the question is… do all of those data points paint a complete picture of who your learners are? I think not. There is so much more to know about our students beyond just test scores. What are some ways you can collect data about student interests and learning preferences?
I’ve assembled a variety of resources on the topic of Knowing Your Learners on my wiki called Dare to Differentiate. There are many tools that have been created, both low and high tech to collect information about our learners in terms of their interests and learning preferences which are customized to the age/grade level of the students. There are even multiple intelligence and learning styles surveys that can be administered to World Language students in the target language.
Two of my favorite tools were developed by a colleague. The first, “Where Does Your Intelligence Lie?,” is an Xcel worksheet on which students indicate True or False to a series of statements. Once you have the student data, you use the second tool, “Class Intelligence Profile,” where you input the two strongest intelligences for each student in a particular class. The results are then created in a chart and also in the form of a pie graph.
Many teachers with whom I have worked love this tool! They print out the pie graph for each class and keep it in their plan books. As they plan lessons for their classes, they refer to the graph to align activities they are planning with the students’ intelligences.
Another great resource I’ve found recently is called a “personality array.” You compare your personality with the characters from Winnie the Pooh.
Happy data collecting!