Cyanotis vivipara Dalzell, Hooker’s J. Bot. Kew Gard. Misc. 3: 226 (1851). (Syn: Belosynapsis vivipara (Dalzell) C.E.C.Fisch.; Dalzellia vivipara (Dalzell) Hassk.; Tonningia vivipara (Dalzell) Kuntze);
Cyanotis vivipara Dalzell submission AS15 October21: 6 images.
Here’s one interesting and uncommon epiphtic Cyanotis submission from Western Ghats.
Cyanotis vivipara Dalzell
Synonyms – Belosynapsis vivipara (Dalzell) C.E.C.Fisch.
Family – Commelinaceae
Its a epiphytic Cyanotis species found growing on large tree barks having trilocular capsule with two seeds in each locule.
Specific epithet ‘vivipara’ refers to running stem which is viviparous performing vegetative propagation.
Photographed in Shimoga district, Karnataka
In early October 2021
Belosynapsis vivipara : 2 posts by 2 authors. Attachments (2)
Belosynapsis vivipara (Dalzell) C.E.C.Fisch. ??
Yes, it is Cyanotis vivipara Dalzell, dear …, thank you very much for ID my plant,
Yes, it is Belosynapsis vivipara.
PUNE: Researchers from several institutes, including the Agharkar Research Institute here, have rediscovered a rare endangered plant species, ‘spiderwort’, after a gap of 161 years. They stumbled upon the rare plant species during a study to assess the floristic diversity of Chandoli national park in the northern Western Ghats of Maharashtra, which was recently declared a world heritage site by Unesco.
After its collection in 1851 from Parva Ghat in the state, the species was not found anywhere else in the state and was considered extinct.
The discovery, which has been published as a research paper in the Journal of Threatened Taxa, was made jointly by Shrinath Kavade, professor, Art, Commerce and Science College, Lanja in Ratnagiri; Subhash Deokule, University of Pune; P Lakshminarasimhan, Botanical Survey of India, Howrah; Prakash Diwekar, Botanical Survey of India, Western Regional Centre, Pune; and Sachin Punekar of Agharkar Research Institute. Punekar is attached to the city-based non-governmental organization, Biosphere.
Kavade said, “The species is called Belosynapsis vivipara, which was found along the backwaters of Warana river across Sahyadri range. The genus Belosynapsis is represented by five species distributed from South Asia to New Guinea. In India, however, it is represented by three species, namely, B epiphytica, B kewensis and B vivipara.”
Punekar said, “The specimens found in 1851 were from Parva Ghat, which lies at the junction of Maharashtra, Goa and Karnataka, while the latest discovery was in the northern-most extension of the northern Western Ghats of Maharashtra. The distance between the two points is sizable and a thorough study of the area lying in between could further lead to similar discoveries, which will go a long way in conserving this threatened plant species.”
The recent study found about 100 such plants growing on large tree trunks in the riparian forest patches of Male and Patharpunj villages in Chandoli national park, which forms the northern-most distribution of this vulnerable species. The plants usually grow at a higher elevation, on densely moss covered tree trunks and branches of trees in shady, semi-evergreen riparian forests.
“This species is on the verge of extinction and is equally important to biodiversity. Thus, before declaring any area as protected, certain species of the flora and fauna should be given due importance. Also, total protection should be given to the riparian forest areas of Chandoli national park for conservation of this vulnerable and endemic species. Ex-situ conservation and domestication of the species in greenhouses and gardens for future survival, besides its re-introduction in wild and similar habitats is imperative,” Punekar said.
is it possible to get this paper as reported by times of india way back in 2012….
Here is the paper in JoTT.
Wonderful. i am very happy to see this plant ‘s pictures. it seems it it grows on tree bark from the pictures in this paper. decades from Maharashtra, India
Belosynapsis vivipara (Dalzell) C.E.C. Fisch. (Commelinaceae), a vulnerable spiderwort, rediscovered after sixteen decdes from maharashtra
Kavade, S., Deokule, S., Lakshminarasimhan, P., Diwakar, P., & Punekar, S. (2012). Belosynapsis vivipara (Dalzell) C.E.C. Fisch. (Commelinaceae), a vulnerable spiderwort, rediscovered after sixteen decades from Maharashtra, India. Journal of Threatened Taxa, 4(6), 2660-2663. https://doi.org/10.11609/JoTT.o2444.2660-3
i have saved a pdf for myself
putting the citation here so our website will have it
Thank you again …