Life – owning and living with a dog can have positive effects on both physical and mental health. Studies have found that having a loyal companion will help with exercise, structure, discipline and even affection. This can provide purpose and routine for an individual’s overall well-being.
Taking your dog for regular walks is one way to get moving.
Their presence can reduce stress levels, improve moods, and create positive energy in our lives. Studies have shown that pet owners tend to suffer from less depression and anxiety than non-pet owners. This is likely due to the endorphins that are released when interacting with them.
Optimistic Health is important, accomplishing this requires the brain to release endorphins. This is a key element in improving both physical and mental health. Spending time with a canine companion has been proven to release endorphins – those feel-good hormones that help us stay positive and healthy.
Endorphins are chemicals released by the brain that reduce stress and create a feeling of happiness and contentment. They help physically by reducing pain, boosting the immune system, positive thoughts, and sleep quality. When endorphins are released they can provide an improved sense of well-being.
The pituitary gland and the hypothalamus — The hypothalamus and the pituitary gland are like orchestra conductors. Their job is to tell other endocrine glands throughout the body to make the hormones.
Endorphins –“feel-good hormones” – are peptides created in the brain that bind to the brain’s opiate receptors, reducing the perception of pain & triggering feelings of euphoria.
This class of feel-good chemicals = endocannabinoids the four main neurotransmitters:
It’s believed that these hormones provide us with positive energy!!!
Four main brain chemicals, dopamine, serotonin, oxytocin and endorphins, all play a role in how you experience happiness.
These interactions with a dog and their impact on chemicals/hormones in the brain, provide us with a range of physical and emotional activity that helps us stay alive.