You must be logged-in in order to download this resource. If you do not have an AOE account, create one now. If you already have an account, please login.Login Create Account
Great! you're all signed in. Click to download your resource.Download
Getting Started with Why and How
Why Use Sketchnotes in the Art Room? 2:26
Best Material Options 0:45
The Foundational Concepts of Sketchnotes
Drawing Body Gestures 3:17
Using Arrows and Bullet Points 3:43
Diving Deeper with Key Points
Finding Key Points 7:43
Blending in Art Concepts
Adding in the Elements and Principles of Art 2:47
Focusing on Typography 6:24
Moving Beyond Paper Notes
Sketchnotes and Assessment 3:26
Getting Started with Digital Sketchnotes 2:44
Unlock Certificate: 5 Questions
2 PD Hours
1 Explore methods for getting started with a visual library including icons, layouts, and expression.
2 Learn how to scaffold the process of sketchnoting for your students.
3 Discover how to promote student engagement through the use of sketchnoting.
Dive into the recent documentation trend of sketchnoting! Gain specific ideas to excite students with simple drawing tips, layout and formula ideas, and step-by-step methods to getting started. Discover ways to teach the elements and principles through sketchnoting as well as connecting typography. It’s everything you need to get going with this engaging note-taking method!
Connected K-12 Art Educator Framework Competencies
7. Media and Techniques
A. Selects best practices when teaching media and techniques to students
B. Scaffolds media and technique skills for students according to age and ability level
C. Values how the arts connect with other disciplines and provides opportunities to experience those connections
Host of AOEU's Everyday Art Room, Elementary Art Teacher, and PRO Facilitator
Nic Hahn, an elementary art teacher in Minnesota, and she has worked as an instructor for AOEU. She also authors the popular blog “Mini Matisse.” She enjoys sharing creative ideas and positive musings about teaching. Nic has worked with learners from preschoolers through adults and has discovered she loves teaching at all levels.
Simple Body Gesture Examples
Arrows, Icons, and Bullet Point Examples
Connector and Separator Examples
Elements of Art
Principles of Design
The Sketchnote Handbook
Improve Visual Literacy With a New Way to Take Notes
3 Inexpensive Ways to Make Your Own Sketchbooks
How to Build Confidence With a Student-Centered Drawing Libr...