There are three different types of crystal skulls spoken about in the world today: the Ancient skull, the Old skull and the Modern skull.
1) An Ancient Skull – is a crystal skull that was fashioned at least 1500-2000 years ago. Some of these crystal skulls could literally be hundreds of thousands of years old. There are only a small number of such crystal skulls known publicly.
2) An Old Skull – is a crystal skull that was created between 100 years ago to about 1000 years ago.
3) A New or Contemporary Skull – is a crystal skulls manufactured by modern carvers. They come in all shapes and sizes and are being, done primarily, by carvers in Brazil and China.
The collection of skulls that you find here, on The Sounds of Sirius online store, are contemporary crystal skulls.
Background information on the Ancient Crystal Skulls
It is believed that, thirteen crystal skulls, of apparently ancient origin, have been found or are yet to be found, in parts of Mexico, Central, and South America. This has become one of the most fascinating subjects of 20th Century archaeology, as some of the skulls are believed to be between 5,000 and 36,000 years old.
It’s believed that for the Mayans, the Aztecs and the Atlanteans, the skulls were used as a powerful tool, for healing Body Mind and Spirit. Many indigenous people of the Meso- American and American Indian cultures speak of their remarkable magical and healing properties, but nobody,absolutely knows, where they came from, or what they were used for.
Much research is currently being done on the ancient skulls that have already been found, but they seem to defy logic. Their origin is still a baffling mystery. Everything that is known about lapidary work indicates that the skulls should have been shattered, fractured, or fallen apart when carved. It would appear, that they could not possibly have been carved, by any human hand.
Some people describe the Ancient Crystal Skulls, as the computers of the ancients, believing that they contain hidden knowledge and important information. They believe that when the time comes for this ancient knowledge and wisdom to be revealed, it will help humanity pass through its current series of challenges, and take us into a Golden Age of peace and harmony.
Why work with Crystal Skulls?
There have been numerous reports from all over the world, of people having some very special experiences connected to the crystal skulls. Many people’s lives have been profoundly affected after having had an opportunity to spend time in the presence of one of the ancient crystal skulls.
And this type of phenomena is now, beginning to happen around the ‘Contemporary Crystal Skulls’ too. It could be said that the crystal skulls create a type of energy vortex, that is a catalyst for helping people to awaken to their true spiritual nature”. It seems that when one begins to work with a quartz crystal that has the shape of a human-like skull, strange phenomena can begin to occur around them.
Perhaps it is not just the fact that the crystal is shaped like a skull that is important. Perhaps, it is also the actual crystal material itself…..Crystal is sacred to many indigenous people who all seem to associate it with light. All over the world, indigenous people have said that crystal comes from the heavens.
Then, of course, there is our modern, scientific use of quartz…quartz crystal is found in just about every electronic device from televisions, to computers to telecommunication satellites. If a tiny silicon chip can have such incredible storage capacity, why would a crystal skull not be capable of storing information? It could therefore, as the Maya suggest, indeed be likened to some sort of ancient radio, or computer device, for communicating between the worlds.
Jamie Sam, a native American Indian author says this about the skulls:-
“The crystal skulls can provide us with an access point, into other dimensions, where we can begin to see our connections with all other things. The crystal skulls show us that we need to awaken to this knowledge, that we need to wake up to our connection with each other and with this Mother Earth that sustains us, and that we need to start to repair and celebrate these connections in our lives”.