Vitamin C supplements increase the amount of weight lost when dieting
Adiponectin is a hormone secreted by fat cells. Adiponectin is very important for maintaining good health because it increases our sensitivity to insulin thus decreasing the risk of diabetes. It also plays a part in preventing cardiovascular disease. Unfortunately as we gain fat-weight and become obese we release less Adiponectin with a direct inverse correlation.
In this study of 118 subjects, many of whom were overweight to obese, and who were almost 40 years of age had values of Vitamin C and Adiponectin analyzed. The heavier the person and the higher the percentage of body fat, and the larger the waist circumference the lower their level of vitamin C. In a second study obese individuals were placed on a weight loss diet low in Vitamin C for eight-weeks (only 38mg a day). They randomly were supplemented with either a Vitamin C 500mg capsule per day or placebo. Initially the level of Adiponectin was related to their Vitamin C level. During the diet period both groups lost weight and had an increased in the level of Adiponectin but the Vitamin C group lost substantially more weight. The placebo group lost from 11 to 15 pounds and the Vitamin C group lost from 13 to 16 pounds. The study was performed at Arizona State University in Mesa and is published in the July 2007 issue of the Journal of Nutrition.
Horse Chestnut Extract is a potent anti-aging ingredient
In the first part of this study Japanese scientist?s state that contraction by fibroblasts (the connective tissue and collagen cells of the body) improves cell health, regulate blood flow, and heal wounds. The scientists searched through plants and found that Horse Chestnut Seed Extract (HCSE) improves the contraction of these non-muscle cells and then applied this cellular research to 40 healthy women. They applied a gel containing 3% HCSE to the skin around the eyes 3 times a day for nine weeks. After six-weeks photo evaluation showed a significant decrease in the wrinkle scores at the corners of the eyes and in the lower eyelid skin compared to the placebo group. The study is published in the September-October 2006 issue of the Journal of Cosmetic Science.