Year 6 Slavery Tour of Lancaster
Year 6 braved the wind and rain on Monday to participate in a Lancaster Slavery Tour. Building on our learning from last term, the children explored the sights and sounds of our city and made links to our colonial past.
Bird Beak Experiment
Year 6 followed up their learning on adaptation at the Butterfly house with a cheeky chocolate experiment. We tested which beak type would be best to help survive on Hodder Island (which is filled entirely with chocolate buttons!).
Year 6 Brilliant Butterfly House Visit!!
Year 6 had a special treat this week, as we visited the Butterfly House in Williamson's Park. We met a lot of different animals as part of our Science topic on adaptation, including Drago the blue-tonged skink, Mike the bearded dragon and Raymond the tortoise...oh and not forgetting Gary the…
Year 6 Walker Art Gallery
Year 6 really enjoyed their visit to the Walker Art Gallery in Liverpool last week. We explored each of the galleries, viewing paintings from the pre-Raphaelites to post-war modernism before selecting our favourite work of art to sketch in our art books as part of a "floor…
Year 6 World Book Day '23
Year 6 really enjoyed celebrating World Book Day this year!
Wonderful costumes and a surprise guest reader with Mrs Lowe popping in to catch up with her old class at the end of the day.
Year 6 LOVE maths (well maths games!)
Year 6 had a great maths session on the day before half-term break - they spent the morning playing games and exploring with our new equipment!
Top fun and top learning!
Year 6 are Fire-safe!
Year 6 enjoyed a fire safety talk from Lancashire Fire and Rescue on the last few days of last term - ask them what they can remember from the powerpoint and talk!
Why has a camel got a hump?
Why has a camel got a hump? Why do both penguins and polar bears have webbed feet?
How can a cactus survive in the desert?
Well, if you ask Year 6 they can tell you as they explored how animals and plants can adapt to their location by making changes to their bodies and behaviours!
Off with his HEAD!!
Year 6 had an exciting History Day last week! They learnt all about the Stuarts, including how Oliver Cromwell tried to ban Christmas!
Year 6 Chinese New Year!
Year 6 really enjoyed their Chinese New Year workshop - celebrating the Year of the Rabbit!
Year 6 Leonardo da Vinci sketches
Year 6 have been busy this week in art, researching the style of Leonardo da Vinci! Don't you think they've done well?
Year 6 are Fit!
What fun Year 6 had on Tuesday as they got fit for 2023 with the Tanzii Team!