We all are familiar with the term “lawyer” refers to a person who studies and practices law. In some jurisdictions, the lawyers are known with the title “attorney.” An attorney is responsible for advising and representing its clients in the court regarding the matter, whether private or legal.
Advertising refers to communication about the lawyer or law firm’s services. The conversation is made on behalf of the law firm or lawyer/attorney. The purpose of advertising is retaining the lawyer/attorney or the law firm.
Attorney advertising refers to practices and advertising. The methods such as public relations, maintain contact with alumni, blogging, cross-selling, and client relations are included in attorney advertising. Let us talk about attorney advertising in the USA. The lawyers in the USA are bound to give a guarantee about their advertisement. Legal Service Commission in Australia is responsible for regulating the attorney advertisement.
The type of assurances the lawyers need to provide about their advertising is that the advertisement is not false, not offensive, nor prohibited by law. It is not depictive or misleading.
Historic Attorney Advertising
With the change in time, advertising and marketing is changing rapidly too. The ways of advertising which were then tangible or physical are now becoming online and intangible. The historic attorney advertising is based on the new and old means of advertising.
If we talk about attorney advertising, history began in 1977 in the USA. The advertising on the website came after 12 years of this decision. The advertising was then done by physical means like magazines, newspapers, and other print advertising.
Now with the change in time as the world is becoming more social, the attorney advertising is also becoming social. Attorneys are now advertising through social channels like YouTube, Facebook, LinkedIn, and many others.
Attorney advertising rules
If you look around, the whole world is bound by the rules. Rules tell us about the actions which we are allowed to do or not. Rules are the instructions given to regulate our behavior. Attorney advertising rules to govern or control the advertising actions of the lawyers. Lawyers can advertise their services depending on the state or area in which they are providing services.
Some states/countries allow the lawyers/attorneys to provide full services only if they are permitted by the law to provide the services in that area; otherwise, they can only advertise legal services.
Some lawyer advertising rules are discussed below.
Internet Advertising Rules
Internet advertising rules are applied to social accounts, websites, YouTube, or other channels used for advertising.
Social media advertising rules
In this era, millions of people are using social sites. Some of them use social networking sites to stay connected with friends and family, and some of them use social networking sites for advertising their services or business.
If an attorney uses social networking sites to stay connected with his friends and family, he doesn’t need to file his account for advertisement expect he is using the site for advertising his services.
Website Advertising Rules
For governing the content on your websites for advertising, rules4-7.17 and 4-7.11 are applied. However, the rule 4-7.20 states that you don’t need to file your website if you are using it to show reviews of your clients.
YouTube Advertising Rules
YouTube advertising rules are applied if an attorney uses YouTube for uploading videos to promote his services. The content is then subject to lawyer advertising, and it must be filed. On the other hand, if an attorney uses the YouTube or similar site for uploading the videos which are not relevant to law, then the YouTube channel doesn’t need to be filed.
Filing for social media advertising
Before using or reviewing any advertisement, it must be filed. Rules 4-7.19 and 4-7.20 claims that only that advertisement will get the freedom to be considered or used, which falls within one of the above rules, and the ad should be filed at least 15 days before you want to use and review it.
Filing for website advertising
A website made for attorney advertisement doesn’t need to be filed. Exceptions occur if the attorney wants to file the website advertisement, then he can do it by paying the advertisement fee.
Attorney Advertising Disclaimer
The disclaimer is a kind of statement for clearing, limiting, or specifying the obligation and rights, but in terms of uniformity, they vary. They are enforced and exercised by the parties involved in the relationship of the legal type.
Attorney Advertising Disclaimer explains to the viewers that the content or advertising on the website is a subject of copyright and paid and protects the website from any liability.
Attorney Advertising Guidelines
Following are some attorney advertising guidelines:
- An attorney should not mislead the clients about any law or fact.
- The attorney should not sponsor the misleading information.
- The attorney should avoid the communication which solicits the confidential information.
- The attorney should avoid communication with the parties which are already represented by the council.
- The attorney should behave ethically.
- An attorney should beware while providing legal advice online to the clients.
Attorney Advertising South Carolina
Attorney Advertising South Carolina applies several rules on attorneys for advertising their services and reviews. A lawyer can promote through electronic or written communication.
It can also be in recorded form. The advertisement should consist of both quality and quantity. The attorney/lawyer is responsible for the content advertised on its website or another advertising source.
Personal Injury Attorney Advertising
While advertising for the attorney, you’ll face many competitors in the market. Personal injury attorney advertising is not an easy or cheap task. It is expensive. But if you are a beginner and don’t have a big budget, then you can pursue inbound marketing.
Make yourself visible on search engines through SEO (Search Engine Optimization), provide a secure connection, launching mobile friendly and fast speed site.
Inbound marketing will result in attracting and gaining more clients than traditional marketing. In inbound marketing, you can take advantage of doing search engine optimization, content marketing, and assuring online availability. Inbound marketing will lead you to gain long time clients.