(born 1942). When Ehud Brog became an army recruit at the age of 18, he changed his name from one of European derivation to one in Hebrew. His new name, Barak, meant “lightning.” In his 35-year military career, Barak rose to the post of chief of staff, Israel’s highest rank, and became the most decorated soldier in the nation’s history. After making the transition to politics in 1995, he distinguished himself again as a strong-willed leader, and four years later he became prime minister of Israel.
Barak was born in 1942 at the coastal kibbutz Mishmar Hasharon. His parents had emigrated from Eastern Europe in 1933 and were founding members of the kibbutz. He was the oldest of four boys. As a child he was not a successful student, and he was asked to leave his high school, but he eventually completed his education and in 1976 received a bachelor’s degree in physics and mathematics from Hebrew University in Jerusalem. Two years later he earned a master’s degree in economic engineering systems from Stanford University in California.
Barak had been drafted into the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) in 1959 and took the infantry officer’s course in 1962 and a commando course given in France in 1964. In the Six-Day War in 1967 he was a reconnaissance group commander. He graduated from the armored corps commander’s course in 1968. By the Yom Kippur War in 1973 he was a tank battalion commander, and by 1974 he was administering the tank commander’s course. In 1976 Barak was intelligence chief for a rescue mission in Uganda, where more than 100 Israeli hostages were held by Palestinian guerrillas at the airport in Entebbe. The rescue mission was regarded as one of Israel’s finest antiterrorist actions.
Barak went from one achievement to the next in the army. He was a member of the elite sayeret matkal unit that handled some of the army’s most delicate missions. In 1972 he led commandos in an operation to storm a Belgian airliner hijacked to Israel, and in 1988 he organized the Tunis assassination of the terrorist mastermind Abu Jihad. Between these operations, Barak planned and carried out many others.
In 1982 Barak was promoted to major general and head of the IDF planning branch. That year he was deputy commander of Israel’s forces in Lebanon, and he led the general staff planning department from 1982 to 1983. He was director of military intelligence for the IDF from 1983 to 1986, commander of the IDF central command from 1986 to 1987, and deputy chief of staff of the IDF from 1987 to 1991. With his promotion to lieutenant general in 1991, Barak became the 14th chief of staff of the IDF. His four-year tenure in that position gave him widespread credibility and visibility as a leader.
Barak eventually moved from the military to the government as had many Israeli politicians before him. In early 1995 he retired from the army, and later that year he was named minister of the interior by then–Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin. Rabin became a mentor to Barak, treating the younger soldier as his protégé. After Rabin’s assassination later that year, Prime Minister Shimon Peres appointed Barak minister of foreign affairs. Barak was campaign manager for Peres in 1996, but the Labor party lost in a very close race. In the May 1996 elections Barak was elected to the Israeli parliament, the Knesset, as a member of the Labor party. In the party primaries on June 3, 1997, he was elected chairman of the Labor party after highly publicized internal battles among the candidates.
Barak’s victory in the 1997 elections placed him in the position to lead the opposition Labor party against the Likud party government of Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu. Labor party supporters argued that Barak’s reputation as centrist, combined with his impeccable military record, would make him the strongest challenger to the right-of-center Likud party. In the campaign leading up to the May 1999 elections, Barak ran under the coalition One Israel. He emphasized economic and other domestic issues, including education and health services, as well as relations with the Palestinians and with Syria and Lebanon. Netanyahu’s plummeting popularity in the wake of renewed Israeli-Palestinian violence during 1996 and 1997, combined with allegations of corruption within the Likud party leadership, led to an overwhelming victory for Barak. At the same time, centrist parties increased their seats in the Knesset.
As prime minister, Barak set out to revive Rabin’s efforts toward peace, which had stalled under Netanyahu. In September 1999 Barak and Palestinian leader Yasir Arafat signed a peace agreement that set guidelines for implementation of the 1998 Wye River accord, which called for Israel’s withdrawal from parts of the West Bank in return for Palestinian guarantees of security, and established a deadline of September 2000 for a permanent peace settlement. The initial momentum of Barak’s efforts soon faded, however, in the wake of several setbacks. In December 1999 Barak renewed negotiations with Syria after a nearly four-year hiatus, but talks broke down in January 2000 over the issue of control of the disputed Golan Heights area. Negotiations between Barak and Arafat stalled in February 2000, and a July summit at Camp David in Maryland ended with the two sides deadlocked over the future of Jerusalem.
While seeking to revive the peace process, Barak saw his political support erode. He lost his parliamentary majority in July 2000 when three conservative parties opposed to his meeting with Arafat left his coalition. His grip on power became more tenuous during a new round of Israeli-Palestinian clashes sparked by hard-line Likud party leader Ariel Sharon’s September 2000 visit to a contested religious site in Jerusalem. Facing pressure from the opposition over his failure to stop the violence and for his concessions to the Palestinians, Barak resigned as prime minister in December and called for a special election to be held in February 2001. Following a campaign marked by continuing violence, Barak was decisively defeated by Sharon. Upon conceding the election, Barak also resigned as Labor party leader and gave up his seat in the Knesset.
In 2007 Barak staged a political comeback as he was reelected leader of the Labor Party. Soon after, he became defense minister and deputy prime minister, positions he also held under the Netanyahu administration that took power in March 2009.
In January 2011 Barak announced that he would leave the Labor Party and, along with four other Labor members of the Knesset, form a breakaway party, Atzmaut (“Independence”), that was expected to remain in Netanyahu’s ruling coalition. The Labor Party—a key member of the coalition—had been in the grips of a struggle: members who were critical of the government’s handling of the peace process pushed for the party to leave the coalition, while the Barak-led faction was generally supportive of the Netanyahu government. Barak’s realignment was seen as a boost for the ruling coalition since it created a more stable, albeit smaller, majority, insulated from the threats of critics in the Labor Party.