How Protecting Oneself from Cyberbullying
How it works
Cyber bullying is in our society today and it’s affecting teenagers. Some of the affects are seeing on the news, stories on social media and things happen at different schools around the country. Cyber bullying is everywhere and victims are categorized by their behavior, people that bully have certain characteristic and this need to be stopped. I will be talking about how to prevent cyber bullying, how the parents can help to stop cyber bullying, signs of cyber bullying and last thing I will talk about is how to prevent cyber bullying from social media.
Their ways to prevent cyber bullying is by talking to someone about the problem. Every psychologist will tell you that the best way to help your child or student is to have a conversation first (Fitzgerald, Pattie). Another reason that you can prevent bullying is by standing up for yourself making sure you can stand your own ground. Don’t ever let anyone make you feel upset and sad over something that they said about you. If the bullying keep getting bad go tell your teacher or your parent so they can do something about it. Staying off social media is a way to prevent the bullying because a lot of people same harmful things. The best thing to do is stay off social media unless you really feel like you need to get on it for important things only. If you feel you need to tell anyone else you should go to your school social worker and talk to them about the problem so that they will know everything that’s going in with you. Cyber bullying shouldn’t happen to anyone so make sure if you see bullying stop the problem or tell anyone that’s close around you. Cyber bullying prevents a lot of bad things to people and can harm their life. “Remember that the ultimate goal is to protect and restore the victim’s self respect”.
How it works
Warning signs of cyber bullying that you should know about if it happening to your child. You could know something wrong with your child by looking at them or having the feeling that you know something is going on. Many of the warning signs that cyber bullying is occurring happen to children by having anger or depression problems. Another warning sign is looking at their weight loss or them gaining weight on different areas. Make sure you always check on your child every single day even if it’s a happy day for them. Never know what’s going on in the inside of their body or how they feel in the inside. Some of the warning signs that a child may be involved in cyber bullying are suicidal thoughts or attempts and seems uneasy about going to school.( Sometimes if you’re around your child and they take their phone out their hide the screen or move from around the parent. Signs of cyber bullying are very noticeable but, just to make sure that you always know what’s going on what your child no matter what the problem is or what they’re doing. A child starts to avoid social situations, even those that were enjoyed in the past. More signs about cyber bullying is knowing that your child is distancing their self from everyone and just liking to start being lonely.
Parent can prevent cyber bullying by teaching their child appropriate online behavior and what things to say while on social media. Make sure you build your trust with your child and that you don’t blame them for the cyber bullying. Don’t ever think that your child is lying to you about anything. Make sure you talk to your child regular and not in a moody way because they’re going to think something is wrong or you might be blaming them for the problem that’s going on. If they are being bullied, be supportive and understanding. “Find out how long the bullying has been going on and ensure that you’ll work together to find a solution”. The parents can also go talk to their child teacher and tell them what’s going on. If the bullying gets bad and the teachers and social workers doesn’t do anything than that’s when you go to the school board and tell them what’s going on. Always make your child feel happy and never down about the situation. More ways parents can help prevent the cyber bullying by watching their child on social media and don’t yell at your child because of the problem. Make sure you just have a nice talk with your child so, that you can know everything that’s going on from what’s happening at school to social media. After you hear everything from your child brings it to the school so they can be aware of what’s happening to the child.
There are a lot of ways to solve cyber bullying on social media. Here is one way you can solve it by watching your child while on different types of websites and making sure nothing is being said about your child. Make sure your child don’t response back to the harmful things that are being said or you can just scroll pass it. Another way to prevent the bullying by going talk to your school guidance counselors about the problem and the harmful things that are being said towards you. If the incident gets very bad you should get law enforcement and tell them that you did everything to stop it. When the law enforcement get involved make sure you say that your child was being bullied on social media accounts and at school. I think the best thing for students that are being bullied is to stay off social media because it can only get worse. It’s better to stop the bullying off social media because the child will feel more depress about because a lot of people can see it and they just don’t know what to do about it. Social media is the top reason why cyber bullying gets out of hand. Cyber bullying happens on social media everyday just because certain people don’t like another person. I think we should put a stop to cyber bullying on social media because teenagers are killing their self, stop going to school, and just attempting to do crazy things. “In 2013, for example, a spate of suicides was linked to the social network Ask.fm, where users can ask each other questions anonymously”. One more thing I wanted say is parents watch the sites. You will never know what your child is going through if you don’t be aware or on the lookout.
In conclusion cyber bullying is everywhere in our society, victims are categorized by their behavior, people that bully have certain characteristic and this must be stopped. There are ways you could prevent cyber bullying and ways for the parents to stop the bullying. You can also find out the signs of cyber bullying and how solve the bullying on social media. Cyber bullying is really from teenagers in today’s world because it’s always a problem. Most of the teens are on social media and are saying just anything thing they want but, they think it don’t hurt anyone when they say harmful things to others. Cyber bullying is happening all over the world and no one’s knows how to put a stop to it. I wrote about cyber bullying because I think we should really put a stop to it and stop watching others get bully. The school board should know about the cyber bullying that’s happening to the children and do something about it. In today’s society people are committing suicidal and attempting to do things to their self because of getting bullied. Writing about cyber bullying made me think about the others that are getting bullied and how they feel right now. It’s sad to hear about other people stories that are on the news or on social media saying that something bad happen because someone was picking on them. Let’s stop the bullying and get alone with each other.
The deadline is too short to read someone else's essay
Cite this page
How Protecting Oneself from Cyberbullying. (2020, May 10). Retrieved from https://papersowl.com/examples/how-protecting-oneself-from-cyberbullying/