Holiday Travel presents christian tourism in India, India houses many ancient churches all over the country which reveal a fusion of European and British architecture.India has Churches of all kinds depicting different forms of Christainity. There are Syrian Churches, Catholic Churches, Protestant Churches and various others.
According to the legends St. Thomas or Doubting Thomas sailed to India from Eastern Asia in 52 AD. He spent 12 years in India, the last eight of his life in Mylapore in Chennai. Several shrines have been created in the places associated with him. Apart from this, the advent of Europeans in India from 15th century onwards led to the mass influx of Christians and subsequent development of Christianity. Some of the churches of the Colonial India are comparable to the best in the world and are as much the heritage of India as the temples of ancient India. Visit these churches and explore the fascinating world of Christianity in India. India has some unique Christian pilgrimage sites. The interesting thing about the Indian Churches is that, they reflect distinct archaeological designs. Here one can see Churches in British style, Portuguese style, French style and of late many Churches according to Indian style were also constructed.
The major churches in India are:
Goa on India's west coast was once a Portuguese enclave. The legacy of Christianity and of the Gothic architectural style popular in Portugal during previous centuries, can still be seen in the churches of Goa toda. Old Goa Churches: The holy Basilica of Bom Jesus, houses the mortal remains of St. Francis Xavier. It is a famous pilgrimage center among Roman Catholics. Other well-known churches are the Convent and Church of St. Francis of Assisi, Church of St. Cajetan, Church of St. Augustine Ruins, Church and Convent of St. Monica, Church of Our Lady of Rosary, Chapel of St. Anthony and Chapel of St. Catherine.
Panajim: Panaji Goa's capital has many renowned Churches and buildings constructed in Gothic style, these are Lady of Immaculate Conception, the Chapel of St. Sebastian and the statue of Abbe Faria
Churches in Himachal Pradesh: Christ Church and St Michael's Cathedral, The Catholic Church of St. Francis, St. John's Church-In-Wilderness, and the Christ Church
South India Churches
Christianity has taken its root in India in the first century itself. i.e., three centuries before it gained official recognition in Europe or became the established religion in Rome. St Thomas, one of the Apostles of Jesus Christ landed in Muzris (Kodungallur), the famous ancient ports on the West Coast of India during the year 52 A.D. He founded seven Churches on the Kerala coast in Palayur, Kodungallur (Maliankara), Quilon (Kollam), Kokkamangalam, Niranam, Nilakkal, and Paravoor. The present St Thomas Archdiocesan Shrine, Palayur is believed to be the first Christian Church established on the Indian soil.
Kerala Churches : Tthe Malayatoor Church, Valiya Palli Church, Santa Cruz Basilica and St. Francis Church.
Tamil Nadu Churches: Christ The King Church, Kandal Cross Shrine, Luz Church, Manappad Church, Santhome Cathedral Basilica, St. Andrew's Church, St. Mary's Church In The Fort, St. Thomas Mount and Velankanni Church.
North India Churches
Delhi Churches worth visiting are the Church of the Sacred Heart and the Cathedral Church of the Redemption, The Roman Catholic Church Sardhana, in Shimla Christ Church & St. Michael's Cathedral, St. Joseph's Roman Catholic Church Gorakhpur and Kanpur Memorial Church in U.P.