Cinnamon is well known for its blood-sugar-lowering properties.
Apart from the beneficial effects on insulin resistance, cinnamon can lower blood sugar through several other mechanisms.
First, cinnamon has been shown to decrease the amount of sugar that enters your bloodstream after a meal.
It does this by interfering with numerous digestive enzymes, which slows the breakdown of carbohydrates in your digestive tract.
Second, a compound in cinnamon may mimic the effects of insulin to improve the uptake of sugar into the cells.
Numerous human studies have confirmed the beneficial effects of cinnamon, showing that it can lower fasting blood sugar levels and improve hemoglobin A1c, a marker of long-term blood sugar control.
The effective dose is typically 1–6 g, or around 0.5–2 tsp. of cinnamon per day.
May have beneficial effects on neurodegenerative diseases
Neurodegenerative diseases are characterized by progressive loss of the structure or function of nerve cells.
Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s disease are two of the most common types.
Certain compounds found in cinnamon appear to inhibit the buildup of a protein called tau in the brain, which is one of the hallmarks of Alzheimer’s disease.
In a 2014 study in mice with Parkinson’s disease, cinnamon helped protect neurons, normalized neurotransmitter levels, and improved motor function.
However, these effects need to be studied further in humans.
Cinnamon may protect against cancer
Cinnamon has been widely studied for its potential use in cancer prevention and treatment.
Overall, the evidence is limited to test-tube and animal studies, which suggest that cinnamon extracts may protect against cancer.
It acts by reducing the growth of cancer cells and the formation of blood vessels in tumors and appears to be toxic to cancer cells, causing cell death.
One study in mice with ovarian cancer found that cinnamaldehyde could block the expression of certain proteins involved in cancer growth.
These findings were supported by test-tube experiments, which showed that cinnamaldehyde could reduce the growth and spread of ovarian cancer cells.
May prevent bacterial and fungal infections
Cinnamaldehyde, one of the main active components of cinnamon, may be beneficial against various kinds of infection.
Test-tube studies suggest that cinnamon oil could help kill certain fungi that cause respiratory tract infections.
It may also inhibit the growth of certain bacteria, including Listeria and Salmonella.
Plus, the antimicrobial effects of cinnamon may also help prevent tooth decay and reduce bad breath.
May have anti-viral properties
Some research suggests that cinnamon may help protect against certain viruses.
For example, cinnamon extracted from Cassia varieties is thought to be beneficial against HIV-1, the most common strain of HIV in humans.
Other studies suggest that cinnamon could also protect against other viruses, including influenza and Dengue, a viral infection transmitted by mosquitoes.
Still, additional human trials are needed to confirm these effects.
Cinnamon is a versatile spice that is associated with a long list of health benefits.
Thanks to the many beneficial compounds it contains, it may help lower blood sugar levels, reduce heart disease risk factors, and reduce inflammation.