Mathematics is one of the most fundamental things that we begin learning early in life. Kids begin to discover and understand things around them by using Mathematics before even learning how to sit. The way we train and enhance our maths skills becomes significantly effective in our academic future and increases our chances of success. This is why understanding the importance of learning mathematics for kids and discovering ways to improve their skills becomes important, especially for parents.
Importance of Mathematics for kids
Learning Maths could be similar to building a pyramid. You will need to build a good foundation to build the perfect shape. Maths is not just about complex calculations and complicated algorithms. The reason why grown-up kids find Maths to be difficult or complex is that their foundation is not as strong. They might not have received proper Maths education during their childhood, hence missing out on the opportunity to build a strong base.
Lack of Maths knowledge may result in affecting cognitive development among kids. Children who have acquired strong mathematical education are able to make sense of life and create cause-and-effect relationships with greater ease in their adulthood. The fact that important life skills directly increase corresponding to one’s Maths skills makes it clear that learning mathematics in early childhood will have a direct effect on their future development and success. It helps kids understand the world in a better way and procure mental discipline. It also encourages logical reasoning, creativity and critical thinking, abstract or spatial thinking, problem-solving and effective communication skills.
Due to the importance of Maths in life, parents have a huge role to play in the development of their kid’s mathematical and future potential. But Maths isn’t the favourite subject for many kids in schools and can be a little tricky sometimes. Therefore, let’s dive into a few ways through which you can improve your kid’s Maths skills, all from the comfort of your home.
● Involve kids in cooking activities
Learning mathematics alone can be overwhelming. But there are several ways to make Maths fun. Cooking and baking activities are not just important life skills, but also an easy way to enhance your kid’s mathematics skills. Allow them to help you with the kitchen stuff. You could involve them in reading the instructions, following recipes and weighing and measuring out ingredients. This will help them understand quantities, temperatures and units.
● Take them for grocery shopping
Getting kids involved in grocery shopping makes this ordinary activity, a fun task. This would also help them practice real-world mathematical calculations outside of the class and textbooks. You can encourage them to read food labels, compare brands and prices, budget and find the best deals. This will help them understand the concept and value of money and be more familiar with numbers and prices.
● Play Maths games at home
We have already discussed that maths is not the most fun subject. Numbers can be oppressive for some children and when not focused properly, it can get complicated. Making mathematics fun is the key to improving arithmetic and numeric skills. Games such as dominoes, chess, cards and memory games not only make maths fun for kids, but they also help you bond with them a little better and recognise their strengths and weaknesses. These games will test their maths skills without them even realizing it. It’s a win-win!
● Introduce them to real-world maths
As we know, maths problems are present everywhere in our regular lives. Turning real-life situations and scenarios into maths exercises for kids can prove to be a lot of fun. When going shopping, you can discuss prices and amounts and help them improve their mathematical thinking and calculation. You can also make them practise numbers, measurements, shapes and time through different activities.
● Stay informed about your kid’s learning process
It’s necessary to understand what area of maths your child is learning and when. Being in touch with their teachers and checking out their homework diaries and curriculum will help you stay informed about your kid’s learning process. Based on what your child is learning, you could redesign the maths activities at home. Although, it’s important not to pace up the process or make it competitive. This is about learning and also having fun.
Wrapping It Up
Summing up the article, we can say that kids learn the best during play. If children enjoy what they are doing, they will grow a deeper understanding of new concepts and ideas.
Kumon is among the largest and most-known after school programs in India specialising in nationwide after school Maths and English programs for preschool to K12 students. For more information on Kumon, visit the website.