Researchers, professors and representatives of institutions participating in a sustainable citrus project recently visited Brazil’s Fundecitrus for a progress meeting. The project is Sustainable Citrus Culture Through the Controlled Release of Antibacterial Compounds From Formulations Based on Microgels.
The project aims to develop sustainable technologies for the protection of citrus and as an alternative to copper, which is recognized as the most widely used antimicrobial agent, including in organic production. There is a growing need for sustainable methods to combat citrus diseases, such as citrus canker. The research is based on the production of bio-blocks, derived from biomass, such as chitosan, which is obtained from crustaceans (animal skeletons) and, later, will be used in the production of pesticides used in citrus growing.
The project is funded by the State of São Paulo Research Foundation and the Dutch Organization for Scientific Research, in partnership with the University of Groningen (Netherlands), Maastricht University (Netherlands), São Paulo State University, Citriculture Defense Fund (Fundecitrus), Santa Clara Agroscience and Agttec Inovação.
For Fundecitrus researcher Franklin Behlau, this is an important project with a high level of innovation both for the production of inputs and for use in orchards to control citrus canker. “What is striking about this project is the interdisciplinarity and involvement of the various links in society,” Behlau said. “It has foreign universities, national universities, innovation companies, input factories and Fundecitrus as a research and service institution for the citrus production sector. One of the high points for the approval of this project is … the generation of results and important academic information.” He added that the project “also envisages the production of an input to be produced and used by citriculture.”
In addition to attending the meeting, the group visited Fundecitrus’ research laboratories.