Cloud seeding, according to KSP magazine, is a sort of weather modification that tries to influence the amount or type of precipitation that falls by releasing substances into the air that alter the cloud's microphysical processes. It's used to either increase or avoid precipitation. Chemicals released by aircraft aid in the production of ice particles. Particles grow heavy enough to fall as precipitation when they cool.
Instruments that emit electric charges could be utilized to transport the electric charges to air molecules. Infrared laser pulses are also employed to induce the formation of seed particles from ambient sulfur dioxide and nitrogen dioxide.
This technology aids in the enhancement of precipitation, the suppression of hail, the dissipation of fog, and the reduction of lightning by altering the natural growth of clouds. In the face of scorching temperatures, water shortages, and drought, Israel has turned to cloud seeding to bring rain. This technology is used by hydroelectric corporations to increase rainfall. More runoff equals more water for power generation. It is used to clear fog from airports by converting it to precipitation.
Content created and supplied by: Giftpong123 (via Opera News )
Opera News is a free to use platform and the views and opinions expressed herein are solely those of the author and do not represent, reflect or express the views of Opera News. Any/all written content and images displayed are provided by the blogger/author, appear herein as submitted by the blogger/author and are unedited by Opera News. Opera News does not consent to nor does it condone the posting of any content that violates the rights (including the copyrights) of any third party, nor content that may malign, inter alia, any religion, ethnic group, organization, gender, company, or individual. Opera News furthermore does not condone the use of our platform for the purposes encouraging/endorsing hate speech, violation of human rights and/or utterances of a defamatory nature. If the content contained herein violates any of your rights, including those of copyright, and/or violates any the above mentioned factors, you are requested to immediately notify us using via the following email address operanews-external(at)opera.com and/or report the article using the available reporting functionality built into our Platform See More