Critique Of A Public Speech Critique Of A Public Speech Presenting a speech can have it difficulties, whether it is you not having a loud speaking voice or nervousness, you still have to have the ability to deliver a great speech to your audience. On January 20, 1961 over 49 years ago our late President John F. Kennedy presented the Inaugural Address, in Washington D. C. The weather was very cold, and it was one of the largest crowds at the Inauguration. As I am watching the speech for the very first time, multiple thoughts are coming to my head.
Here is our President –Elect presenting this speech to us about how much he is going to help change our county for the better. The beginning first words of his speech immediately grabbed my attention. “We observe today not a victory of party but a celebration of freedom—symbolizing an end as well as a beginning—signifying renewal as well as change (Kennedy, 1961). ” That was a powerful statement, and the speaker let you know from the beginning what the speech was going to be about. President Kennedy made his audience aware and kept them entertained. He made America aware of the wrong that was going on in our country at the time.
He spoke with authority is his voice with hope for change, which also gave the audience hope. When he spoke each vocal character tics went along with what he was saying. His body movements went along with his speech. When he really believed what he said he would ball his fist and shake it. He never looked down, his eyes stayed focus on his audience, and he even would turn around or to the side to acknowledge the audience over on that side. His head always was held high and the emotions or gestures he made on his face went in tune with the words for the speech.
I believed that President Kennedy spoke from his heart and that made the interacting with his audience a smooth transition, because he was there to make America to be better place to live. President Kennedy use a humor metaphor is his speech “ … But we shall always hope to find them strongly supporting their own freedom—and to remember that, in the past, those who foolishly sought power by riding the back of the tiger ended up inside. ” At first the audience was quiet, because they didn’t know if it was a joke or not, then they finally caught on and President Kennedy had a smile.
President Kennedy did a wonderful job on presenting his first Inaugural Address. I would not change anything he did but I am able to take away. He did not change the style of his voice, and when he made a statement you knew because the way he presented. He was a talented speaker, and I have learned not to be afraid to speak about what I believe in no matter who the audience. I have learned to make sure the topic fits your audience because to keep from not becoming entertained by your speech. I have also learned speak slowly and clearly so everyone will be able to understand you.
Overall when listening and looking a presidential speech you have high exceptions from that president speaking. I was very amazed at President Kennedy pointing out issues like racism, and religion among the entire world. He believed in equality and freedom and was not afraid to say that. He spoke very easily and kind hearted, in a very caring and concerned voice. Every presidential speech I have seen and watched was only president who delivered and spoke what was true, President Kennedy, Clinton and Obama.
Great changes in America came from President Kennedy, even though he was in office for only four years, he made a lot of changes to our country. Many of these changes allows me to attend colleges and Universities, also it has given all people equal rights and the ability to vote. I recommend any one to watch President J. F. Kennedy Inaugural Address it is a great speech. References Kennedy, J. (1961). John f. kennedy’s inaugural address. John F. Kennedy’s Inaugural Address, Retrieved from http://www. infoplease. com/ipa/A0878607. html