Allergies are an overreaction to a substance. As an allergy sufferer, you must pay special attention to your interactions with substances around you if you want to prevent the uncomfortable symptoms of an allergic reaction. Fortunately, many allergy sufferers continue to live normal lives. Reducing allergic reactions can be done.
Let’s talk about some tips to reduce allergic reactions and where you can go in Will County & DuPage County, IL, to manage your allergic conditions effectively.
Avoid Your Triggers
By now, you should already know what substances or activities trigger your allergies, so do your best to avoid them. You can reduce your exposure to allergens by staying indoors when the pollen count is high, using a HEPA filter in your home or office, and washing your hands after being outdoors. You can’t always avoid going out, especially if you have to go to school or work. Wear clothing that covers your arms and legs, wear a hat to cover your hair and a mask that filters out pollen and other allergens. If you are allergic to animals, try to keep them out of your home or at least away from areas where you spend a lot of time. When it comes to food allergies, avoid eating anything that contains your allergen, and be sure to read labels carefully.
Take Allergy Medication
If you have severe allergies, take prescribed medication if you anticipate uncontrolled exposure to an allergen to prevent a reaction from occurring. It’s always a good idea to keep your allergy medication handy, even if you’re not currently experiencing any symptoms. You never know when an allergy attack might strike, and it’s better to be safe than sorry.
Be Prepared and Have a Plan
And this is especially true if you have severe food allergies – have an emergency action plan in case of an unexpected allergic reaction. Epinephrine is not just used to treat severe allergic reactions, it can also stop the progression of anaphylaxis, which is a life-threatening reaction to an allergen. Learn how to use your EpiPen so you can give your body the medication it needs during a reaction.
See an Allergist
If you are not satisfied with your current allergy treatment plan or would like to find out what other allergy treatment options are to improve your quality of life, you should make an appointment with an allergist. An allergist focuses on helping improve the lives of patients with allergies. The latest allergy treatments include immunotherapy, which trains your body to respond to the allergen less and less.
Allergists in Will County & DuPage County, IL
Our allergy doctors at Oak Brook Allergists can help reduce your allergic reactions through our tailored treatments. We treat the full range of allergies, from allergic rhinitis and skin to food allergies. We also treat all types of asthma, such as exercise-induced asthma or adult-onset asthma. Our goal is to give you the best options that will allow you to live your life unimpeded by your allergies.
To schedule an appointment with one of our allergists, call our office today at (630) 574-0460 or use our convenient online request form.