The adventure of reaching the village of Wujmah, which is hidden among the Hajar Mountains, requires tracing the mountain path that passes through several small villages.
The journey of ascent and descent begins on the winding mountain path between the orchards of agricultural villages. The journey begins with an exploration of archaeological sites, including ancient tombs and mud and stone dwellings.
Studies estimate that these sites date back to approximately 3,000 BC. These archaeological sites still bear witness to the presence of ancient human settlements high in the mountains before reaching the beautiful oasis of the village.
Although this mountain path requires a strong will and high physical fitness, the beauty of the site with its terrain and natural resources encourages explorers to continue the exploration journey until reaching the last point, as, at the end of the mountain path, the visitor is surprised by the view of ancient geological formations.
On the edge of the geological formations, the villagers hang some pottery vessels that collect drinking water from mountainous heights of more than 1,000 metres. Tourists, birds, butterflies and all kinds of wildlife that reside in this area benefit from the water collected in these pots.
The residents of the village mention that many types of wildlife live among the heights of the mountains; among these animals are Arabian Tahr, foxes, deers and others. These animals can be seen in their natural habitats at all times, and the number of these animals has increased in recent years due to the implementation of the system of natural reserves and tightening control by the environmental authorities in the Sultanate of Oman.
"These animals represent the natural heritage of the residents of the village. We have been watching them for decades, and we feel joy when their numbers increase after the intensification of awareness programmes and the improvement of control tools over the various elements of nature”, an environmentalist told Observer.
On the same mountain path, there are also many aflaj and water basins which were constructed by locals long ago. They are still the main source of freshwater for the residents of this mountain village.
The village is famous for the production of natural honey, as the residents of the village inherited this profession from their fathers and grandfathers, and they are still creative in producing honey in great abundance.
"The density of trees and vegetation, the gentleness of the atmosphere and the availability of water are basic factors that help us to continue working in beekeeping, and therefore this village is distinguished by the production of high-quality honey, and we market it in various local markets. Demands for honey are increasing, especially in the winter season, as honey enters the Components of daily food dishes in the villages of the Hajar Mountains during this season in particular”, Al Abri explained.
Many tourists visit this village to learn about its natural and geological resources. The tourists seek to develop the mountain path and put up guide signs to help the visitor reach the archaeological sites easily. The development of the infrastructure for this site is also very important, as the site lacks restrooms and other facilities.
TEXT& PHOTOS BY YAHYA AL SALMANI