A bollard is a vertical post that is usually between two and four feet in height. The diameter can be as little as eight inches or as much as 36 inches. To function as desired, bollards must be selected wisely and installed correctly. If you are considering bollards for your property, you can count on the experts at Marathon Solutions Group for help.
What Is the Purpose of Bollards?
For centuries, wooden posts were affixed to docks and quays for mooring boats. The earliest use of the word bollard to describe a mooring post was in a dictionary published in 1844. Since then, bollards have become increasingly popular for other applications.
1. Sign bollards can be used to mount the signs that indicate reserved parking spaces, no-parking areas, or time-limited parking spaces. Lightweight, traditional sign poles can be easily damaged or knocked down, but bollards are not as easily moved. The signs remain in their proper position so that they are visible to drivers.
2. Protective bollards can surround fire hydrants or utility boxes, or they can be used to protect the passenger shelters at bus stops. Protective bollards are sometimes used by retailers and restaurants to prevent drivers from intentionally or accidentally crashing their vehicles into the walls or doors of the building. Bollards can also be used in parking lots to prevent vehicles from driving onto the sidewalk or into light poles, and they often form the supports for a cart corral. In many major cities, you will frequently find bollards have been installed to create a pedestrian refuge in the middle of a busy thoroughfare.
3. Security bollards became increasingly common during the last decade of the 20th century. Private business and government agencies may use bollards to prevent vehicle-ramming attacks of buildings or to protect people in parks, courtyards, or other open spaces. They can also be used to protect loading docks, prevent vehicles from entering playgrounds or sports fields, protect guard shacks and toll booths, or enhance site monitoring and surveillance.
4. Architectural bollards may be strictly decorative, but they may also serve other purposes. For example, they can serve as hitching posts for horses, provide a place for cyclists to attach their bike chains and locks, or define the borders of a walking trail.
There are additional uses for bollards that are not included above, so feel free to contact Marathon Solutions Group if you have additional questions. We are a well-respected company offering an extensive range of pavement-related services, including bollard installation, asphalt paving, parking lot maintenance, thermoplastic markings, concrete installation, asphalt and concrete repairs, parking lot striping, asphalt milling and overlays, parking lot signage, asphalt patching, marking removal, and asphalt sealcoating. Submit our online form or call our office at +1 800-879-1147 to receive a free quote.
Connect with us