Using the Internet as an important company resource has its advantages, but there are some disadvantages when dealing with cloud computing. Cloud computing involves the use of Internet host servers for distributed applications. For instance, a company uses the Internet to host a customer service application. This lets the company hire people who work from home to manage customer service calls. Before setting up your cloud computing network, follow these simple rules to avoid security breaches and risks.
User Name, Passwords and Power Users
Cloud computing makes your business applications available over the Internet, which means that all one needs is a user name and password to access the application. If a person leaves the company, the application is available from the user’s home. Make sure you have power users set up on the application to quickly disable the employee’s account. There should also be an administrator account set up, so the owner of the company or the IT manager can disable higher level employee access.
Keep Your Data Secure
For most cloud computing applications, the data is also located on the remote host. Your data is the most sensitive part of the cloud computing network. It is the bread and butter of the company. For this reason, the data should have plenty of security. For most setups, the data is hosted on a Microsoft SQL Server or MySQL database. Make sure the hosting company has a database administrator who understands the importance and design of good database security. Poor security on the database can lead to data loss and theft.
Use Encryption on Web and Database Servers
Encrypt your data between the web host and your client computers, and keep passwords and sensitive information like financial data encrypted in the database. Web host encryption is accomplished by purchasing an SSL certificate from companies such as Verisign. The certificate is installed on your host, and the certificate turns on encryption for specified web pages such as those used to access company data. Databases such as SQL Server offer encryption services for table fields.
Always Have a Recovery Plan
Disaster recovery gives you a plan to replace lost data and get the cloud computing network up and running after a hard drive crash or operating system failure. The goal of a disaster recovery plan is to minimize the amount of time the company system is down and restrict the amount of data loss. A disaster recovery plan includes a backup system, restore process layout and a map of each system component that needs reinstallation. A click at the goodcloudstorage.net will provide all the necessary information for backing up of the files. For the purpose, the internet connection of the person should be stable at the mobile phone or desktop.
These few steps help you keep the data and system secure and restrict data loss. The company data is one of the most important parts of cloud computing, and it is the most volatile in terms of security. Keep your data safe to avoid theft and loss.