9. ANTHROPOSOPHY OR ESOTERIC COSMOLOGY
Estimated Creation Year: 1913 AD
Representative Prophet: Rudolf Steiner
Main book: Cosmology, Religion
Main deity: God
Headquarters / Capital in the world: Unknown
Number of faithful around the world: Unknown
Main exponents: Rudolf Steiner
Rudolf Steiner is an enigma and, in many ways, very difficult to tackle. His life and work defy conventional categories, and the vastness of it cuts across numerous specialties. The 380 volumes of his published writings and lectures constitute an imposing edifice that turns out not to be particularly accessible to today's readers. Completely overlooked by most mainstream stories, however, it had a profound and continuing influence on today's world. This influence came from an almost limitless creativity that manifested itself in multiple domains, from agriculture to zoology, and including architecture, painting, education, economics, philosophy, cosmology, poetry, dramaturgy, history, comparative religion, biblical exegesis, medicine, physiology, etc. hermetic exegesis, dramaturgy, design and stained glass. He even invented a completely new art form, eurythmy, an art in motion that expresses sound in gesture and has several thousand practitioners around the world today. If ever there was a good subject for the study of creativity in individuals, it was Rudolf Steiner.
This creativity of Steiner was largely the result of his own special talent. But it could only manifest itself when the cultural context opened a space for it. Regardless of the profound ideas about human nature that may have existed in his head prior to 1900, there was no public for them, and his production was limited to philosophical works and literary reviews. But when he found enthusiastic listeners among the Theosophists in Berlin, a new avenue of expression was opened for him, and he began to speak on questions about which he had been silent until then. A small core of early followers gave him space to lecture on occult topics and also recorded his production so that we have a historical record to evaluate it. But the theosophical audience was itself limiting, since they wanted to hear theory, but many had no interest in art. Since Steiner wanted to transform Theosophy into something practical, he introduced the art, alienating several of his early followers. However, he maintained a considerable following, so he charted his own course independently of the Theosophical Society. This gave him room to be productive in the traditional creative arts, but in order for his ideas to have room to transform the practical world, the external circumstances had to be right again.
Brief description of Anthroposophy:
“Anthroposophy cannot find its way into the world through ordinary agitation or propaganda, no matter how well-intentioned. Agitation kills true anthroposophy. Anthroposophy must advance because the Spirit prompts it to advance. You must show your life because life cannot fail to reveal itself in existence. But it should never impose its existence on people. Always waiting for those who want to come, he must be far from any restriction, even the restriction of persuasion ”. - Rudolf Steiner. The life, nature and cultivation of anthroposophy. Rudolf Steiner Press: London, 1963. Page 17.
“Above all, you have to know what the true standard and content of Anthroposophy should be. It does not consist of a sum of opinions that the "anthroposophists" should entertain. Among anthroposophists it should never be said: "We believe this," "We reject that." Such an arrangement may arise naturally as a result of our anthroposophic study, but it can never be presented as an anthroposophic "program." The correct attitude can only be: 'Anthroposophy is there. It has been acquired through persistent effort. I am here to represent you, so that what is acquired in this way is made known to the world. It is still very little felt in anthroposophical circles the difference, in fact, exists between day and night between these two standards! - Rudolf Steiner. The life, nature and cultivation of anthroposophy. Rudolf Steiner Press: London, 1963. Page 52.
To see some of Rudolf Steiner's work, we suggest visiting:
I THE BIRTH OF THE INTELLECT AND THE MISSION OF CHRISTIANITY Paris 25th May, 1906
II THE MISSION OF MANICHEISM Paris 26th May, 1906
III GOD, MAN, NATURE Paris 27th May, 1906
IV INVOLUTION AND EVOLUTION Paris 28th May, 1906
V YOGA IN EAST AND WEST Paris 29th May, 1906
VI YOGA IN EAST AND WEST (conclusion) Paris 30th May, 1906
VII OCCULTISM AND THE GOSPEL OF ST. JOHN Paris 31st May, 1906
VIII THE CHRISTIAN MYSTERY Paris 1st June, 1906
IX THE ASTRAL WORLD Paris 2nd June, 1906
X THE ASTRAL WORLD (conclusion) Paris 6th June, 1906
XI THE DEVACHANIC WORLD Paris 7th June, 1906
XII THE DEVACHANIC WORLD (conclusion) Paris 8th June, 1906
XIII THE LOGOS AND THE WORLD Paris 9th June, 1906
XIV THE LOGOS AND MAN Paris 10th June, 1906
XV EVOLUTION OF PLANETS AND EARTH Paris 11th June, 1906
XVI EARTHQUAKES, VOLCANOES AND THE WILL OF MAN Paris 12th June, 1906
XVII REDEMPTION AND LIBERATION Paris 13th June, 1906
XVIII THE APOCALYPSE Paris 14th June, 1906
Brief description of Waldorf Education:
Vague and general phrases ("the harmonious development of all the powers and talents of the child", etc.) cannot provide a basis for a true art of education. This art of education can only be built on a real knowledge of the human being. It is not that these phrases are incorrect, but that deep down they are useless, as I would say of a machine that all its parts must be brought into action harmoniously. To make a machine work you have to approach it, not with phrases and truisms, but with real and detailed knowledge. Therefore, for the art of education it is the knowledge of the members of the human being and its various developments that is important. Of course, there is no doubt that the truly realistic art of education, as outlined here, will only slowly make its way. This resides, in fact, in the whole mentality of our age, which for a long time will continue to regard the facts of the spiritual world as the fumes of a maddened imagination, while vapors and totally unreal phrases are needed for the result of a realistic way of think. thinking. - Rudolf Steiner. The education of the child in the light of anthroposophy. London: Rudolf Steiner Press, 1965.
To see more about Waldorf education we suggest visiting:
Steiner's complete lectures on Education in English translation, PDF format.