THE USE OF DIDACTIC GAMES IN THE UKRAINIAN LANGUAGE CLASSES UNDER PROFESSIONAL GUIDANCE AS A MEANS OF IMPROVING SPEAKING CULTURE OF FUTURE BACHELORS
Keywords:student of higher education, Ukrainian language for professional direction, didactic games, speech culture, interesting exercises
The question of the formation of the language personality of a student of higher education and increasing interest in learning has always been the focus of psychological-pedagogical and methodical research and remains extremely relevant to this day. The issue of speech culture, which is formed in classes on educational components of the humanitarian direction, among which the leading role belongs to language disciplines, in particular, classes on the Ukrainian language in a professional direction, is of considerable importance for the implementation of professional activities and for solving organizational issues.The article is devoted to the issue of finding such forms and methods of work in Ukrainian language classes for students of higher education institutions, which would promote the activation of students' educational activities, increase their interest in learning, and improve speech culture. The purpose of the article is to highlight the issue of the use of didactic games in Ukrainian language classes for professional orientation as a means of forming the rhetorical competence of future bachelors and improving the level of their speech culture. The article clarifies the role of interesting exercises in the formation of linguistic, communicative, and rhetorical competence of the student of education, and describes the method of organizing classes using didactic games, which will contribute to the development of non-standard thinking, and creativity of students. Features of the use of didactic games in classes are described and concrete examples are given. The results of the study showed that classes using didactic games contribute to the development of the student's creative personality, improvement of the communicative qualities of his speech, improvement of general culture, formation of moral factors, and indifference to the history and language of his native people. The methodical principles of using didactic games in Ukrainian language classes for professional orientation are scientifically substantiated; the method of using such exercises while working on language material was developed and checked, and the proposed method was checked, which contributes to the students' conscious assimilation of the educational material. It can be implemented in the educational process and used to improve programs and textbooks. Prospects for further research in this field are outlined.
Ampilohova, L. (2004). Interaktyvni tekhnolohii [Interactive technologies]. Zavuch – Head teacher, № 30, 13-15 [in Ukrainian].
Vasylieva, N. (2005). Zastosuvannia interaktyvnykh metodiv navchannia na urokakh predmetiv humanitarnoho tsyklu [Application of interactive teaching methods in lessons of subjects of the humanitarian cycle]. Upravlinnia shkoloiu – School management, № 34, 18-22 [in Ukrainian].
Oryshchyn, R. (Ed.). (2006). Interaktyvni tekhnolohii na urokakh ukrainskoi slovesnosti [Interactive technologies in Ukrainian literature lessons]. Ternopil: Pidruchnyky i posibnyky, 106 [in Ukrainian].
Pometun, O., Pyrozhenko, L. (2002). Interaktyvni tekhnolohii navchannia: teoriia, praktyka, dosvid [Interactive learning technologies: theory, practice, experience]: metodychnyi posibnyk. Kyiv: "A.S.K.", 136 [in Ukrainian].
Karaman, S.O. (2000). Metodyka navchannia ukrainskoi movy v himnazii [Methods of teaching the Ukrainian language in the gymnasium]. Kyiv: Lenvit, 272 [in Ukrainian].
Kohut, O.I. (2005). Interaktyvni tekhnolohii navchannia [Interactive learning technologies]. Ternopil: Aston, 203 [in Ukrainian].
Piekhota, O.M., Kiktenko, A.Z., Liubarska, O.M. & in. (2001). Osvitni tekhnolohii [Educational technologies]: navch.-metod. posibn. Kyiv: "A.S.K.", 256 [in Ukrainian].
Popova, O. (2005). Dilova hra u roboti nad movlennievoiu kulturoiu studentiv (do problemy intehratsii kursiv) [Business game in working on students' speech culture (to the problem of course integration)]. Ukrainska mova i literatura u shkoli – Ukrainian language and literature at school, № 4, 50-52 [in Ukrainian].
Tilniak, N.V. (2014) Metodychni aspekty proektuvannia komunikatyvnoi vzaiemodii studentiv tekhnichnykh spetsialnostei u protsesi vyvchennia ukrainskoi movy za profesiinym spriamuvanniam [Methodical aspects of designing communicative interaction of students of technical specialties in the process of studying the Ukrainian language in a professional direction]. Pedahohika vyshchoi ta serednoi shkoly – Higher and secondary school pedagogy: zb. nauk. prats, vyp. 40. Kryvyi Rih, 103-108 [in Ukrainian].
Shevtsova, L.S. (2004). Metodyka zastosuvannia movlennievykh sytuatyvnykh zavdan [The method of applying speech situational tasks]: metodychnyi posibnyk. Zhytomyr, ZhDU im. I.Ia. Franka. 94 [in Ukrainian].
Shcherbyna, B.I., Volkova, O.V., & Romanenko, O.V. (2005). Interaktyvni tekhnolohii na urokakh ukrainskoi movy ta literatury [Interactive technologies in Ukrainian language and literature lessons]. Kharkiv: Vyd. hrupa "Osnova", 96 [in Ukrainian].
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License.
Authors published in this journal agree to the following terms:
a) The authors reserve the right to author their work and grant the journal the right to first publish this work under the Creative Commons Attribution License, which allows others to freely distribute the published work with a mandatory link to the authors of the original work and the first publication of the work therein magazine.
b) Authors have the right to enter into separate additional agreements regarding the non-exclusive distribution of the work in the form in which it was published by this journal (for example, posting work in an electronic repository of the institution or publishing as part of a monograph), provided that the reference to the first publication of the work is maintained therein. magazine.
c) Journal policy permits and encourages the submission of manuscripts by the authors on the Internet (for example, in repositories of institutions or on personal websites), both prior to submitting this manuscript to the editorial board and as it contributes to the emergence of productive scientific discussion, and has a positive impact on the promptness and dynamics of citing a published work (see The Effect of Open Access).