Eagle — the symbol of the strong
This is an eagle bronze statue. The eagle symbolizes freedom, strength, bravery and victory. The eagle wanders from the high altitude to find its prey, and then swoops down at the fastest speed to solve the prey in its two claws. The national seal of the Ptolemaic dynasty in ancient Egypt and the logo of the army of the Roman Empire all adopted the image of an eagle. At present, the eagle pattern is still used in the national flag or national emblem of many countries. The national emblem of the United States is the white headed sea eagle, the fish eating eagle, a specialty of the Americas, and the national bird of the United States. “
Nowadays, more and more people like to decorate their living space with animal bronze carvings. There are many categories of animal bronze carvings, including bronze lion sculpture, bronze elephant sculpture, bronze horse sculpture, and Eagle sculpture. Different sculptures represent different meanings. The eagle symbolizes freedom, strength, bravery and victory.
Nature is always enlightening to people, so is life. Many things will also enlighten people in thought. Putting an eagle animal sculpture in our work will tell us that to live a wonderful and meaningful life, we should be like them. It doesn’t matter if we linger for a long time, the key is to keep our eyes open, see our goals clearly, and then attack them quickly. It may be difficult to achieve our goals. Even so, we should learn to be like eagles and live a good life every day. Life is like this. You may not have the result you want, but you can have the process you want.
Details of eagle bronze statue
This is an eagle bronze statue with two feet on the ground. Its wings are open, showing the broad wings of the eagle. It gives people a sense of hegemony and openness. Therefore, most of the eagle’s shapes are lofty and ambitious. The treasure of the eagle lies in its inner state. It has eternal charm. Sculptors should not only consider the realistic shape, but also consider the overall shape design, which is a natural spiritual expression. Therefore, this sculpture is both perceptual and elegant, so that every detail is full of artistic flavor. The attitude of the eagle taking off also reveals the fighting spirit of momentum, courage and never giving up until the goal is reached!
This exquisite bronze Eagle statue is made by our Arturban sculpture foundry. We have rich experience in animal sculpture. The traditional wax loss method is adopted. It is not only lifelike, but also like a real Eagle standing on the ground. Its sharp mouth, claws and sharp eyes. The fine hairs on the wings are clearly visible. The color of the surface of the sculpture is thick and natural, and its beautiful image makes you unable to move your eyes.