While most people think eating healthy is a drag, it doesn't have to be! Superfoods are simply foods that are packed with nutrients, antioxidants and other goodies. On this list are some super fruits, vegetables and grains to expand your palate and making healthy eating exciting for you.
Famous for its infectious smell and robust flavor, garlic's popularity isn't without reason. Garlic has been used in cooking and medicine for centuries. Garlic can reduce cholesterol levels and hypertension levels, and it also boosts digestion. Some of the minerals inside garlic are phosphorus, iron and calcium.
Best known for being found on the shores of beaches (and on our feet), seaweed is an edible form of algae. There are three types of seaweed: brown, red and green. While seaweed does contain some vitamin A and C, it is one of the only foods to contain iodine. Iodine is essential to maintaining a healthy thyroid.
Kale is a very lean and green leaf. Super high in iron and fiber, it contains no fat. Kale is an anti-inflammatory food. It has an abundant source of vitamin K and A. It can be eaten raw in a salad or cooked and served as a substitute for collard greens.
Chia seeds are tiny seeds with few calories and many health benefits. They contain omega-3s, fiber, protein, calcium, manganese… the list could go on. The seed hails from South America, and was an important crop for the Mayas and Aztecs. Chia seeds help support bone health and lower blood pressure.
Despite having a bad historical reputation, coconuts are a multifaceted fruit. Not only do they nourish our bodies, but they beautify us as well. Coconuts can be consumed by their water, flesh, oil and milk. While historically labeled as "artery-clogging," do not be fooled by coconut oil's saturated fat status. In fact, it is one oil that helps you lose weight.
An ancient Southern American grain, quinoa fed people in Peru, Bolivia and Chile for thousands of years. Quinoa has twice the amount of protein as rice or barley. It has a nutty taste with a soft bite when cooked. As a complete protein, quinoa contains the nine essential amino acids.
The creamy fruit known as an avocado is certainly packed with flavor. Being a great source of healthy fats, the fruit also contains loads of fiber, protein and antioxidants. Avocados contain high amounts of monosaturated fats (MUFAs), which support heart and brain health.
Frozen or fresh, blueberries have a delicious flavor. Their blue color comes from a plant compound called anthocyanin. A handful of berries can help fight against heart disease and cancer. It promotes bone strength and mental health and also lowers blood pressure.
Last but not least is spinach, a dark green leaf that has various health benefits for anyone. Full of protein, fiber and antioxidants, spinach also contains chlorophyll, which is scientifically proven to be effective at blocking the carcinogenic effects of heterocyclic amines (the burnt parts of grilled meats).