Play by artists Gillie and Marc
CLICK HERE TO DONATE DIRECTLY TO WWF UK
VISIT THIS SCULPTURE AT KINGSTON UPON THAMES FROM 27 JAN
Wild Chimp Play
Luca (Italian origin meaning bringer of light)
Aiden (Irish origin meaning little fire or fiery one)
8 and 2
Play is a very important part of any animal, even us! It helps us to learn important skills, build bonds, and to have fun. Chimps are no different and they are very similar to young humans when they play. They’re so similar they would probably have a great time if they were to play together!
While the majority of play is with young chimps, adults also like some fun, often joining in to play with younger members of their community. They wrestle, chase each other, and many other fun activities. Being chased up a tree is very good practice to develop their tree climbing skills. They also play with the tools used by the older chimps, using play to learn how to use them.
Chimps also have another very human characteristic when it comes to play, they laugh. They have what is called a ‘play-pant’ and if you didn’t know any better you could easily mistake it for laughter. Whether they’re being tickled or chased it can be great fun and their face cracks a huge smile. If things get a bit scary the baby can scream and mum will come running to save the day!
HOW TO HELP
Based off real animals that Gillie and Marc met while studying, the public will be able to meet individual animals. This will help them to realise that there are apes with unique personalities, thoughts and emotions. The loss of one individual is just as devastating as losing an individual human.
With public art, more people will come into contact with these sculptures, will stop and consider them, will take a photograph, and will discuss this with their friends and family. Through this increased exposure, the message of love, family, and conservation will be spread much further than any piece of art in a gallery ever could. It will bring people into close contact and will help them to fall in love. With love comes a greater urge to want to create a change and save the great apes.
The sculpture will be aligned with the hashtags #LoveTheLast and #ChimpsAreFamily to raise unparalleled awareness about the sculpture’s cause across the globe.
To help protect the great apes you can adopt a chimp and help them via the WWF: https://www.justgiving.com/campaign/chimpsarefamily
If you are interested in buying chimpanzee related art, you will also be directly helping real chimps in the wild with 30% going to WWF to continue their fantastic work for chimpanzee conservation: Click here to browse art > https://gillieandmarc.com/collections/chimps
ABOUT GILLIE AND MARC
Gillie and Marc’s highly coveted public artworks can be found worldwide including in New York, London, Singapore, Shanghai, and Sydney. They are Archibald Prize finalists, won the Chianciano Biennale in Italy, took out the Allens People’s Choice Award in 2016 and 2018 and Kids’ Choice Award in the 2016 Sculpture by the Sea and received the Bayside Arts Festival People's Choice Award in 2019 in Sydney.
The husband-and-wife duo are on a mission to make art for a better tomorrow. They are best known for their beloved characters, Rabbitwoman and Dogman, who tell the autobiographical tale of two opposites coming together as best friends and soul mates.
Gillie and Marc are also passionate eco-warriors and have dedicated their lives to protecting nature.
Gillie grew up with the wildlife in Zambia and Marc studied chimpanzees in Tanzania as a young man. Over time, the artists developed a deep appreciation for all living things and a desire to preserve the magnificence of the natural world.
Through their art, Gillie and Marc aim to transform passive audiences into passionate advocates for animal conservation. Their mission is to use their work as a platform to continue spreading awareness about endangerment, which will ultimately lead to change and save species from extinction.
Their art has raised hundreds of thousands in donations for the many wildlife charities and causes they support through their project Love The Last.
Please follow @gillieandmarcart