AUTOMOTIVE GLASS STRUCTURE HAVING FEATURE LINES AND RELATED METHODS OF MANUFACTURE
Automotive glass structures having curves and feature lines and methods for forming the same are provided. An example method includes applying localized heat (e.g., via a laser, heating element) to a location of a substantially planar glass structure and bending the glass structure at that location (e.g., along a line of the planar glass structure) to form a feature line in the glass structure. The bending can be formed to have a radius of curvature of between 2 mm and 5 cm. Additional layers of curved or joined glass layers may further be included to form a curved multi-layer glass structure for automotive use.
The present disclosure relates to glass structures for use in automotive vehicles, and more particularly, to automotive glass structures having curved feature lines and processes for forming the same.DESCRIPTION OF RELATED ART
Passenger vehicles such as cars, trucks, or the like, typically include a curved front windshield to protect the driver and provide reduced wind resistance during use. Vehicles typically include various side and rear windows as well, including various shapes and curvatures. Processes for making such windows, and windshields in particular, typically begin with a flat sheet of glass that is cut to desired dimensions and then heated in an oven to sufficient temperatures to slightly bend or curve the glass to a desired shape. The glass may be supported on one or more sides by railings such that gravity pulls and curves the glass there between. Alternatively, the glass may be placed over a mold and heated in an oven to bend around the mold and take the shape thereof
Generally, such processes for making glass structures are limited by the amount of curvature or bending achievable with the glass. For example, typically only smooth, high radius of curvatures (e.g., radius of curvature of 1-3 meters or more), are used for automotive glass structures.SUMMARY
In some embodiments, a process for forming an automotive glass structure having one or more feature lines (or curves/bends) includes applying localized heat to one or more locations of the glass structure, whereby the glass structure bends at the location of the localized heat. In some examples, the glass structure is supported by a support tool such that as localized heat is applied gravity forces the glass structure to bend at the one or more locations (e.g., along a longitudinal line of the glass), thereby forming a feature line or bend in the glass. In some examples, additional forces may be applied to the glass structure, e.g., via a press, vacuum air suction, or the like to aid in bending or shaping of the glass structure. In some examples, a radius of curvature of the feature line or bend in the glass structure at the one or more locations is between 2 mm and 5 cm.
In another embodiment, a glass structure includes a first layer of glass having a feature line or bend in at least one location thereof. The feature line having a radius of curvature between 2 mm and 5 cm. In some examples, the glass structure is a multilayer glass structure and includes a second layer of glass including a first portion of glass and a second portion of glass, the first and second portions meeting at the feature line or bend in the first layer of glass. A polymer may be disposed between the first layer of glass and the second layer of glass.
Various other glass structures and processes are provided herein.
Embodiments of the present disclosure and their advantages are best understood by referring to the detailed description that follows. It should be appreciated that like reference numerals are used to identify like elements illustrated in one or more of the figures, wherein showings therein are for purposes of illustrating embodiments of the present disclosure and not for purposes of limiting the same.DETAILED DESCRIPTION OF THE DISCLOSURE
This application describes example techniques for forming glass structures for use in a vehicle (e.g., a car, a truck, a semi-truck, and so on) or other apparatus. Example glass structures may include exterior glass for the vehicle. As an example, a glass structure may include a windshield (e.g., a front or rear windshield). As another example, a glass structure may include a window (e.g., a passenger or driver side window). Example glass structures may also include an interior glass for the vehicle. For example, interior glass for a dash (e.g., dashboard) in the front portion of the interior of the vehicle may be formed. As another example, interior glass used for gauges, displays (e.g., electronic displays), instrument clusters, inside panels for doors, consoles, and so on, may be formed and are part of the present embodiments.
As will be described, the techniques described herein may allow for forming glass structures with aggressive curves or folds (e.g., herein also referred to as ‘feature lines’). For example, a faceted windshield with aggressive feature lines may be formed. Without being constrained by way of example, a glass structure may have a feature line with an example radius of curvature of between 2 mm and 5 cm. Thus, glass structures may be formed in shapes and configurations which were previously unavailable through conventional bending methods. In this way, the techniques described herein may provide for stronger glass structures with more aesthetic options not available with conventional automotive glass structure processes.
With respect to forming the glass structures, glass (e.g., borosilicate glass) may be locally heated to allow for aggressive feature lines where the bend in the glass may be between 5 and 120 degrees, or between 45 to 60 degrees, or for example, 30, 42, 55, 62, 68 degrees. An example of such local heating is described below with respect to
Reference will now be made in detail to specific aspects or features, examples of which are illustrated in the accompanying drawings. Like reference numerals refer to corresponding parts throughout the figures.
In this example, a tool 212, which may include a silica material (or other material with a higher melting temperature than glass), is used to selectively support the glass 200 and promote bending in localized regions, e.g., to create desired feature lines therein. In particular, tool 212 is generally formed in a shape desired for glass 200 after processing/bending. In some examples, portions of tool 212 may be movable, e.g., from a flat or planar orientation to the curved or trench shape shown. The articulated tool 212 can move as the glass softens to promote bending in selected areas. Furthermore, the tool 212 may include fewer or more areas to form additional feature lines, and may also include large radius of curvature surfaces (e.g., 1 m or more) similar to conventional molds.
In this example, localized heating 220 is applied to the glass 200, in particular, applied to locations longitudinally along glass 200 where sharp curves or feature lines are desired. Localized heat 220 can be provided via laser, heating resistors (e.g., tungsten wire, rod), flame, plasma, radiative (e.g., diode), or the like. In some examples, a CO2 laser can be used and scanned along glass 200 where the bending is desired, here along 220. Such a laser bending step can be done before the glass enters inside the oven 210, which reduces or eliminates the local stress generated by the local heating inside the oven 210. In other examples, a heating resistor, e.g., a wire or rod, can be used and the glass 200 placed there over, where the glass 200 bends around the heating resistor via gravity pull and/or with the aid of a support tool, such as tool 212.
The localized heat 220 causes regions or locations of glass 200 to reach a higher temperature (e.g., 700 degrees Celsius or greater) than the surrounding glass 200. Thus, these regions or locations can bend or curve more easily than would occur based on the heat within oven 210 alone (e.g., 650 degrees Celsius). Heating the glass 200 in a localized manner, e.g., along a narrow region, allows for bending of the glass 200 in a sharp manner, e.g., with a small radius of curvature, to form feature lines. For example, the achievable radius of curvature at the location of the localized heat 220 for typical automotive glass (e.g., via a process as shown in
In some examples, a downward force may also be applied to glass 200, for example, via air suction below the tool 212 to pull the glass 200 against the tool 212. In other examples, a press or mold may be brought down onto the glass 200 to press the glass 200 into the tool 212. In yet other examples, the tool 212 could be oriented downward, e.g., forming a convex instead of concave shape, and the glass 200 bent downward over the tool 212 to form sharp curves similar to that of
As shown in
The final structure shown in
The example shown in
The second layer of glass 400a, 400b, 400c, may additionally be used to adjust a color or visual character associated with the glass structure. For example, each of the portions 400a-400c may vary in a visual spectrum which is apparent to a viewer. In this example, the portions may appear darker or lighter to a viewer.
The examples shown in
In the illustrated embodiment, the glass layers 500a-500b may each optionally be formed according to the techniques described in
The first glass structure 602A may be, for example, the glass structure illustrated in
In some embodiments, the first glass structure and second glass structure 602A-602B may be connected via an adhesive (e.g., at feature line 604). For example, the glass structures 602A-602B may be connected as described, at least, in
While not illustrated, it may be appreciated that the vehicle 600 may include an interior glass structure. For example, the vehicle 600 may include a glass dash positioned in the front of the vehicle 600 which is formed as described herein. In this example, the glass may optionally be a single layer glass with a film (e.g., polymer film) on top. As another example, a display (e.g., a touch-sensitive electronic display) may be formed from glass as described herein. The display may advantageously be curved or extend across substantially a length of the vehicle 600 due to the enhanced forming techniques described herein.
The glass dash 702 may be formed according to the techniques described above. For example, the glass dash 702 may be formed as described in
The foregoing disclosure is not intended to limit the present disclosure to the precise forms or particular fields of use disclosed. As such, it is contemplated that various alternative embodiments and/or modification to the present disclosure, whether explicitly described or implied herein, are possible in light of the disclosure. Having thus described embodiments of the present disclosure, a person of ordinary skill in the art will recognize that changes may be made in form and detail without departing from the scope of the present disclosure.
In the foregoing specification, the disclosure has been described with reference to specific embodiments. However, as one skilled in the art will appreciate, various embodiments disclosed herein can be modified or otherwise implemented in various other ways without departing from the spirit and scope of the disclosure. Accordingly, this description is to be considered as illustrative and is for the purpose of teaching those skilled in the art the manner of making and using various embodiments of the glass structure. It is to be understood that the forms of disclosure herein shown and described are to be taken as representative embodiments. Equivalent elements, or materials may be substituted for those representatively illustrated and described herein. Moreover, certain features of the disclosure may be utilized independently of the use of other features, all as would be apparent to one skilled in the art after having the benefit of this description of the disclosure. Expressions such as “including”, “comprising”, “incorporating”, “consisting of”, “have”, “is” used to describe and claim the present disclosure are intended to be construed in a non-exclusive manner, namely allowing for items, components or elements not explicitly described also to be present. Reference to the singular is also to be construed to relate to the plural.
Additionally, numerical terms, such as, but not limited to, “first”, “second”, “third”, “primary”, “secondary”, “main” or any other ordinary and/or numerical terms, should also be taken only as identifiers, to assist the reader's understanding of the various elements, embodiments, variations and/ or modifications of the present disclosure, and may not create any limitations, particularly as to the order, or preference, of any element, embodiment, variation and/or modification relative to, or over, another element, embodiment, variation and/or modification.
It will also be appreciated that one or more of the elements depicted in the drawings/figures can also be implemented in a more separated or integrated manner, or even removed in certain cases, as is useful in accordance with a particular application.
1. A method for forming a glass structure for a vehicle, the method comprising:
- applying localized heat to first location of a substantially planar glass structure; and
- bending the glass structure at the first location, wherein a radius of curvature of the glass at the first location is between 2 mm and 5 cm.
2. The method of claim 1, wherein the first location is along a line of the planar glass structure.
3. The method of claim 1, further comprising:
- applying heat to at least a second location of the glass structure; and
- bending the glass structure at the second location.
4. The method of claim 1, wherein the planar glass structure is supported by a mold when applying the localized heat.
5. The method of claim 1, wherein the localized heat is supplied by a laser.
6. The method of claim 5, wherein the laser is scanned over the glass structure.
7. The method of claim 1, wherein the localized heat is supplied by a heating element.
8. The method of claim 1, wherein the glass structure is heated in an oven operating at least 600 degrees Celsius, and the localized heat heats the first location to at least 650 degrees Celsius.
9. A glass structure for a vehicle, comprising:
- a first layer of glass formed of a substantially planar layer of glass, the first layer of glass including at least one curved region having a radius of curvature of 2 mm to 5 cm;
- a second layer of glass formed of at least two portions of glass, wherein the two portions of glass meet at the at least one curved region; and
- a polymer disposed between the first layer of glass and the second layer of glass.
10. The structure of claim 9, wherein the at least two panes of glass are joined together by a polymer.
11. The structure of claim 9, wherein the at least two portions of glass are glass welded together.
12. The structure of claim 9, wherein the two portions of glass form an angle of between 5 degrees and 120 degrees.
13. The structure of claim 9, wherein the two portions of glass form a mitered joint.
14. A vehicle comprising:
- one or more electric motors;
- a battery pack connected to the electric motors; and
- a glass structure positioned on the vehicle, wherein the glass structure comprises a first layer of glass which has at least one feature line with a radius of curvature of 2 mm to 5 cm.
15. The vehicle of claim 14, wherein the first layer of glass is a substantially planar layer of glass, and wherein the first layer of glass includes the at least one feature line.
16. The vehicle of claim 15, wherein the glass structure further comprises:
- a second layer of glass formed of at least two portions of glass, wherein the two portions of glass meet at the at least one feature line; and
- a polymer disposed between the first layer of glass and the second layer of glass.
17. The vehicle of claim 14, wherein the glass structure comprises at least two panes of glass which are joined together by a polymer.
18. The vehicle of claim 14, wherein the glass structure comprises at least two portions of glass which are glass welded together.
19. The vehicle of claim 14, wherein the glass structure comprises two portions of glass which form an angle of between 5 degrees and 120 degrees.
20. The vehicle of claim 14, wherein the glass structure is a windshield of the vehicle or a dash positioned inside the vehicle.
Filed: Feb 4, 2021
Publication Date: Jan 19, 2023
Inventors: Christos Gougoussis (Fremont, CA), William S. Sweney (Oakland, CA), Rosemary Mottsmith (Los Angeles, CA), Michael Pilliod (Los Angeles, CA), Gregoire Hamel (Paris)
Application Number: 17/758,350