JEE is also known as the Joint Entrance Examination for an engineering degree course. In the examination hall, the student usually feels that the time is slipping out and running fast. In such a case, it seems almost impossible to attempt the exam within the specified timelines. The mental pressure and the ticking clock become the two most common important reasons for exam failure. Here we are described JEE Main Mathematics.
JEE Main come packed with fear. Students can save themselves from the exam fear by following some important points. In an engineer’s life, JEE Main 2020 is the most crucial phase. The subjects here are divided into three main categories including Mathematics, Physics, and Chemistry. Out of these, JEE Main Mathematics is the most time-consuming.
The subject is fully filled with numerical and calculations and it seems as if there is not sufficient time to even complete the section. The majority of the candidates of engineering colleges could not be able to score well due to lack of time. To overcome this problem, the first and foremost thing to do is to lay down a strong foundation in their minds. They must also know the pattern, syllabus, and weight-age of different topics. Once the candidate has understood the basic structure of this paper, he/she will be able to prepare well and do an excellent job in the paper. For this consider the following points:
Students of top engineering colleges must break down the topics to know which is the most scoring. Also, learn the weight-age of each and every topic of the JEE Main 2020 syllabus. Those sections which weigh more than three percent of the total are important. The number of questions from each topic in terms of percentage are Complex Numbers and Quadratic Equations 5-6%, Sequence and Series 6-7%, Matrices and Determinants 6-7%, Statistics and Probability 4-5%, Trigonometry 6-7%, Coordinate Geometry 10-12%, Limits, Continuity, and Differentiability 7-8%, Integral Calculus 10-12%, 3D Geometry 5-6%, Vector Algebra 3-4%.
Mathematics is not the subject to cram. Instead, it demands more practice. It is important for the candidates of the best engineering colleges to stand out of the crowd and give importance to practicing. In the Mathematics section, there are 25 questions with serious calculations. In the examination hall, calculators are not allowed. Therefore, you should sharpen your calculations by regular practice sessions. Also, you can take the help of calculation tricks recognized as Vedic mathematics. It can simplify the calculation in no time.
If students of Top B Tech Colleges in India are attempting this exam for the first time, it is a bit difficult to adapt their minds around the pattern. Solving previous year question papers makes it easy to understand the paper and thus save your time. Try and solve a lot of questions. This method will enable you to comprehend the pattern easily and know what sort of questions you would be tackling.
Remember, you will never get extra marks to solve tough questions. In order to save time and effort, try to solve easy questions first so that you can confidently score maximum marks as you can in a limited time. Save the hard questions for later and if you find time afterward, get them solved or just leave them.
NTA or National Testing Agency is the test conducting agency for JEE Main 2020 for the students of engineering colleges in India. This exam is Computer-based and students cannot use any pen-pencils except for the drawing paper. In order to make candidates well-versed with this online system, NTA has started a provision of online preparatory sessions. Students can register and take it at home on their systems. In case, any candidates who have no access to computers or laptops, they can take the tests in the examination centers of their cities.
Time is an essential factor in life and of utmost importance during the examination. Everything related to these examinations is available online. Therefore, you must wield the technology for your JEE Main exam preparation. Time will run faster for those candidates who are new to it. Nobody can deny from the fact that mathematics is a scoring subject but also it consumes a lot of time. So, you cannot devote the whole time to mathematics. You need to have a proper plan while attempting the examination. Take and retake mock tests until and unless you achieve a satisfactory level.
Do not let these exams at ease. There are only a few months left considering which you should start your preparations early. If students of B Tech colleges in Rajasthan have not started yet, there is no better time than now. They should take notes, consult teachers, take online tests, and use a lot of mock test tools. Starting early has a multitude of benefits. It ranges from knowing your weaknesses to forming an examination strategy.
JEE Main 2020 is a superior level exam but Mathematics is a subject that demands clarity. If students of Engineering Colleges in Jaipur are confused even with the ground level problems, the advanced problems would seem like a hard nut to crack. Many candidates tend to know the difficult problems but when it comes to the easiest ones, they get confused. Avoid this happening and start from scratch.
Everywhere there are ups and downs. There are strong and weak points in education as well. Mathematics is a vast domain where some topics might seem easy to the students while others are difficult. You know the topics which seem easy to you but the difficult questions require attention. You should not leave them. Instead, work hard in those areas. Go through the topics time and again until you attain a clear level of understanding.
JEE Main Mathematics 2020 can be quite daunting for the students. However, if aspirants have strictly followed these tips, their minds will be much sharper and be filled with the knowledge you have acquired. If candidates are well prepared, they will be confident. With this confidence, they will also be able to beat the anxiety and nervousness before the exam.