If an individual sustained a torn gastrocnemius muscle, it is considered as a severe injury to the rear part of the calf of the leg. When it comes to a muscle strain, the muscle fibers disengage and slightly separate. In case of a severe strain, it can tear the tissue in which any strength imparted by cohesion of the muscle fibers is lost. The symptoms of a muscle strain can develop right away or over time due to systematic overuse. Some symptoms of a torn gastrocnemius muscle such as tissue inflammation, muscle weakness and leg pain can be treated at home with first aid care and medical treatment.
You have to instruct the individual to rest. Always remember that bed rest aims to put no weight on the affected gastrocnemius muscle for the initial 48 hours. The leg pain and debilitating effect can be severe when an individual sustains a torn gastrocnemius muscle. This is why bed rest is an essential part of treatment.
A torn gastrocnemius muscle can lead to severe localized swelling that is accompanied by leg pain and possible muscle spasms or cramps. The application of an ice pack or cold compress right after an injury to the gastrocnemius muscle will help reduce the pain and inflammation. This mode of treatment is considered safe and can be used up to eight times in a day until the swelling is completely gone and to address the lingering aches and pain during the recovery period. The application of ice is one of the basic measures in a first aid training course. All you have to do is to register for training today.
Over-the-counter medications and corticosteroid injections are treatments for the inflammation caused by a torn gastrocnemius muscle. Ibuprofen is effective for moderate pain while a shot administered by a doctor would be required for cases that involve severe pain.
Using leg aids
Always remember that rest must not be prolonged and movement must be started as soon as the swelling subsides, but the calf muscles endure a great degree of stress during weight-bearing activity. Based on studies, supportive treatments are recommended to prevent further injury. The individual must wear a compression bandage on the affected muscle as well as using a cane or crutches to help relieve the stress.
Resuming exercise gradually will help ease the discomfort caused by a torn gastrocnemius. Undergoing physical therapy is recommended so that the individual will not face the risk for injury in the future. The application of hot packs before an exercise routine and stretching is required.
A torn gastrocnemius muscle can heal on its own but there are cases in which the pain and weakness can last. With this in mind, the solution is no other than surgery. The doctor would request for an MRI to help determine if surgery is required for the full recovery of the individual.