The following Outcomes studies examine the impact of IB programmes on students, teachers and schools. These studies explore programme implementation and outcomes within a variety of school contexts around the world.
Decoding the IB teacher professional: A comparative study
The objective of this study was to decode the International Baccalaureate (IB) teacher professional by identifying the characteristics of IB teachers compared to non-IB teachers, using the Teaching and Learning International Survey (TALIS).
A study on the impact of the IB's professional development
This study examines the impact of the International Baccalaureate’s (IB) professional development (PD) model, practices and services.
Middle leadership in IB continuum schools
This study aims to enhance understanding of mid-level ("middle") leadership in four International Baccalaureate (IB) continuum schools from a distributed leadership perspective.
International Baccalaureate Educator Network: Success case study
This study was designed to examine the benefits of IBEN participation as well as factors that may support or hinder successful dissemination of IBEN learnings within a school.
The international-mindedness journey
International-mindedness is an overarching construct related to intercultural understanding, global engagement and multilingualism.
Read more studies
Interim report: A study on the impact of the International Baccalaureate’s professional development (2018)
This research summary provides interim findings from an ongoing study on the impact of the International Baccalaureate’s (IB) professional development (PD) model, practices and services.
"Caring" across the International Baccalaureate continuum (2016)
This study aimed to develop a better understanding of the role of “caring” across the continuum of IB programmes in nine schools located in South-east Asia, Europe and the Middle East/North Africa.
International Baccalaureate programmes: Longer-term outcomes (2015)
This in-depth qualitative study investigated longer-term outcomes of participation in International Baccalaureate (IB) programmes on the lives of former IB students.
The International Baccalaureate continuum—Student, teacher and school outcomes (2014)
The purpose of this study is to explore and document the impact of the International Baccalaureate continuum on students, teachers and schools in five Southeast Asian countries: Cambodia, Indonesia, Singapore, Thailand and Vietnam.
The IB teacher professional: Identifying, measuring and characterizing pedagogical attributes, perspectives and beliefs (2013)
This research project aims to provide empirically-grounded insights into what constitutes the International Baccalaureate (IB) Teacher Professional, in both theory and practice.
A study of successful practices in the IB Continuum (2010)
In this study, the Hong Kong Institute for Education illuminates key strategies and practices that promote successful programme implementation and transition within full continuum IB schools.