Prunes have an enviable reputation as a laxative and it now seems they may protect you from colon cancer, too.
Researchers from Texas A&M University and the University of North Carolina have found that consuming dried plums maintains a healthy balance of bacteria within the lower colon which is associated with a lower bowel cancer risk.
Despite their unattractive brown, wrinkled appearance, prunes have one of the highest antioxidant levels of all fruit. Made by drying certain varieties of plum, of which the most popular is the d’Agen sugar plum, it takes around 3.5kg fresh plums to produce 1kg prunes.
As a result, prunes are a concentrated powerhouse of antioxidants originally present in the fresh plums. They are also an excellent source of soluble fiber, which fuels the growth of beneficial, probiotic bowel bacteria.
The latest research, presented at the September 2015 Experimental Biology conference in Boston, suggests that prunes boost the growth of one particular group of beneficial bacteria (Bacteroidetes) while, at the same time, suppressing the growth of another type (Firmicutes) associated with bowel inflammation. By promoting a healthier balance of bowel bacteria, eating prunes is associated with fewer precancerous cell changes in the colon linings.
Interestingly, the laxative action of prunes doesn’t come from its fiber, but from a substance called hydroxyphenyl isatin (once prescribed as a laxative drug) which stimulates secretion of fluid into the bowel and stimulates intestinal contraction. So, if you want the laxative action – drink prune juice or eat whole prunes; if you want the bowel cancer protection, stick to whole prunes.
We suggest another natural remedy, the jam that was made by The VA hospital in Quebec. It is also called the hospital jam because it has been tested on patients who have had a severe form of constipation. It is so effective that you can get a prescription for it.
YOU WILL NEED:
- 150 g date palm (1 cup)
• 150 g prunes (1 cup)
• 1.5 cups of boiled water (for thicker jam less)
Cut the dates and prunes into small pieces. Put them in boiling water and cook until the mixture thickens.
The resulting quantity should be 20 servings 1 tbsp. This jam is suitable for all ages.
You can eat it alone, smear on bread, add the yogurt, cereal.
Sorbitol is a type of sugar alcohol that can be consumed by diabetics because it does not require the secretion of insulin. They are processed very slowly and they reach the colon usually half-processed, therefore, leads to softer stools.
Date palm some call the healthiest fruit on the ground. They are a good source of natural fiber that is essential for a good bowel movement. Anemia, high blood pressure over, cholesterol, to cancer, all these diseases can be prevented with dates