Unit Two East or West, Home Is Best
Going Home and
Contents Task 1 Summary Writing (Going Home) Task 2 Paragraph Writing
Summary Writing (Going Home)
Task 1 Summary Writing (Going Home)
I Guidelines Gathering essential facts
1) Keep only essential (=extremely important and necessary) facts and main actions (=the events in a story, film, play, etc.). 2) Provide necessary background information (when and where the events happen, who was involved, etc.). 3) Leave out unimportant actions and descriptions. 4) Use indirect speech and straightforward language. Arrange the story in a story in chronological (time) order, that is, in the order in which the actions take place.
II Practice Activity 1 (P30-32) Practicing selecting essential facts
Point out the main idea in the following short passages. Passage Passage 2 Passage Passage 4
Activity 2 (P32-35) Summarizing
1) Read Peter Hamill’s “Going Home”, underlining facts in the story about Vingo. 2) Answer these questions which will help you find essential facts.
III Writing Assignment (1)
Write a summary of the first half of “Half a Day” (on page 17 ) in about 150 words.
Task 2 Paragraph Writing
I Guidelines 1. Paragraph unity
A unified paragraph contains only sentences that explain or support the general statement made in the topic sentence. Any sentence that does not relate to(=is not connected in some way)the main idea will not develop it.
2. How to achieve paragraph unity
a. Begin with a discussable point and express it in a topic sentence. b. Stick to the single point throughout, that is, all other sentences should be about this point. c. Prove and develop the point; don’t merely repeat it. d. Link your sentences to make your ideas easy to follow.
II Practice Activity 1 (P35-37) Practicing paragraph unity 1) Study the two passages below and point out which one is a better example of a unified paragraph. 2) Study the passages, find the topic sentence and cross out sentences that do not relate to the central idea.
2) Read the second article and answer the questions.
Activity 2 (P37-43) Reading on the subject 1) Read the first article and answer the questions. 2) Read the second article and answer the questions.
Questions to think about
Activity 3 (P44-45) Reading from your peers Questions to think about What is the main idea in each passage? How is the main idea supported in each passage? Which one do you like best? Why?
III Writing Assignment (2)
Write a paragraph in about 150 words on the topic: What does home mean to me? You are to open the paragraph with a topic sentence explaining what home means to you. Then you are to support the central idea by giving an example or examples.
Thank You !
© 2023 SlidePlayer.com Inc.
All rights reserved.