Wrap a Word Around Perspective Grid in Adobe Illustrator
In the previous tutorial, you had learned to wrap text around the perspective grid and in today’s tutorial, you will learn to Wrap a Single Word around Perspective Grid in Adobe Illustrator.
The process of today’s, wrap text illustrator tutorial is slightly different from the previous one.
Let’s begin with the tutorial- It’s easy to draw step by step.
Launch Adobe Illustrator, and create a new document. Now, select the Type Tool from the Tool Panel and type the word. Choose a word that has an odd number of letters.
Now select the text and make it an editable text by Creating Outlines and then Ungroupingthe letters.
Select the Pen Tool and draw a straight line on the middle letter.
With the help of the Selection Tool, select the letter T and the line and click on Divide in the Pathfinder Panel.
When you will click on Divide, the letter T will get divided into two parts. Later on, Ungroup the two parts of the letter T.
Select the letters from the left side to the half middle letter and group them and do the same with the remaining letters.
Select Perspective Grid Tool from the Tool Panel. The grid will appear on the artboard. Now right click on the Perspective Grid Tool in the Tool Panel and select Perspective Selection Tool.
As taught in the previous tutorial, you will see a small cube on the top left. In this cube, the blue highlighted side shows that the left side of the grid is selected.
With the help of the Perspective Selection Tool, select the Left Grid on the cube and drag the first group of letters on the Perspective Grid.
Now select the Right Grid on the cube and drag the second group of letters on the Perspective Grid.
Now, click on the small cross icon near the cube to hide the grid. Fill color in your word and this is how you can Wrap a Single Word around Perspective Grid in Adobe Illustrator.
Now, you know how to wrap text in illustrator. Practice this tutorial and share your views in the comment section. Also, share this tutorial with others.