Some couples put off having a baby for years for different reasons. But when they finally decide on starting a family, it is when they realize that getting pregnant may not come as easy as they were expecting it to be.
Conversely, newly-weds want to have babies right away and being blessed with a healthy baby nine months after. But how long does it usually take to get pregnant? Why do some women have a hard time conceiving while others seem to do it without much effort?
On the question of why some women get pregnant easily, a reproductive endocrinologist said that these situations happen.
While the majority of women trying to conceive will indeed get pregnant within a reasonable period, one in every six or seven couples will not be as fortunate. But some statistics show how long it takes for a woman to conceive and have a child.
Statistics on Getting Pregnant
According to the American Society for Reproductive Medicine (ASRM), there is a 20% chance of a woman, whose age is between 25 and 35, having sex on a regular basis, and not using any contraceptive, can get pregnant when she is fertile.
When a female reaches the age of 36, the probability of her getting pregnant become smaller. As the woman ages, the percentage lessens steadily.
From 20% at the age of 35, it goes down to eight percent on her 40th birthday and then between two and four percent when she turns 42 years old. The case is different if there are infertility issues.
Forty-five percent of women who get pregnant under the age of 37 and who have no fertility issues are said to have conceived within three months while around 60-65 percent have been pregnant within six months.
Moreover, around 85 percent have conceived within a year, and at least 93 percent of these expectant mothers conceived within eighteen months.
Conversely, at least seven percent of women who did not get pregnant in one-and-a-half years and who have normal results on their fertility evaluation tests will be able to bear a child over time.
For those who will still find it difficult to get pregnant will have to consider consulting an ob-gyn and discuss the options.
Some women have gynecological problems or conditions that can affect their chances of getting pregnant easily. These can include:
- Polycystic ovarian syndrome
- Irregular menstruation
- Inverted Uterus
- Uterine fibroids or Myoma
Women with gynecological conditions, who wish to get pregnant, and are 35 years old or older should seek consultation if they have been trying to conceive for the last six months or even earlier.
An OB-GYN or a fertility expert will do some tests on the couple: sperm count for the husband and hormonal levels for the wife. The uterus, fallopian tube, and ovaries will also be looked into.
Although the chances of getting pregnant get slimmer as a woman gets older, this does not mean women over 40 or at 45 years of age will not have babies.
So long as a female ovulates and has not reached menopause, she can still conceive and carry a baby to term. Even those who have had tubal ligation reversal can still release eggs and ovulate.
For those who have been using birth control pills and worrying about the length of time they will get pregnant once stopping the pill, it is just a matter of time.
Researchers at the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania did a comprehensive review of studies made and claimed that if delays do happen, these are only temporary. These delays will last for the first few months of trying to get pregnant.
The review also stated that other contraceptives or birth control methods, such as natural planning, IUDs, and condoms which have been stopped or reversed could cause delays in conception but by trying regularly, a woman can get pregnant within twelve months.
According to doctors, couples who want to get pregnant should consider seeing a specialist to learn about their options using treatments. The sooner they seek medical assistance, the better.
Possible Causes of Infertility
Infertility in Women
Some of the causes of the female infertility include irregular ovulation or no ovulation, blockage in the fallopian tube and abnormalities in the structure of the uterus.
These can prevent the sperm from fertilizing the egg or affect the transport and implantation of the fertilized egg on the uterine wall.
Infertility in Men
When the sperm cells of a male have a low count or the percentage of viable sperm cells is low, there is male factor infertility.
A doctor can do some tests on these factors, including the mobility of the sperm cells to rule out infertility. These can be caused by several factors and can be hormonal, genetic, behavioral and structural.
There are couples who face the challenges of infertility where doctors are unable to determine what caused this condition.
When this is the case, this means that both the man and woman have fertility issues.
Treatment Options for Infertility
1. Timed Intercourse
Considered to be the simplest way to treat infertility, this is recommended in the absence of ovulation or the woman is unable to determine when she is ovulating.
What the doctor usually does is to give her medication for ovulation or will be the one to monitor the woman’s ovulation cycle. The couple will then be given the days when they should have sexual intercourse.
2. Artificial Insemination
This method is done by injecting the viable sperm sample into the woman’s uterus via a catheter when she is ovulating.
3. In Vitro Fertilization (IVF)
With this method, mature eggs will be harvested from the ovary of the woman trying to get pregnant via a simple procedure. Eggs of the woman that have been frozen earlier can also be used.
These eggs are then fertilized in the lab for days, using the sperm of the man. Once an egg is fertilized, it will be transferred into the uterus of the woman.
Couples who have been trying to get pregnant but are finding it difficult to conceive should not give up. While it may take a while, it can happen so long as there are no fertility issues. And if there are, there are options to consider and fertility experts who can help.