Lactaid is an alternative to milk that is creamy and has the consistency of real milk. The reason Lactaid is so similar to milk is that it is made from milk with the lactose removed, which makes it safe for lactose-intolerant people to drink. Cooking with Lactaid is surprisingly straightforward. Because it is so similar to milk, it acts nearly the same way in most recipes and there are no special substitutions necessary to make the Lactaid work like milk.
Measure out the amount of Lactaid in place of the milk called for in the recipe.
Heat the milk according to recipe instructions, or leave it cold if the recipe calls for that. Do not allow Lactaid to boil. Boiling the Lactaid can scald the milk and make it taste bitter or produce scum on the top of the milk.
Add the Lactaid to the recipe at the same point in the process as regular milk would be added. Lactaid should mix with other ingredients such as flour, sauces, chocolate, soups or any other ingredients the same as milk.
Add additional thickeners to the Lactaid if necessary. Some recipes, such as pudding, require a fuller-fat milk. If your recipe calls for full-fat milk, then you may have to add a little more of a thickening agent to the recipe to retain the desired texture, as Lactaid can appear thin or watery.
How to Keep Scalloped Potatoes From ...
How to Use Evaporated Milk in Place of ...
Whole Milk Vs. Lactaid Milk
How to Cook With Almond Milk
What Happens if You Whip Condensed Milk?
How to Freeze Goat's Milk
How to Make Crab Bisque
How to Thicken Condensed Milk
How to Keep Milk From Separating in ...
How to Substitute With Dry Milk
How to Freeze Greek Yogurt
Can I Dilute Whipping Cream to Sub Milk?
Heavy Cream vs. Milk in Baking
How Do I Curdle Soy Milk With Lemon ...
How to Cook Farina in Milk
How to Make Milk Powder Non-Instant
How to Substitute Yogurt for Milk in ...
How to Make Arby's Jamocha Shake In ...
How to Fix Grainy Whipped Ganache
What Can Be Used as a Substitute for ...
Brenda Priddy has more than 10 years of crafting and design experience, as well as more than six years of professional writing experience. Her work appears in online publications such as Donna Rae at Home, Five Minutes for Going Green and Daily Mayo. Priddy also writes for Archstone Business Solutions and holds an Associate of Arts in English from McLennan Community College.