Type double circled digits in Word, Excel and more
Insert digits with double circles from ⓵ to ⓽ in Microsoft Office, Word, Excel, Outlook etc. Use them as an alternative way to number a list like this …
- Double Circled digits in different fonts
- Double circled digit symbol codes
- Quick access for commonly used symbols.
- Word, Excel, PowerPoint and Outlook
- Windows Emoji Panel
- MacOS and Office for Mac inserting characters
Double Circled digits in different fonts
Only two common Office fonts have double circled digits Segoe UI Symbol and Calibri. Here’s how the symbols look in both fonts plus the Unicode Hex value to easily find or insert them.
Double circled digit symbol codes
These are the important code numbers or values you’ll need to enter the double circled digit symbols. The hex value (e.g.
24F5) lets you insert or find each symbol quickly.
Use the Alt + X shortcut in Word for Windows, for example type
Alt + X to type ⓵
Double Circled Digit – One
Double Circled Digit – Two
Double Circled Digit – Three
Double Circled Digit – Four
Double Circled Digit – Five
Double Circled Digit – Six
Double Circled Digit – Seven
Double Circled Digit – Eight
Double Circled Digit – Nine
Quick access for commonly used symbols.
If you use a symbol often, a fast way to enter it is AutoCorrect.
Once in a document you can copy it to AutoCorrect and make your own shortcut.
Word, Excel, PowerPoint and Outlook
Go to Insert | Symbols | Symbol then type in the Hex value from the above list.
Windows Emoji Panel
The current Windows Emoji Panel (Windows 10 and 11) doesn’t have the double circled digit symbols!
MacOS and Office for Mac inserting characters
On a Mac, to enter the Male, Female or combo symbol:
- Command + Control + Spacebar shortcut to open the Character Viewer.
- Search for “ double circled ’” and the Viewer should find the symbol you need.
Despite the name Character Viewer, the Apple system tool will also insert characters into any program, including Office for Mac.
Add more interesting bullets to Word and PowerPoint lists
Add different symbols for each bullet in Word and PowerPoint
Five+ heart ❤ symbols in Word, Excel, PowerPoint and Outlook
Word’s symbol substitution, the good and the bad
About Unicode, fonts and symbol codes