A Short History and Evolution of UI Design
Have you ever wondered about the history and evolution of UI Design which is practically everywhere today? It is evident that there is no place on this Earth where people are not familiar with digitalization.
Today, computers and smartphones are predominant globally. So, to make it easy for humans to interact with objects and technology, the development and rapid evolution of UI design have become essential.
What is the UI Design?
User Interface (UI) Design is the process of building interfaces in software devices and machines like computers, home appliances, electronic devices, etc. It focuses on maximizing usability and making it easier for users to interact with these devices, enhancing user experiences.
History and Evolution of User Interface Design
1960s – 1980s
Modern microwaves were the first things that needed any help related to computing power in the late 20th century. After them, from the 1960s to 1980s, keyboards played an important part in human interaction with computers. It was in the early 1980s; we started to see rapid development in UI innovation.
It was the time when GUI(Graphical User Interface) and mouses were in trend; Steve Jobs visited the famous Xerox Parc. From here, he got the inspiration to discover the game-changer; Apple Macintosh. The game slowly started to change when big companies like IBM and Compaq followed Apple to create their own mice.
In 1985, Microsoft introduced Windows 1.0, but it wasn’t until 1992 that it began to follow others to have its own GUI in the form of Windows 3.1.
The invention of laptops and palm pilots came soon after with simplifying devices like keyboards and mice.
There were significant updates in GUI in the meantime, which served as the base for developments in Operating Systems to make computer usage easier.
The 2000s was the era of smartphones which made computer UI design the hot topic in the market again. The huge changes in the hardware side of this era are remarkable to this day which continue to be the inspiration behind all the new discoveries.
In 2007, Apple came up with the best UI design so far for handheld devices. It was a touch-screen GUI that has proven to be super functional with different features distributed as “apps”.
The early 2010s had been quite a time for everything digital going under significant renovations. Innovations like voice assistants started with Apple again as its Siri had served as an inspiration for Google Now (2012) and Amazon Alexa (2014), which are creating wonders today.
UI Design has made its way into every field like Gaming, Architecture, Engineering, etc., which need technology to stay important in this competitive world.