The discovery of liquid water on Mars may make the planet more feasible for astronauts, NASA officials said Monday.
Water is the key component for life, which leads many to speculate about the possibility of finding life on the red planet. What the discovery of water also means is it becomes more feasible for colonists to survive there.
“Water may be an important resource for future human explorers and inhabitants on Mars and may decrease the cost and increase the resilience of human activity on the red planet,” said Mary Beth Wilhelm, of NASA’s Ames Research Center in Moffett, California. “Looking forward, it’s imperative for us to understand the source of water for these features, as well as the amount.”
The benefits of water for human missions to Mars
The evidence of flowing water on Mars came from hydrated minerals called perchlorates, which naturally appear on Earth in deserts. Some types of perchlorates can be used as rocket propellant, officials said.
“In principle, you could make solid rocket fuel,” said John Grunsfeld, astronaut and associate administrator of NASA’s Science Mission Directorate, at a news conference Monday. “There are plenty of resources on Mars.”
If NASA could zero in on a source of water close to the surface, astronauts could use it to create pressurized gardens, Grunsfeld said. Because of low pressure on Mars, water boils at 10 degrees Celsius, or 50 degrees Fahrenheit, making it hard to keep liquid from evaporating.
“Certainly, you could build inflatable or small green houses with higher pressure, and if there is a lot of water on Mars, you could use that water to grow plants inside the greenhouse,” he said.
Why human missions to Mars are so appealing
NASA officials say humans are crucial for searching for life on Mars, as a human astronaut is better able to explore the environment than the rovers that exist now. Rovers struggle with steep slopes, located near many of the areas believed to have water, but traversing those areas would be trivial for humans, Grunsfeld said.
NASA wants the first humans on Mars by the late 2030s, according to Richard Zurek, chief scientist for NASA’s Mars Program Office.
“Water in any form, solid, vapor or liquid, is a potential resource for astronauts. By not having to drag that all the way from Earth, with the expense of doing that, it’s definitely worth it,” he said. “If we want to do long stays on the planet, we’re going to have to find ways to use the resources that exist there.
“The more that Mars has to offer us, the less we have to take,” he said.
Robots still have a role to play
The Mars Rover 2020 mission, as well as subsequent launches of a new orbiter and other robotic explorers, will pave the way for humans, officials said.
“It’s really a methodical approach, where we learn everything about the environment we’re going to subject humans to that we can,” said Jim Green, director of planetary science at NASA Headquarters, adding that years of studying the planet will help NASA design “better missions to leverage and utilize the types of resources available.”