St Patrick’s Day Books for Preschool
This post may contain affiliate links.
The luck of the Irish will be on your side with this amazing collection of St Patrick’s Day books for preschool featuring legends, leprechauns, and lots of luck!
Some of these picture books tell the story of St. Patrick, the Patron Saint of Ireland, and the history of St. Patrick’s Day.
The rest of the books are fiction, and they allow your kids to imagine what life would be like if leprechauns were real. Fill your book basket this month, and get your kids excited about your preschool St. Patrick’s Day activities.
St Patrick’s Day Books for Preschool
Fill your book basket with a great collection of St Patrick’s Day children’s books. Most of these books can be found at your local library or used bookstore.
If you have a hard time finding them, you can order them through my Amazon affiliate links by clicking the images below.
The Leprechaun in the Basement – It’s St. Patrick’s Day, but Michael doesn’t feel like celebrating. His dad is out of work and has no money for new baseball shoes. As Michael heads into the basement on an errand, he hears someone singing–it’s a leprechaun, complete with pot of gold!
Room for One More – A summertime adventure creates a BIG problem that leads to a surprising new friendship for the leprechauns.
Discovery in the Woods: A St. Patrick’s Day Surprise – What is all the fuss about? What could be in that deep dark hole under the tree? And what in the world has happened to Sophie’s poor nose? A St. Patrick’s Day surprise is discovered in the woods one soggy March day.
St. Patrick’s Day in the Morning – Jamie seeks a way to prove that he is not too young to march in the big St. Patrick’s Day parade.
The Story of St. Patrick’s Day – In about 200 words, this little book presents the story of Saint Patrick’s Day in a way that is simple enough for a toddler to understand.
The Story of the Leprechaun – In a faraway village lives a talented little shoemaker—who also happens to be a leprechaun. He keeps the gold that he earns from making shoes hidden away in his home, where he thinks it will be safe. But one day a greedy man named Tim spies the leprechaun’s pot of gold and tries to steal it! How can the little leprechaun outsmart Tim and make sure his pot of gold will be safe forever?
St. Patrick’s Day – The story of Patrick’s life and how the day is celebrated.
Patrick: Patron Saint of Ireland – The story of Patrick’s life, from his noble birth in Britain, to his being captured and taken to Ireland by a group of bandits, to the “dreams” that led him to convert the Irish people to the Christian faith.
Jamie O’Rourke and the Big Potato – The laziest man in all of Ireland catches a leprechaun, who offers a potato seed instead of a pot of gold for his freedom.
Fiona’s Luck – The greedy Leprechaun King has locked away all the luck in Ireland and the whole country has fallen in to despair. Through clever charades, Fiona outwits the Leprechaun King and restores luck to the land.
O’Sullivan Stew – Someone has stolen the witch of Crookhaven’s horse, and there will be no peace in the village until it is returned. So bold, brassy Kate O’Sullivan takes matters into her own hands. But instead of saving the day, she manages to land herself–and her family–in trouble with the king. So Kate sets out to save their hides the only way she knows how–with a good story.
Tim O’Toole and the Wee Folk – Tim O’Toole and his wife, Kathleen, are so poor they have not a penny or a potato between them. Even their cats are too skinny for the mice to chase! When Tim goes out to find a job, he stumbles upon “the wee folk”—a band of leprechauns who give him gifts to make his fortune. That is, if Tim can keep clear of the evil McGoon family. . . .
The Leprechaun’s Gold – In this classic Irish legend, two harpists — merry-hearted Old Pat and ill-spirited Young Tom — set off for a contest to name the finest harpist in all of Ireland. When Young Tom realizes that Old Pat is truly the better musician, he schemes to be the winner — but he doesn′t reckon with the clever trickery of a mischievous little leprechaun.
Jack and the Leprechaun – It’s St. Patrick’s Day, and Jack Mouse is visiting his cousin Sean in Ireland. Sean tells Jack about the myth of leprechauns, and Jack is determined to catch one for himself!
The Luckiest St. Patrick’s Day Ever – Share in this leprechaun family’s charming St. Patrick’s Day celebration, complete with a fun parade and an Irish feast!
There Was an Old Lady Who Swallowed a Clover – There was an Old Lady who swallowed things over and over, and now she’s come back to swallow a clover!
Happy St. Patrick’s Day, Curious George – Today is George’s lucky day—St. Patrick’s Day is here! George loves a celebration, and St. Patrick’s Day means plenty o’ music, dancing, and feasting fun! He dresses up in his festive finest, looks for leprechauns, and learns some Irish dance steps. But can George make it to the parade without causing any trouble?
That’s What Leprechauns Do – What do leprechauns do? They bury a pot of gold at the end of the rainbow, of course. But as Mrs. Bally Bunion’s ox, Miss Maude Murphy’s hen, and Old Jamie soon find out, they can’t resist having a little fun along the way. For, besides burying pots of gold, mischief is what leprechauns do!
The Night Before St. Patrick’s Day – Natasha Wing puts an Irish twist on a Christmas classic. It’s the night before St. Patrick’s Day, and Tim and Maureen are wide awake setting traps to catch a leprechaun! When they wake the next morning to the sound of their dad playing the bagpipes and the smell of their mom cooking green eggs, they’re shocked to find that they’ve actually caught a leprechaun. But will they be able to find his pot of gold?
How to Catch a Leprechaun – You’ve been planning night and day, and finally you’ve created the perfect trap! Now all you need to do is wait. Is this the year you’ll finally catch the leprechaun?
Ten Lucky Leprechauns – Count from one to ten as one little leprechaun looking for treasure magically becomes ten silly leprechaun friends at the end of the rainbow! A humorous, rhyming celebration of St. Patrick’s Day!
More St. Patrick’s Day Fun
Everything you need to create your own leprechaun traps! Includes ‘The Definitive Guide to Leprechauns and their Capture’, as well as a box full of items that can create traps to help you get your own gold!
This St. Patrick’s Day Tic Tac Toe game set is the perfect St. Patricks’s day class gift, birthday party favor, or travel game!