No problem, here are five suitable destinations for a hiking-centric vacation within the western United States along with a description of each location: 

1. Sedona, Arizona. With many highly acclaimed hiking spots like Cathedral Rock, Devil's Bridge, and Soldier's Pass, Sedona has no shortage of beautiful landscapes. If you are looking for a more unique hiking experience, consider trying a vortex or yoga hike during your stay, or perhaps finding one of Sedona's many incredible stargazing locations.
2. Joshua Tree National Park. Located in southern California, Joshua Tree has a wide variety of hiking trails, making it a perfect destination for hikers of all ability levels. If you are looking for something less difficult, consider one of the park's short, circular walks and nature trails that are accessible year-round. If you are in the mood for a challenge, try your hand at one of the multi-day treks intended for advanced hikers. Remember to check ahead if you plan to check out one of the more advanced trails because they are only open at certain times of the year.         
3. Olympic National Park. Located just outside of Seattle, Washington, Olympic National Park is a diverse and beautiful destination that spans close to a million acres. Due to its immense size, visitors are treated to a wide variety of ecosystems and terrains, so whether you prefer to hike in lush rainforests, alpine regions, rugged coastal wilderness, or immense dry areas, you will be able to find something for you here. With more than 611 miles of trails, the park has trails suitable for hikers of all skill levels. 
4. Malibu, California. If you are interested in ocean breezes and taking in beautiful coastal panoramas as you hike, look no further than Malibu in southern California as the destination for your hiking-centric vacation. With a wide variety of trails offering ocean views, Malibu is perfect for hikers of all abilities that want to explore the coastline and take in the majesty of the Pacific Ocean. 
5. Grand Canyon. One of the most famous hiking destinations not only within the western United States but on the entire planet, the Grand Canyon truly has everything you could want as a hiker. With easily accessible pathways, sightseeing routes, and numerous stops along the South Rim of the Canyon, it's not difficult to find a beautiful vista. This Arizona landmark has a wide variety of hiking trails, so whether you are interested in a casual stroll or a serious hike away from the crowds, you should be able to find just what you're looking for. 

I hope that you've found these recommendations helpful as you consider a destination for your vacation. Happy hiking!
