Zeta was a young mage who had recently graduated from Magic School. But before she could become a full-fledged wizard, she still had to go through a magical rite of passage: conquering the Cave of Wonders and discovering its secret. This was no mere test; many mages had died trying to complete this task. 

First, Zeta had to take a long boat ride to the island where the cave was located. To her dismay, the boat left as soon she as she got out, making her wonder how she would ever get back home.

Zeta stepped into the massive chamber. There were three rooms. The first room contained a series of puzzles that required her to cast spells she learned from school. She got through them all and was rewarded with a scroll with a single word on it. It was a strange word, one she didn't recognize. She tried casting a spell with it, but nothing happened.

The second room contained a series of moving floors with an endless pit below. Zeta had to use every movement spell she knew to cross it safely. There were a couple of close calls, but she managed her way across. Again, her reward was a scroll with a mysterious word on it. It was a different word this time, but still it did nothing.

The final room was filled with treasure. Diamonds, gold, priceless heirlooms, every valuable object imaginable. Just as Zeta was about to pick up a diamond, she sensed that death would befall her if she touched any of the treasure. With great effort, she walked past it all and received the third scroll containing the final word. 

Zeta returned to the main chamber. Suddenly, an orb appeared in the center. Zeta thought for a minute and realized that she had to cast a spell using the three words on the scrolls. The first two times she tried to do so, nothing happened because the order of the words wasn’t correct. The third time, though, she finally said the words in the right order and was instantly teleported to the Magic School. It was a teleportation spell! All of her friends who already passed the rite were waiting for her, ready to celebrate her success. Zeta was now a full-fledged mage and had learned a teleportation spell to boot!
