Mechanisms and Consequences of Flight Polyphenisms in an Outbreaking Bark Beetle Species
May 07, 2020 | Biology
Reading time: 1 minute
Lab.Equipment has your everyday Bio industry news fix covered. Here is today's article first published on Journal of Experimental Biology:
Kelsey L. Jones, Rahmatollah Rajabzadeh, Guncha Ishangulyyeva, Nadir Erbilgin, and Maya L. Evenden
Flight polyphenisms naturally occur as discrete or continuous traits in insects. Discrete flight polyphenisms include winged and wingless morphs, whereas continuous flight polyphenisms can take the form of short- or long-distance fliers. The mountain pine beetle (Dendroctonus ponderosae) exhibits polyphenic variation in flight distance but the consequences of this flight variation on life history strategies of beetles is unknown. This study assessed the effect of flight on two particular aspects of beetle biology: (1) an energetic trade-off between flight distance and host colonisation capacity; and (2) the relationship between flight distance and pheromone production. A 23-h flight treatment was applied to a subset of beetles using computer. After flight treatment, both flown and unflown (control) beetles were given the opportunity to colonise bolts of host trees, and beetles that entered hosts were aerated to collect pheromone. A trade-off occurred between initiation of host colonisation and percent body weight lost during flight, which indicates energy-use during flight affects host acceptance in female mountain pine beetles. Furthermore, production of the aggregation pheromone trans-verbenol by female beetles was influenced by both percent weight lost during flight and flight distance. Male production of exo-brevicomin was affected by beetle condition following flight but not by the energy used during flight. These novel results give new insight into the polyphenic flight behaviour of mountain pine beetles. Flight variation is adaptive by acting to maintain population levels through safe and risky host colonisation strategies... More of this in the Journal of Experimental Biology Blog.
If you're in the Biology industry and are in need of reliable Bio lab equipment for your basic and advanced applications like food production or agriculture, then you have come to the right place. Lab.Equipment delivers a large collection of equipment for Bio labs. Go through our recommended Biology products with a plethora of accessories available including:
We showcase robust and versatile equipment from well-established MFGs such as:
Handling other scientific or industrial applications? No worries. Lab.Equipment has you covered. Browse our selection of feature-packed lab equipment for food testing, environmental, chemistry applications and more.