We all know exercise is good for us. It strengthens your entire cardiovascular system, including your heart and lungs, and helps prevent heart disease. Cardiovascular exercise (“cardio”) also burns calories, which helps you manage your weight, which is also good for your heart.
Many people consider exercise to be a solo activity, but what if exercise could be a family activity? To help strengthen our bodies and our bonds? Something you can do together, instead of spending all of your leisure time playing computer games, checking social media or watching TV?
Research shows that active parents raise active children, and active children are more likely to grow up to be healthy adults. Developing positive exercise habits at a young age will pay dividends later in life. Unfortunately, about 17 percent of children in the U.S. ages 2-9 are obese, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Obesity is a large contributor to poor heart health and risk for heart disease.
The American Heart Association recommends that healthy children, age 2 and older, participate in one hour of moderate to vigorous activity every day to help them maintain a healthy weight and ward off heart disease, cancer and stroke.
But everyone’s busy. Between homework, after-school and after-work chores, extracurricular activities, making dinner and finding time to relax, how can you carve out time for family exercise?
Here are a few tips to get your family up and moving, together!
Getting into a habit of regular exercise as a family builds both bodies and bonds. The good habits your kids form early in life will help them live longer, healthier lives, and will help prevent serious illnesses, including heart disease, hypertension and diabetes. (And you’ll reap those benefits, too!)
To learn more about how you and your family can adopt a heart-healthy lifestyle, schedule an appointment with a cardiologist affiliated with Memorial Hermann online or by calling (713) 222-2273.
If you have questions regarding the Memorial Hermann Heart & Vascular Institute, our cardiologists, or treatment facilities, please use our contact form below or call (713) 222-2273 for more information.