Setting Out To Break a World Record
Have you heard our big news yet?
This month we are setting out to break a world record in Northern Colorado!
Guinness World Record: Longest Line of Toothbrushes
Did you know that pediatric dental disease, also known as childhood tooth decay, is the #1 chronic childhood illness in America? Or that 1 in 5 U.S. children go without dental care? Or that more than 40% of children have dental cavities by the time they reach kindergarten?
I didn’t. Here at Change Gangs, we want to support charities that make a big impact on people’s lives, and it turns out that something as small as a toothbrush, can make a pretty big impact.
That’s because children with poor oral health are 3 times more likely to miss school as a result of dental pain. If they do go to school, the pain can make it difficult to pay attention and learn. And the feelings of shame and low self-esteem that children often feel when they have bad teeth can make it hard for them to fully participate in school and build the social skills that will help them succeed as adults. Because a good education is one of the most important factors influencing future employment prospects and lifetime earning ability, poor dental health as a child can impact his or her entire life.
Untreated childhood dental disease also has serious long-term health consequences and has been connected to heart disease, stroke, pulmonary disease, and pre-term, low birth-weight babies. In 2012, someone visited the ER every 15 seconds for an emergency dental condition.
It’s Happening on February 26th!
February is National Children’s Dental Health Month which makes it the perfect time to tackle this problem.
Thanks to Delta Dental of Colorado, Nanci Garnand of Re/Max, and the Loveland Design Center, we have 55,000 toothbrushes that we’ll line up end to end for a record breaking 5.5 mile long line of toothbrushes. Don’t worry, the toothbrushes are individually wrapped, so they will stay clean, sanitary, and suitable for donation.
After we break the record, the toothbrushes will be disbursed to food banks and children’s organization throughout the state of Colorado.
How Can You Help? Spread the word!
We’re spending the entire month of February spreading the word about the importance of dental hygiene for children and how people can help children in need get access to better dental care.
We need volunteers! Can you help with a 2 hour shift? Email Sharon: firstname.lastname@example.org
Also, if you want to help financially. We have the toothbrushes, but it would be amazing to provide toothpaste to go with it. Our goal is to raise $5,000 for toothpaste. If we raise more money than we need for that purpose, then we'll direct those funds to America's Tooth Fairy to provide dental care to children in need. 100% of donations you make go directly to either of these purposes.
Our event website is http://milesofsmilescolorado.com
The two Loveland businesses working together to break the world record are:
Sharon Lipinski: Founder of Change Gangs: Virtual Giving Circles and
author of "365 Ways to Live Generously: Simple Habits for a Life That's
Good for You and for Others”. https://sharonlipinski.com/
Christine Forster: President of Change Gangs: Virtual Giving Circles and
My Big Day Events. https://www.mybigdaycompany.com/
Contact: Sharon (970) 581-7681 email@example.com
Search our blog
Making Business Personal. We pride ourselves on giving you something to look forward to. We are a connected collective of creatives - owned an operated by outstanding women.
Never miss an event or opportunity. Sign up for our newsletter!
*All content produced by My Big Day; DBA Big Deal Company, including websites, are the property of My Big Day LLC and protected by U.S. and international copyright laws. You may not copy, reproduce, distribute, transmit, modify, create derivative works, or in any other way exploit any part of our materials without the prior written permission from My Big Day LLC.