Have you ever thought of making a disaster supply kit? If you have, what prevented you from making one? Or, if you actually made it, what did you put inside? We are going to try to help you make a list of items that you should include in your disaster supply kit. You might wonder why should you even think about preparing one such kit. Well, in the globalized world that we live in today, you need to be prepared for the worst. As we have seen, disasters that have roots on one continent are quickly and quite easily transferred to another one. Today, distance does not play a role. It is easily traversed. On the other hand, nuclear energy is a source of energy used by both civilian and military government. Just one small mistake can lead to a disaster just like the one in Chernobyl. Be prepared.
Basics to building a disaster supply kit
No matter what is the nature of the disaster, there are certain items that you should always have in your disaster supply kit:
- Radio with batteries
- Flashlight with batteries
- First aid kit
- Whistle signal
- Dust maks
Water must be in your disaster supply kit
Water – the most precious item on the list. Forget to include it in the kit and you will not last more than 48 hours. Therefore, in order to survive the minimum of three days, you need to make sure to have at least a gallon of water per person per day ready to be used. Remember, you will need water for sanitation as well, not just for drinking. Therefore, do not throw away dirty water just like that. Make sure to save it, for it can be used later in other purposes.
Food should occupy the second space on your disaster supply kit
Food. You will last longer without food than without water. Still, in order to have a true supply kit ready, make sure to have three days worth of food stored away. The first 72 hours are crucial in surviving a disaster. Everything that you include in your kit needs to be in quantities large enough to last for at least the mentioned three days. Pack accordingly.
Radio with batteries
Radio with batteries. You will not be able to use it without batteries. Therefore, pack enough. Why radio you ask? Radios are small enough and easy to carry around. Unlike TVs, they will more easily survive any kind of a blast. They will be your way to get a hold of the latest information. Therefore, make sure to prepare enough batteries.
Flashlight with batteries
Flashlight with batteries. Since you will probably be tucked away in your shelter, you will need to be able to see in the dark. Remember, shelters do not have windows, therefore, at a certain point, it will get quite dark inside, especially if you have no source of power. You will want to be able to see in darkness. Who knows, you might need to go out under the dead of night. Be prepared for it.
First aid kit
First aid kit. What we are talking about is a state of emergency. On such occasions, you need to be able to provide first aid to people in your surroundings. In order to do that, you will need to have tools for it. Therefore, make sure to prepare a first aid kit in your disaster supply kit. It should be within your grasp at all times.
Whistle signal. In case that anything happens, you are going to need to be able to call for help. If you get hurt, hardly will you be able to shout for very long. Even if you are able to shout, you will quickly lose voice. So, in order to be able to call for help throughout the emergency, you need to have a whistle on you. It is much easier to breathe hard into it than shout all the time.
Dust mask. Should a natural emergency strike it can provoke fire. Fire and smoke can contaminate air so much that you would be unable to see or breathe properly. In order to survive it, you need to protect your lungs. You will do this by wearing a dust mask. It will filter contaminated air and enable you to breathe more easily. It is also a good idea to have a gas mask just in case. Still, a dust mask is a must.
Can opener – the way to get to your food. In case that you have seen the movie The Pianist, you will understand why it is important to have a can opener in your survival kit. Since most of the food that you will take with you is going to be packed in cans, you need to make sure to be able to open its container. Otherwise, you may suffer from hunger, while food would be lying right in front of you.
These have been the basic items that you should have in your kit. The government has an expanded list of items that you should take a look at. It will help you prepare a survival kit for different threats.
What should you do with your home when the disaster strikes?
In the times of disaster, it is important not to be materialistic. In the case of hurricane damage, for example, you should not run to your house looking to get your beloved possessions. You should make sure to survive. Afterward, you will salvage what is left with the help of insurance claims adjuster. If you do not survive for such a blunt reason, who is going to take care of your family? Therefore, be smart and ready – prepare a disaster supply kit.