Job Description for a Technical Support Position at School
Once merely a perk available only to wealthy districts, now schools use technology throughout the entire educational process. Schools deploy technology to track attendance and grades, inventory school property from books to desks, protect students and staff with recording devices, and connect to the world for Internet research. With such broad tech usage, schools lean on their information technologies staff for assistance using the equipment and for help when it breaks. Technical support staff members have an important role within the IT department and perform a variety of job functions.
Troubleshooting and Repair
A technical support staff person performs the first layer of troubleshooting when something goes wrong with school technology. He answers help desk calls and discusses the problem with the end user. He then attempts to offer solutions that the end user can complete or he uses a remote connection to perform the repair himself, if possible. Often he will visit the staff member to either solve the problem or deliver a replacement device. Sometimes he will seek the help of IT management or a vendor to complete the repair.
Technology support specialists are the first point of contact for help using and troubleshooting district software applications. Support specialists help maintain school information-system database software by performing basic activities such as adding user accounts, creating and printing reports, and troubleshooting problems. They may train staff members on new software or hardware as it is introduced. They are expected to attend specialized training opportunities to learn how to use and train others to use new equipment. They may also create application documentation, such as user guides, to assist the end user.
The network is the brain and the backbone of the school district's technology. A support specialist will perform much of the basic networking installation and repair on the network while reporting to the network administrator. He will install switches and routers, route and terminate network cable, install wall jacks and troubleshoot or test faulty connections. He will work with the network administrator to distribute and maintain network access passwords and will assist in training new staff members about proper network use.
A tech staff member must have a working knowledge of the many technological tools employed by teachers and other staff members. She should know how to install, set up and maintain multimedia projectors and interactive whiteboards, a common tech tool tandem. She will install and train on the use of a variety of input devices, ranging from document cameras to advanced telephones. She may be called to maintain or troubleshoot the school public-address system and to synchronize the bell system to ring according to the precise schedule approved by the school board and mandated by the state department of education. She may also assist with the security infrastructure.
A technical support employee must be able to carry up to 75 pounds for short distances. While he may sit for half of a typical day, he will also spend time walking and standing as he visits rooms and troubleshoots problems. He should be flexible and able to work under pressure. He should have strong communication skills since he may have to teach less tech-savvy employees technical information. He should not only have a broad general technical knowledge, but a demonstrable ability to research new technology and troubleshooting methods in this ever-changing field. He should have a bachelor's degree, industry certifications or comparable work experience.