China is very a large country. Airport Map of China has many national and international airports with flights to/from most countries in the world. By the end of 2019, there were 238 civil airports in China Airport Map, and the total annual capacity reached approximately 13 billion passengers. This figure does not include the special administrative regions of Hong Kong and Macau (or the area administered by Taiwan).
Both Hong Kong and Macau have their own civil aviation regulators. The top 10 Airports in China are Beijing Capital Airport (PEK), Beijing Daxing Airport (PKX), Shanghai Hongqiao Airport (SHA), Shanghai Pudong Airport (PVG), Guangzhou Baiyun Airport (CAN), Shenzhen Baoan Airport (SZX), Xi’an Xianyang Airport (XIY), Chengdu Shuangliu Airport(CTU), Hangzhou Xiaoshan Airport(HGH), and Tianjin Binhai Airport(TSN).
The network of Chinese airports has grown rapidly in the last fifteen years. The four main hubs for travel into China are Hong Kong; Shanghai; Beijing and Guangzhou; from these major airports there are connecting internal flights to all provinces in China.
Beijing Capital International Airport
Beijing Capital International Airport (IATA: PEK; ICAO: ZBAA) is the busiest airport in China both domestically and internationally. It is located 25 km northeast of the center of Beijing, the capital of China. Beijing Capital International Airport has the largest number of international routes, especially to/from North America and Europe. It is also the main hub for domestic routes and has direct lines to/from all major cities in China.
Shanghai Pudong International Airport
Located in Pudong New Area, about 30 km to the east of the center of Shanghai, Shanghai Pudong International Airport (IATA: PVG; ICAO: ZSPD) is the second busiest airport in China. The airport has the second largest number of international routes in China and offers many flights to/from North America and Europe. Being one of the three main air hubs in China, Shanghai Pudong International Airport has direct routes to/from almost all major cities in China.