March 28, 2023: Saturn continues to make its first morning appearance for northern hemisphere sky watches. The First Quarter Moon is near Mars after sundown.
by Jeffrey L. Hunt
Chicago, Illinois: Sunrise, 6:41 a.m. CDT; Sunset, 7:12 p.m. CDT. Check local sources for sunrise and sunset times for your location. Times are calculated by the U.S. Naval Observatory’s MICA computer program.
Summaries of Current Sky Events
Here is today’s planet forecast:
Saturn slowly climbs into the morning sky in the east-southeast. At Chicago’s latitude, the planet is over 4° above the horizon at 45 minutes before sunup. For more southerly latitudes, the planet is higher in the sky and visible without an optical assist.
After its conjunction with Jupiter yesterday, Mercury speeds away from the Jovian Giant. This evening the solar system’s innermost planet is 1.9° to the upper right of Jupiter. At thirty minutes after sundown, Jupiter is only 3° above the western horizon. A binocular is needed to see the pair.
Mercury continues to emerge from bright evening twilight while Jupiter is moving toward solar conjunction next month and reappearance in the eastern morning sky during May.
Fifteen minutes later, brilliant Venus is over 25° up in the west. It continues to step eastward in front of Aries, 11.2° to the upper left of Hamal, the constellation’s brightest star.
At this hour, the sky is too bright to easily spot Uranus, 2.4° to the upper left of the Evening Star. The more-distant planet is near the limit of human eyesight when viewed from a dark location. Return with a binocular at ninety minutes after sundown, near the end of evening twilight, to see two planets in the same field of view. Uranus is dim, aquamarine in color, and near the center of the field of view when Venus is off-set to the lower right of the field.
The half-full evening moon (First Quarter) rises about eight hours before sundown and can be found easily during the daytime. By an hour after sundown, the lunar orb is high in the southwest, 5.5° to the upper left of Mars.
The Red Planet is marching eastward in front of the Gemini Twins. Castor and Pollux are to the upper left of the moon and Mars this evening.
The brightening moon whitewashes the dimmer stars and celestial wonders from view. Through a binocular, Mars, the star Propus, and a star cluster catalogued as Messier 35 (M 35 on the chart) are visible, but the cluster is muted by moonlight.
2023, April 21: Morning Saturn, Evening Moon, Taurus Display
April 21, 2023: Before sunrise, Saturn is low in the east-southeast. After sundown, a razor-thin moon appears with Taurus and its Pleiades star cluster. Venus is nearby along with Mars.Keep reading
2023, April 20: Morning Saturn, Evening Planet Duo
April 20, 2023: Saturn appears in the east-southeast before daybreak. After sunset, brilliant Venus and Mars are easy to see, as Mercury departs.Keep reading
2023, April 19: Solar Eclipse, Venus-Aldebaran Conjunction
April 19, 2023: A solar eclipse occurs in the Eastern Hemisphere, during the overnight hours in the Americas. Venus passes Aldebaran, Taurus’ brightest star, after nightfall.Keep reading