Last updated: April 26, 2019
Different researchers have set on to establish the predominance of insomnia in women and women and each research has shown that more women than men are affected by insomnia and also shows a higher risk of contacting insomnia in women. The risk has been shown to increase with age and the older women have the highest risk to contact insomnia.
Insomnia is a type of sleep disorder that is characterized by lack of sleep and the inability to stay asleep.It can impair the quality of life and the capacity of an individual to function properly. Insomnia can cause excessive sleepiness during the day, inability to focus and concentrate, fatigue, irritability and ultimately depression. Different people differ in the amount of hours of sleep they need but mostly the standard hours of sleep is seven to eight hours of sleep every night (Trickey, 2004).There different types of insomnia; transient or short insomnia which lasts between one night and several weeks, intermitted insomnia which does not happen every day but from time to time and then chronic insomnia which happens for like three or more consecutive days for several months and can also be divided into two more categories, primary and secondary insomnia. Primary insomnia is not related to any medical condition and the secondary insomnia can be linked to medical conditions like cancer, stress poor sleep environment and drugs.
Women are more than twice more likely to suffer from insomnia than men.Insomnia in women can be caused by many interrelating factors. Some of the causes are hormonal imbalance that comes with different phases in a woman’s life. For example the kind of hormonal imbalance that comes with menstrual cycles, during menopause and also the hormonal imbalance encountered during pregnancy. And also the discomfort that comes with pregnancy causes insomnia in pregnant women (Trickey, 2004). Other factors like divorce and unemployment also add to the risk of suffering from insomnia in women mostly because women are thinking creatures and they are more likely to be affected by such things than men.
The hot flushes associated with menopause and sweating at night disturbs the nights sleep in women and can increase the risk of suffering from insomnia, also the discomfort that comes with menstruation increases the chances of suffering from insomnia. Also the increase in the production of hormones during this time affects the sleep patterns of women, pregnancy also comes with its own increase and decrease in production of different hormones. In comparison men have more constant hormone production and in most cases do not experience imbalances in the production of hormones and as a result their bodies function remain undisturbed.Femoral hernia is another medical condition that occurs in women mostly than men and usually the old and frail women. A femoral hernia is caused by pushing of tissue usually fatty tissues or parts of the bowel into the femoral canal were large blood vessels pass into and out of the leg. This condition is four times more prone to women than men (Goroll& Mulley, 2009). The abdominal wall sheet runs between the groin and the ribs and it holds the abdominal body contents in place. However where the nerves and blood vessels pass through there are weaknesses for example the weakness that occurs in the femoral canal of the groin.
Sometimes these weak points give in to pressure and let tissues push through them causing a bulge or a swelling on the groin called the hernia. The risk of developing a hernia is increased by obesity, coughing, constipation, pushing and carrying heavy objects and repeated pregnancies. In women the risk is increased because most women tend to be overweight and obese because they are more inactive and tend to eat fatty foods than men, so the hanging and extra fatty tissues may apply pressure to the abdominal lining and break it to form a hernia.Repeated pregnancies in women also increase the tendency of the condition affecting more women (Goroll& Mulley, 2009). . Repeated pressure caused by the pregnancies erodes and deteriorates the abdominal lining making it week to support the organs and finally this weakness allows for the formation of hernias.
Femoral hernias usually occurs a gap near the groin that is usually triangular in shape and it is located among the inguinal ligament, the femoral vein and the pubic bones lower border.I women this gap is usually bigger because of the shape and angle of the pelvis and the hips. This makes this condition to be more common in women than men because the women’s body give more space to allow the development of the hernia.
Rheumatoid arthritis is also another medical condition that is more common in women than men. It is a condition that affects the joint tissues. It can be described as the inflammation of the joint tissues that when left untreated may completely destroy the joint tissues.It causes the tissue lining of the joints to become stiff, inflamed and swollen. This usually limits one activity by making it difficult to walk and use the hands (Moots & Jones, 2004). Research has shown that this kind of arthritis is twice or thrice more common in women than men especially at the ages of 40 to 60.
It is an autoimmune disease that can lead to severe joint damage like permanent loss of function of the joints. The immune system is a complex network of different organs that work together to protect the body against any invasion by foreign organisms.Sometimes however the body’s protection mechanism, that is the immune system turns against the body and start acting against the body’s own components and these are called autoimmune reactions and they lead into autoimmune diseases like rheumatoid arthritis.
In the case of rheumatoid arthritis the immune system, identifies the normal cells of the joint lining as foreign and attacks them causing inflammation that results to warmth, redness, stiffness and pain (Moots & Jones, 2004). The joints also thicken as a result of rapid cell division that occurs at the joint.Scientists do not know the causes of rheumatoid arthritis yet especially its proneness to women but several theories have been made to explain this observation. The most common theory in existence today on the development of this arthritis being common to women is associated with the hormonal imbalances of women. The sex hormones like progesterone and estrogen are very important in the regulation of the immune system and they have an important role in regulating response to inflammation. Factors like these that are only present in women are thought to increase the risk of suffering from rheumatoid arthritis in women.Another medical condition that is more prevalent in women than men is obesity.
In the United States, studies have shown that more than 60% of the population is overweight with women having the highest rates. Obesity is a medical condition that involves the accumulation fats in the body which ultimately cause very serious effects on ones health (Stanhope & Lancaster, 2006). Calculating of ones body mass can tell if one is overweight or not and it is a method that is widely used for that purpose. One is considered to be obese if their body mass is 30kg and above.
Obesity is indicated to be the cause of most medical conditions. It is associated with cancer, diabetes, heart diseases, breathing problems and autoimmune diseases. The causes are varied and they range from lack of enough exercise, consuming more calories than the body needs, mental illnesses, genetic factors and other medical factors. Obesity can be treated by being active and performing physical exercises and dieting, use of drugs to reduce appetite and absorption of fat in extreme cases surgery can be performed.
Research has shown obesity as the leading cause of death today (McPhee, Papadakis, & Tierney, 2007). There are various reasons why women are more prone to obesity than men. Some of them include; pregnancy, menstrual cycles and menopause which cause major hormonal imbalances. These imbalances expose women to conditions that make them gain weight. These changes in the production of hormones in women determine most of their body functions including their appetites and moods.
Moods can influence a lot of different behaviors in women.Some women have increased appetites during these periods and this leads to excessive intake of calories. Another reason why women are more prone to obesity is that women generally have more body fat than men and also they have a lower basic metabolism as compared to men so they are more prone to obesity (Stanhope & Lancaster, 2006). Women are also generally less active than men so they accumulate more fats as compared to men. Another rather common and a lesser health threat medical condition that is more prevalent in women than men is acne.It is a skin condition that is characterized by comedones, pimples, pustules, nodules and papules (Preston & Alster, 2004).
It is caused by changing of the skin structures which is stimulated by androgen. This condition affects the skin areas with the most sebaceous follicles like the face and back causing zits, spots and pimples. Acne is mostly viewed as a skin condition prevalent in the teens and adolescents but it is very common with the adults too especially the women. Hormones again, tend to affect the prevalence of acne in women in that it is more erratic in women than in men.Acne during the premenstrual period may be caused by over stimulation of hormones like androgen which in turn stimulate the oil glands of the skin causing an over production of skin oils. Pregnancy can also cause an acne eruption during the early stages and then a few months after deliverance an occurrence many scientists have not found a reason for but theories indicate that hormonal imbalance and changes in the production of hormones are the cause of these flare ups.
Different treatments are available for acne including topical ointments that can be used to treat mild acne.For serious problems however, drugs that regulate the production of hormones and skin oils can be prescribed. Keeping the face pores unclogged is also a solution that can be achieved by using facial products that do not clog the pores and keeping the hair clean (Preston & Alster, 2004).
Acne that develops during the menstrual cycles tends to clear by itself. Word Count: 1,737 References Goroll, A. H. & Mulley, A. G. (2009). Primary care medicine: office evaluation and management of the adult patient. 6th Ed.
Baltimore: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. McPhee, S. J. , Papadakis, M. A. & Tierney, L. M.
(2007).Current Medical Diagnosis and Treatment 2008. 47th Ed. New York: McGraw-Hill Professional. Moots, R.
J. & Jones, N. (2004). Rheumatoid arthritis: your questions answered. New York: Elsevier Health Sciences.
Stanhope, M. & Lancaster, J. (2006). Foundations of nursing in the community: community-oriented practice. 2nd Ed.
New York: Elsevier Health Sciences. Preston, L. & Alster, T. (2004).
Breaking out: a woman’s guide to coping with acne at any age. New York: Simon ; Schuster. Trickey, R. (2004). Women, Hormones and the Menstrual Cycle: Herbal and Medical Solutions from Adolescence to Menopause.
2nd Ed. Sydney: Allen ; Unwin.