A dermatologist is a medical doctor who specializes in the relief of conditions that affect the skin, nails and hair. Some of them conditions include, but are not limited to, acne, eczema, psoriasis, skin cancer, moles, melanomas and skin cancers. The American Board of Dermatology certifies dermatologists.
In the U.S., dermatologists must undergo rigorous training and graduate from a licensed medical school or osteopathic school to be able to be qualified. Dermatologists that graduate from medical schools away from the United States needed by law for the foreign graduate certificate before they are permitted to practice dermatology. Just like other medical doctors, dermatologists have been trained and have completed at least one full year in a residency program for clinical training in emergency medicine, family practice, gynecology and obstetrics, pediatrics, general surgical procedures or internal medicine. Dermatologists are considered medical specialists, as these kind of are fully trained physicians who have undergone specialized training in matters pertaining to skin conditions.
A person having a skin condition, such as eczema, psoriasis or skin cancer, may well be referred to a dermatologist by normal doctor. Because associated with the specialized training, a dermatologist is better suited to treat skin problems or assist in managing them. Often, the treatment these people offer includes dermabrasion or chemical peels, laser resurfacing, tissue augmentation, hair transplants, liposuction or sclerotherapy (to treat vascular malformations). Specially trained in the latest, right surgical techniques, a dermatologist is also an expert in managing skin disorders that accompany aging, such as hair loss, skin discolorations and other skin changes. Some even specialize in cosmetic treatments, such as botox injections, collagen injections and eyelid surgery.
Though already deemed a specialist in the care of skin conditions, some dermatologists further specialize some other treatments. For instance, a dermatopathologist focuses on infectious skin diseases or those which are immune system related or degenerative. Such doctors specialize in microscopic examinations valuable in identifying these diseases. Often these specialists even work in hospital settings where contagious skin infections sometimes occur.
Other dermatology specialists include pediatric Desert Sky Dermatology. These doctors work specifically with childhood skin conditions, regarding eczema and other skin allergies common in childhood. These dermatological specialists are generally part of a medical team often treat children who often have very complex medical conditions with multiple signals and symptoms.
Eczema is another area where a dermatologist may treat a large associated with children. Characterized by red, scaly or leathery-looking skin that sometimes oozes and becomes crusty, eczema is a situation that largely affects infants and young kids. As it is commonly of an allergic reaction and dermatologists are specially trained to treat skin allergies, their care is usually recommended. To treat eczema symptoms in children, a Arizona Dermatologist may prescribe topical or a verbal cortocosteroid medication, and also recommend home skin care regimens to lower the severity of eczema’s affects. Though most children eventually outgrow eczema, some do not and the condition is carried over into adulthood. Therefore, many dermatologists also treat adult patients with eczema.
When most people think of a dermatologist, teen zits can be perhaps the first type of treatment they associate along with this specialty. Acne is characterized by the look of pimples, blotchy skin, cysts, whiteheads or blackheads. These eruptions are the consequence of bacteria and oil, which blocks the skin’s pores to cause mild to severe skin eruptions. For persistent or very severe cases of acne, a dermatologist is sought for treatment and relief. Treating offered may are definitely the dermatologist draining the pimples or cysts with specially designed instruments and a dermatologist may prescribe medications to specifically target and reduce acne problems. In situations where acne scarring has occurred, a dermatologist may perform collagen injections, dermabrasion, a chemical peel or laser surgery to remedy the appearance of unsightly pit marks and scars.