Durian hurts the liver, persimmon hurts the stomach, and the fruit that hurts the kidney the most is it! Make it clear what fruit you should eat!
Beautiful morning light, accompany you to read.
In August, there are still all kinds of fruits, such as mangoes, cantaloupes, apples, pears, grapes, flat peaches. goods are available in all varieties.
although there are many fruits, in fact, we are fastidious about eating fruit. Eating the wrong fruit will hurt the body organs. Next, let's talk about the favorite and feared fruit of the body's internal organs.
the fruit that the five internal organs fear most
1, heart: the polyphenols and flavonoids in apples
apples can reduce the brittleness of blood vessels and improve vascular permeability. Lower blood lipids and cholesterol.
patients with heart disease are not allowed to eat lychees, because if they eat lychees, it is easy to get angry and may aggravate their illness.
2, liver: most like Hawthorn, most afraid of durian
traditional Chinese medicine thinks that Hawthorn tastes sour, sweet and mild, and belongs to spleen, stomach and liver meridian.
among them, the acid of Hawthorn can restrain liver qi, so that liver qi is not too prosperous.
moreover, Hawthorn can enhance the role of enzymes, promote meat digestion and benefit the transformation of cholesterol.
for people with fatty liver, Hawthorn can also play a certain role in eliminating food and fat, so it is a good food to protect the liver.
in contrast, durian has a very high sugar content. After eating, sugar is metabolized in the liver, converted into fat, increases triglycerides, causes insulin resistance, and may damage the liver.
3, spleen: most like grapefruit, most afraid of pears
traditional Chinese medicine believes that grapefruit has sweet and sour taste, cool nature, regulating qi and resolving phlegm, invigorating the spleen and so on.
in the Compendium of Materia Medica, there is an introduction to grapefruit that "can digest the diaphragm and dissipate depression and resentment".
while pears are cold and cold, eating too much is easy to hurt the spleen and stomach, especially for the elderly, children and those who are weak in the spleen and stomach.
4, stomach: most love papaya, most afraid of persimmon
papain contains a substance called "papain", which can help the human body decompose meat protein and promote digestion. So friends who have indigestion can eat some papaya.
Go for the fashionable evening dresses at oriental plaza only at a cheap and affordable price. Our collections make it a piece of cake to help you choose the perfect one.
but persimmon contains more tannin. If you eat a lot of persimmon on an empty stomach, the stomach acid is easy to stick with tannic acid, pectin, cellulose and so on, and the stomach persimmon stone is formed quickly in the stomach. Cause gastrointestinal discomfort.
5, Kidney: love grapes most, fear carambola
grape flat taste sweet acid, enter the spleen, lung, kidney three meridians, usually eat grapes, can play a role in nourishing the kidney.
the toxic substance of carambola causing renal damage is a kind of oxalate. after eating carambola, the related toxic factors can be excreted from the body through the kidney, but for patients with uremia or poor kidney, it is difficult to excrete toxin. lead to glomerular capillary basement membrane damage, epithelial cell foot process damage, cause hematuria and produce a series of allergic reactions, resulting in neuropoisoning, disturbance of consciousness and even death.
eat whatever kind of fruit you feel uncomfortable. Put away this list
anemia: grapes, oranges, tomatoes, apples, strawberries, cherries
high cholesterol: mangosteen, walnut hypertension: bananas, watermelons, grapes, tomatoes, walnuts, persimmons, peaches
arteriosclerosis: apples, avocados, walnuts, tomatoes, bananas
Stroke: apples, persimmons, pineapples, kiwi, pears, watermelons, pineapples, pineapples Walnut, banana respiratory, trachea, lung disease, bronchitis: grape, apple, cherry, pear, persimmon Asthma: grape, peach
tuberculosis: pear, peach, loquat, papaya
digestive system, gastrointestinal, liver disease, gastritis: Apple, grape enteritis: pineapple, banana, apple, grape, grape, tomato, pomegranate diarrhea Red bayberry
indigestion: pear, strawberry
hemorrhoids: Apple, persimmon, peach, banana, fig
liver disease: strawberry, plum, apple, grape, banana cystitis: watermelon, peach
urethral stone: watermelon, kiwifruit
urinary incontinence: peach, plum
urethritis: peach, grape
Kiwifruit, grape, peach, cantaloupe, papaya
eye, ear and throat disease: papaya hoarseness: grape, loquat night blindness: papaya bone, joint, skin disease: grape, loquat
back pain: kiwifruit, watermelon, pear, citrus low back pain: peach
gout: kiwi, pineapple
arthritis: grape, pineapple arthritis Loquat
skin disease: papaya, strawberry, apple, walnut
oral inflammation: pear, orange, plum dental disease: strawberry, orange, plum cold: strawberry, mango, pineapple, loquat, lemon
pregnant women stop vomiting: pear, apple, persimmon
pregnant women recover
increase physical strength, prevent aging: apples, bananas,
poor appetite: grapes
promote growth: apples, pears, bananas, strawberries, cantaloupes