That line may be expressed, for instance, as $5MM what does mm mean and $15MM aggregate. A millimeter is a small unit of displacement (length/distance) in the metric system. We often find the abbreviation on financial statements, which stands for millions. Unfortunately, this practice can occasionally cause confusion within the financial industry as multiple numerical abbreviations are used interchangeably within society. We know 500 definitions for MM abbreviation or acronym in 8 categories.
What does MM mean in chat?
Make me. During chat and text conversations, MM sometimes stands for "make me." If someone asks you to do something that you really don't want to do, you can respond with MM to tell that person off.
This website is using a security service to protect itself from online attacks. The action you just performed triggered the security solution. There are several actions that could trigger this block including submitting a certain word or phrase, a SQL command or malformed data. Get instant access to lessons taught by experienced private equity pros and bulge bracket investment bankers including financial statement modeling, DCF, M&A, LBO, Comps and Excel Modeling. For example, within financial statements, the industry-standard abbreviation is M for a thousand, while in everyday life, the abbreviation of K for a thousand is usually the acceptable one.
What does mm mean in measurement?
To take it further; one billion would be shown as $1MMM or one-thousand million. If you’re confused about the letter designations that stand for thousands and millions, you’re not alone. In fact, it’s one of our most frequently asked questions. Here’s why you’re confused and what to do about it.
Can you imagine measuring tiny things using units like yards or miles? If a financial statement has a lot of large figures, the accountant may simply dispense with abbreviations. Stating at the top of the report that “all figures are in millions of dollars” should take care of it.
Definition of M
I have seen one million represented by mn and also by m . A first scheme, indicated by him, was immediately drawn out by two French engineers who were in the Egyptian service, MM. Structured Query Language What is Structured Query Language ?