The electrical components enclosed in a cabinet conduct a lot of energy and in this process a lot of heat is produced that will cause significant damage or failure if it is not properly addressed.
Those that assemble or maintain these cabinets have to determine, sometimes quite fast, where the cabinet air conditioner will be placed in order to adequately safeguard the electronic components, equipment and devices from heat and foreign outside influences.
The unmonitored influence of heat, humidity, dust, water and oil-and quite often a mixture of all of these-can have a disastrous effect on any electrical cabinet. Without a cabinet air conditioner to safeguard electrical components, many issues can occur and below are 4 of the most common ones.
When integrated circuits come into contact with high levels of humidity, there is a lot that can go wrong. Electronics may overheat and sustain damage as a result and a user may be unable to operate them. Capacitors lose their power when they are exposed to environments and conditions that are humid. Without a cabinet air conditioner, humidity is able to influence not only capacitors, but transistors too.
Humidity works against electronics by enhancing the formation of condensation on the working, internal parts of electronic components and this typically occurs when equipment has been moved from a cold environment to a warmer area. An air conditioner is able to cool the area down which leads to it being able to get rid of condensation and allows all components to operate as they should.
2. Airborne threats
A number of factors can affect the air quality in an electrical cabinet and negative ones can definitely stifle the performance of electrical equipment. Factors such as smoke, dirt, dust, and pollen can threaten electrical parts in the cabinet and lead to lags and failures.
An air conditioner enclosed in the cabinet is able to blow these threats out of the area so it does not come into contact with any integral electrical parts and if it does it will not be present for long enough to cause damage. The air conditioner is able to be set so it turns on at specified intervals guaranteeing that no outside airborne elements will threaten the electrical components in the cabinet.
Oil is not the best thing to come into contact with electronic equipment. As much as it protects against common causes of corrosion, its presence is not always required and oil not meant to come into contact with certain electrical pats can cause irreversible damage. Research has shown that oil corrodes anything that has an element of copper and all components that it comes into contact with become weaker especially if it is exposed to them for extended periods of time.
This can have a detrimental effect on critical equipment parts which will deteriorate under the exposure of oil. The best way to counter this is to have electrical equipment well protected by cabinet air conditioners that will ensure that all the raw hydrocarbons, nitrogen oxides and sulfur oxides from the oil are adequately dealt with.
It is common knowledge that water is good and necessary to sustain life, but it can be detrimental to electronics. Sodium chloride that is present in water can have a devastating effect on the performance of electrical equipment. It leaves a residue on any surface it comes into contact with, thereby making it susceptible to corrosion.
In the absence of a cabinet air conditioner, there would be nothing to protect electrical equipment against this incessant corrosion. Air conditioners are able to dry up any water that is present in an electrical cabinet and prevent this corrosion from occurring that could definitely cause system failures.