Serving the region for more than 80 years
The City of Flagstaff’s long aviation history includes three airports. The first site was located near the current Flagstaff High School football field. Due to the elevation and proximity to the peaks, it was difficult for many aircraft to take off, and the airport was relocated to Doney Park near the modern Koch Field Road. The new field was dedicated in 1928 in an event attended by many state and local dignitaries.
Expansion of Flagstaff Airport
The search for a new location that better met the future needs of aviation in northern Arizona began in the 1940s. A suitable site was located just east of Fort Tuthill on U.S. Forest Service land, and planning for the new location began in April 1944. After receiving $46,943 in federal funding and a final site selection process, the property was deeded to the City of Flagstaff on July 30, 1948.
The Flagstaff Pulliam Airport was constructed in 1949 on 795 acres of U.S. Forest Service land. In 1969, the original runway was lengthened to 7,000 feet and widened to 150 feet. It was further extended to its current length of 8,800 feet in 2007.
Non-Hub Commercial Services
The facility is a non-hub commercial service and general aviation airport owned and operated by the City of Flagstaff. It is located three miles south of Flagstaff on Interstate 17. At 7,014 feet above MSL, it is one of the highest air carrier airports in the United States.
The airport was named in honor of C.T. “Maggie” Pulliam. He was a 44-year City employee and Flagstaff’s first City Manager. Pulliam was instrumental in the airport’s development.
Flagstaff Pulliam Airport currently has two air carriers
Flagstaff Pulliam Airport currently has two air carriers, providing daily nonstop service to Denver, Colorado; Dallas, Texas; and Phoenix, Arizona. The facility also handles medical, cargo, corporate, and private aircraft every day. Due to its high elevation, many military aircraft frequent the airport to work on high altitude qualifications.