Watch the Show
New Episodes Every Week
In March 1942, General Douglas MacArthur was forced to leave the Philippines. The Japanese were advancing rapidly and were almost invincible. It seemed that all hope was lost and that the allied forces conceded victory to the Japanese. At first MacArthur was reluctant to leave but finally he agreed. He escaped to Australia and vowed that he would return to the Philippines and liberate the country from the Japanese. Two years later, true to his word, he returned. Join us as we take a look at the amazing story of General Douglas MacArthur.
More than 150 years ago, the town of Gundagai was wiped out by one of the worst natural disasters in Australian history. More than a third of the people who lived there died. But another third was saved by the heroic actions of a few men. They were the unlikeliest heroes, that’s why you’ve almost certainly never heard their story. Watch the program to learn more.
William Carey and his family sailed to India in 1793. He often faced hardship and sorrow there, but he didn’t abandon his mission and stayed for over 40 years. He oversaw more translations of the Bible than had been done in all previous Christian history combined. Life was always challenging for William Carey. But he refused to quit, even when a devastating fire destroyed years of his literary work. His legacy has inspired countless others from his own day to the present. He became known as the revered “Friend of India” and the “Father of Modern Missions.” William Carey shows dramatically how a life dedicated to God can make a profound difference in the world.
Dame Nellie Melba was one of the most celebrated opera singers of all time. She was the first Australian vocalist to achieve international stardom and her work was showcased at some of the most prominent opera houses of her time. But this wasn’t all she was known for. She was created Dame of the Order of the British Empire for her significant charitable work during World War I and she spent a great deal of her time teaching and investing in the lives of rising young vocalists. As much as she loved to perform, she also loved to give. Join us this week as we take a look at the remarkable life of Dame Nellie Melba and the contributions she made to both the arts and also the lives of those around her.
It might be surprising to many but the first Europeans to settle in Australia were actually petty criminals or as they were known then, convicts. It may seem like a tragic beginning, but these prisoners actually took the opportunity of being exiled to a faraway land to start a new life. From a struggling and starving penal colony they began to build a nation. There are many stories of courage, resilience, and ingenuity that tell how people found a new life.
For thousands of years, the same yellow sun has risen over the vast collection of people that we have come to call India in the last century. The term country doesn’t seem to capture it. Twenty-eight states — more like Twenty-eight countries — with many traditions, languages, and styles stretching over a geography that varies from the soaring Himalayas to the steamy Bay of Bengal. And yet, within this riot of colour and culture, one building has come to represent India to the world — the Taj Mahal. Today, we will journey into this magnificent masterpiece and discover the magnificent lesson this great building contains. A lesson it shares with the greatest book the world has ever known.
This program is the third episode in a series of programs that compares and contrasts the lives and the legacies of Constantine the Great and Jesus Christ, and how both have impacted the way we think and the way we live today. This episode will focus on how Constantine embraced Christianity for his political ends and brought about the union of church and state. It explores the consequences of this for subsequent church history and for our modern world. The episode concludes with a challenge to recognise threats to religious freedom and to be able to respond in the right way
This program is the second in a series of programs that compares and contrasts the lives and legacies of Constantine the Great and Jesus Christ and how both have impacted how we think and live today. This second program will focus on the persecution of the Christians and Constantine’s rise to power. The Diocletian persecution, a broken family, and political divisions within the Roman empire formed the background for Constantine’s education in what it meant to rule. When Constantine seized power in Rome, he credited the Christian God. This seismic shift was to define the world we live in today.
This program is the first in a series that compares and contrasts the lives and the legacies of Constantine the Great and Jesus Christ and how both have impacted the way we think and live today. This first programme will focus on their births and their childhoods. Starting with Constantine’s inauspicious birth, we will then consider that of Jesus and how, through his followers, he began to challenge the Empire with his teachings. This was a clash of empires that were to define our world today.
How many times have you heard the hymn “Amazing Grace?” It’s the most popular song in history, sung over 10 million times each year. Ever wondered where it came from? Hear the incredible story in our program, “The Slave Trader – Amazing Grace.” It was written by a notorious blasphemer, a rebellious shipman, a slave trader, who later became a church minister, and an abolitionist who fought publicly to end slavery. In this program, we’ll learn about John Newton and the history and meaning behind the best-loved hymn, Amazing Grace.
On Christmas Eve each year in Austria, thousands of people in Salzburg and the surrounding areas gather together in churches. Their worship services end with the carol “Silent Night”, sung in its original German form. The simple charm of this centuries-old melody has made it a popular hymn for many years. Join Gary Kent as he pieces together the clues that tell us the mysterious origins of this beautiful song that, for a time, stopped a the First World War.
Martin was a tormented soul. He practiced self-harm for religious purposes because he thought he had to stop sinning to be acceptable to God. He punished his body by sleeping on the bare floor of his room, without blankets, even in the bone-chilling cold of German winter. And sometimes, he would lie out in the snow for long periods. He fasted to the point of emaciation, and he would beat himself with a whip. He began every day before 2am and prayed seven times a day. Martin was looking for something that all of us, even in our modern world, are looking for. Join me for Martin’s story in our program, “ Blessed are Those Who Hunger and Thirst After Righteousness.
On 26 September 1943, a group of six men paddled their folding canoes quietly into the Singapore harbour. All around them, the harbour bustled with activity, but they silently slipped undetected between the massive ships berthed along the docks. They were agents of Special Unit Z deployed by the Allied forces to sabotage shipping inside the Singapore harbour, which was occupied by Japanese forces. The men attached limpet mines to the hulls of seven ships and then paddled back to their forward base just 19 km/12 miles away. When the mines detonated, they sank or damaged 39,000 tonnes of shipping, leaving the Japanese completely stunned. Join us as we take a closer look at the amazing story of Operation Jaywick.
This program is about something men tend to think of as extremely complex: the inner workings of women. Most men have burned up lots of energy trying to figure out what a woman wants, what makes her tick, what’s on her mind, and how to make her happy. Well, there’s good news, success is simpler than people think. After years of research, Shaunti Feldhahn shows that women actually can be understood. She’s identified several key findings about women that explain many of the mysteries and enable a man to love his partner the way he wants to and be her hero. In this program, Shaunti shares her helpful discoveries and guides us on a journey into the fascinating inner workings of women.
There are significant dates that are etched in our collective memories, and one of these dates is 22 November 1963. At 12:30 pm a gunshot rang out that reverberated right around the world. Years after John F Kennedy’s assassination, people are still captivated by the event that happened here on Elm Street in Dallas, Texas. As a young man, he survived WWII and received a Purple Heart for bravery, one of America’s highest honours for gallantry during battle, but his life ended here on a peaceful autumn day, by an assassin’s bullet. We’re still fascinated by how the death of one leader could impact a people, a culture, a nation, or a world. Join me as we look more closely into this historic event and the message it carries today
Owers’ Corner, about 50km from Port Moresby, the capital of Papua New Guinea, is visited by thousands of Australian pilgrims every year, yet it is not a church. It is forever consecrated in the hearts of Australians, yet it is not Australian soil. It is Australia’s most important military victory, yet it’s relatively unknown. Our men at Kokoda represented the very best of not just Australian values but the highest values of humanity as well. As you watch the program, you’ll discover that we all walk on a track. And for us, it’s not the Kokoda Track; it’s the track of life. We honour the heroes of the Kokoda Campaign. But let’s consider how much more we should honour Jesus.
In 2015 Queen Elizabeth II became the longest-reigning monarch in British history, exceeding the tenure of her great-great-grandmother, Queen Victoria. And then 7 years later in 2022, Queen Elizabeth II celebrated another milestone—a 70-year reign—a Platinum Jubilee. She was loved and admired by many and was the longest-reigning English monarch ever. She was an anchor for her nation and the Commonwealth. But did she have an anchor? Where did she get her direction, guidance, and inner peace from? The answer may surprise you and perhaps give us some guidance regarding an anchor for our lives. Find out more in our program: Queen Elizabeth II – The Power Behind the Throne.
In her desperate search for freedom, Mary of Magdala was drawn to Jesus’ inspirational message. It changed her life and got rid of her demons. She witnessed the Crucifixion. She was present at the tomb. She was the first person to see Jesus alive after His resurrection, and the first to tell others about it. But still, we seem to know so little about Mary of Magdala. To find out more, watch our program Mary of Magdala.
What makes our planet unique is that it is teeming with life. As humans, we like to get near these magnificent animals, to watch and admire them in their natural habitat. But many of these animals are not only spectacular but unpredictable and dangerous; they might look cute and cuddly but could kill you in mere seconds. This program takes us on a journey into the Wild in search of the world’s deadliest animals and their message for us today.
Time is the most valuable asset we have. We all get the same amount of time every week – 168 hours. The difference between people who make their lives count, and those who don’t, is how they respect and manage their time. The highest achievers manage their time exceptionally well. With the right time-management skills, life becomes easier because good time management lets you work smarter – not harder. You get more things done in less time – even when time is tight, and pressures are high. This week’s program reveals the secrets of successful time management.
Henry Lawson was one of Australia’s most celebrated literary giants. Best known for his stark and striking poetry and short stories, Lawson’s raw depictions of life in the Australian bush strike a chord in the hearts of anyone who reads his work. As we look at the life and times of this renowned Australian poet, we might learn some lessons from his life and work.
In 1986, the Thylacine, commonly known as the “Tasmanian Tiger”, was officially declared extinct by the Tasmanian State Government in Australia. Despite this, over 3000 sightings have taken place since the last tiger supposedly died in 1936, luring countless adventure seekers, trackers and amateur hikers into the Tasmanian wilderness for a chance at fame and fortune. But the real tragedy is how Thylacine even became extinct in the first place.
Addiction is an intense craving for something that you know is bad for you, but you can’t seem to stop – somehow, this thing has gotten a hold of you without you realising it, and now it has you firmly in its grasp. We long for that state of euphoria and pleasure, so we keep coming back for more, only to discover that the more we indulge, the less fulfilled we feel! If you are searching for the keys to lasting happiness and freedom from addiction, join us this Sunday at 8:25 am on Channel 9 Gem to discuss the science behind addictions and discover important secrets that can set you free!
Arthur Stace is one of the legends of Sydney and the most powerful preacher the city has ever known. Yet his sermons were only one word long: the word “Eternity,” written half a million times on the city’s sidewalks. This is the story of how eternity found him and elevated him above a life of rejection, alcoholism, and crime. This program invites us to reflect on the reality and meaning of eternity and how we, too, can find eternal hope in God.
In 1992, UNESCO listed Fraser Island as a world heritage site. World heritage sites are places around the globe that have special cultural or natural significance. Fraser Island was listed for its unique natural beauty and diversity. Join us this week as we take a closer look at this rare Australian gem in our new program, The Secrets of Fraser Island.
Albert Namatjira is one of Australia’s most celebrated watercolour painters. What makes him such a compelling artist is his love for the landscapes he painted. He painted his country. His father’s country. But most importantly he painted his home. A home he had an intimate knowledge of and deep respect for.
When contemplating the great manmade wonders of the world, we’re filled with admiration and astonishment at the human genius behind these marvellous creations. In this episode, we’re going to consider the mastermind behind them all, the source of this human genius, a true wonder of wonders – the human brain.
In 1979, Israeli archaeologist Gabriel Barkay peered into the semi-darkness of an ancient burial cave in the heart of Jerusalem. What he saw caused his heart to race with excitement. He had entered a long-lost world never intended to be seen by human eyes. Surrounding him were dozens of grinning skeletons – ancient Israelites, dead for thousands of years. And there was treasure, fabulous treasure, including two silver scrolls that carried an important message for us today.
This program is part of a series on the Beatitudes presented by Jesus in Matthew 5. In this episode, we will look at what Jesus meant when He taught, “Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of God.” The life of Eleanor Roosevelt, First Lady of the United States of America, is a wonderful example of a life of service. “Poverty of spirit” is the first and foundation of all of the Beatitudes. When we live humbly before God, our lives will be filled with compassion and empathy for others.
Captain Matthew Flinders RN is credited with naming Australia. He is also the first man to have circumnavigated the continent with the help of Aboriginal leader Bungaree and the crew of HM sloop Investigator. His book A Voyage to Terra Australis describes his travels around the great southern land mass, complete with maps and charts. In January 2019, archaeologists excavating a site just behind London’s Euston Station discovered Flinders’ coffin and his remains. It was a ground-breaking discovery that offered scientists the opportunity to learn more about this extraordinary man and his life. This week we take a look at the life and times of this illustrious naval explorer, a man who will go down in history as one of the world’s greatest explorers.
Men carry essential feelings so deep inside they barely know they’re there, much less how to talk about them. But every man genuinely wants his spouse to understand his inner life, know his fears and needs, and hear what he wishes he could tell her. Shaunti Feldhahn reveals what every woman – single or married – needs to know in this program. She delivers one eye-opening revelation after another as she guides us on a journey into the fascinating inner lives of men.
In this program, Gary Kent takes us on a journey through Space, and we make discoveries that are intriguing and more amazing than you could ever imagine. Spectacular adventure awaits the person who reads what is written in the night sky. So venture onwards with Gary Kent to the farthest depths of our Milky Way Galaxy and beyond to the biggest and brightest stars light-years away. The stars have a message for us today, a message that will hold you spellbound!
There’s a lot of fear and uncertainty today regarding the future. People wonder what the future holds in store for them and their families. In this episode, Gary Kent looks at an ancient king’s dream that gives clear, reassuring evidence that God is in control of our world and we have a bright and wonderful future ahead of us as He guides history towards one incredible event. Find out by watching this video.
Cadbury’s Claremont is the largest chocolate factory in Australia and the Southern Hemisphere. This year is the 100-year anniversary of this factory in Tasmania. On average, Australians consume 32 kg of chocolate per person per year. What’s our favourite brand of chocolate? Well, it’s Cadbury! But the Cadbury family have shared more than chocolate with the world. They’ve shared something more important. The high ideals and Christian legacy of the Cadbury family are still visible in our modern society.
There is no greater love on earth than a mother’s love. It’s enduring, steadfast and unremitting. Peter Richardson’s mother’s love followed him wherever he went. This kind of love helps us to understand how much God loves us. Hear the extraordinary story of how a mother’s love for her runaway son triumphed over five shipwrecks in our new program: Five Shipwrecks and a Mother’s Love.
Have you ever wondered what it would be like to have a brain like Einstein? To be able to create complex theories and formulas that could change the world in some remarkable way? As important as IQ is, it turns out that IQ tests are notoriously bad at determining someone’s success or failure in life, and that scoring a high EQ – or emotional quotient – is a better indicator for success.
Travel to almost any city, town or hamlet in Australia and New Zealand, and the chances are you will find some memorial to the Anzac soldiers of the Great War. But of the thousands of memorials found across the country, this one in Mullumbimby in the Northern Rivers region of New South Wales, Australia, has special significance to Gary Kent. Discover why an Anzac memorial in Mullumbimby means so much to him. Watch our episode this Anzac weekend.
This program is part of a series on the Beatitudes of Jesus. In this episode, we will look at what Jesus meant when he taught, “Blessed are the merciful, for they will be shown mercy.” This teaching will be illustrated by the Charlie Brown episode in World War II, in which a German fighter ace spared a stricken American B-17 bomber and saved the lives of its crew. In the Bible, mercy is a central quality of the character of God, demonstrated through Jesus Christ, and a key character trait of his people. Mercy doesn’t come naturally to human beings; however, when we understand the mercy that God has shown to us, we can be more merciful toward others.
In March 2018, Sergei Skripal and his daughter Yulia collapsed onto a public bench in the English town of Salisbury. They were behaving erratically and weaving in and out of consciousness like someone who had taken an overdose of drugs. They were hospitalised and placed under deep sedation in a critical condition. Investigations revealed that Skripal was a Russian double agent who had been recruited to work for MI6, the British Secret Intelligence Service. Watch our program this week and learn more about this Russian spy’s story.
At 7pm on the 26th of May 1940, a short signal was transmitted from the dynamo room in Dover Castle. The message simply stated, “Operation Dynamo is to commence”. A few minutes later, a small flotilla of ships slipped out of Dover and began the treacherous but relatively short crossing over the English Channel, arriving at Dunkirk. When the sailors on board the vessels drew close to the shore, they were greeted with an unprecedented sight; thousands of soldiers, wearing their dark inky green uniforms, huddled on the beaches or milled in the water. All of them were gazing towards the horizon; all of them were waiting for hope. Join us this week as we take a look at the amazing story of the evacuation of Dunkirk.
Considered the pinnacle of human achievement at the time, the RMS Titanic departed from London for New York on April 12, 1912. What was meant to be a 7-day journey came to an abrupt and tragic end when the luxurious ship struck an iceberg, 640 km from land. Isidor and Ida Straus, the co-owners of the Macy’s department store, in New York, died on board the RMS Titanic when it sunk on the night of April 15, 1912. Their love still inspires us, and it gives us a glimpse of the highest form of love – God’s love.
In a sense, the world seems to be getting smaller because we now know more about it. So it is with the brain. Learning more about the brain can help us to get the best out of this control centre of the body. Our next program, Ahead of Anger, will introduce us to an amazing aspect of brain function and we will even discuss how to deal with anger.