Here a serum, there a toner, there a cream - but be careful! If small nodules form around your mouth and nose, you may be suffering from perioral dermatitis!
What is perioral dermatitis?
Perioral dermatitis (also known as mouth rose or stewardess's disease) is a non-infectious skin disease that manifests itself through a rash on the face and is often confused with acne, especially in the early stages. The trigger can be exaggerated care of the facial skin. Perioral dermatitis primarily affects the psyche and is mainly an aesthetic problem.
Perioral dermatitis: symptoms
Typical of perioral dermatitis is a rash on the face, which occurs mainly around the mouth and nose. More rarely, chin and cheeks, as well as forehead and eyelids, are affected. In these cases, small inflammatory nodules (papules) or blisters (pustules) about two millimetres in size form, which can be filled with pus. The affected areas are usually red, dry and scaly, burning and tense. A narrow strip of skin around the lips, about two millimetres in size, remains symptom-free.
There is a similarity to acne, although no blackheads are found in perioral dermatitis.
Perioral dermatitis: causes
The skin disease is triggered by excessive use of skincare products (creams and cleansing products). The complexion reacts to a large number of different cosmetic products and the ingredients they contain with a disturbed protective function. Moisture can escape, and essential fats are no longer produced. Dry skin, flaky skin or itchy skin are the initial consequences. If skincare products continue to be applied to the skin to get the skin problems under control, irritations such as papules and inflammatory reactions around the mouth and nose occur. The vicious circle of perioral dermatitis has begun.
Other causes of perioral dermatitis are
Fluctuations in hormone levels
Infections (e.g. yeast fungus)
Perioral Dermatitis: Treatment
Going to the doctor is indispensable. Only a doctor can determine whether it really is perioral dermatitis or not rosacea or couperose and initiate subsequent treatment with medication.
To reduce the symptoms of the disease, it is essential to discontinue all cosmetic products for a while - even if this may worsen the rash.
Dermatologists also recommend that the face be cleaned with water only to prevent the mouth rash. Information on other skin problems or skin diseases such as neurodermatitis on the front or psoriasis can be found here.