35 Big Machines That Changed the World In Big Ways
Their huge size is only outdone by their huge importance.
Human history is invention—to help understand and improve our world. And some of those leaps forward have been very big, both in size and historical importance. These are 35 mega machines that helped create our world, from the wheel and axle to the quantum computer.
Interface Message Processor, 1969
On October 29, 2019, Leonard Kleinrock (pictured) and his team used this Interface Message Processor to send the first message to another computer using ARPANET. This moment is considered the beginning of the internet and it wouldn't have been possible without the world's first router, the IMP.
Curiosity Rover, 2012
The successor to other Martian rovers like Spirit and Opportunity (RIP), Curiosity is the most advanced machine in human history to ever land on the surface of another planet and conduct scientific experiments. It's successful landing was a big win for NASA who just a year prior flew its last crewed spaceflight on American soil. It also proved that space programs can still achieve amazing things.
John Gorrie's Machanical Ice Machine, 1851
While not the first scientist to research refrigeration (nor the last), John Gorrie was the first inventor to secure a U.S. patent for artificial refrigeration. While his business would ultimately be a failure, his idea would eventually pave the way for commercial and personal refrigeration that would change the way humans transport, store, and buy food. It's importance is hard to oversell.
Cotton Gin, 1793
Don't blame the machine, blame the society. In 1793, Eli Whitney invented the cotton gin, a mechanically marvelous machine that unfortunately had the unintended side-effect of sustaining the economy of slavery in the Antebellum south as it made cotton a more valuable crop. While not Whitney's intent (in fact he lost profits from the machine due to legal battles over patent infringement), this ingenious little machine ultimately changed the world for the worse.
Galileo's Refracting Telescope, 1609
While not necessarily the biggest machine on this list, its impact certainly is. While Galileo isn't credited as the inventor of the refracting telescope, the famous Italian scientist is one of the first to build and explore the night sky with one, discovering the famous Galilean moons in the process. Johannes Kepler would go on to improve the design (culminating in Johannes Hevelius' 150-foot Keplerian telescope in 1673). Now, modern telescopes—terrestrial or celestial—are some of the biggest machines in existence. Galileo would be proud.
Heinkel HeS 3 Jet Engine, 1938
Although far from a household name, the Heinkel HeS 3, designed by Hans von Ohain, was the first jet engine to power an aircraft, the Heinkel He 178. The Heinkel HeS proved a concept 13 years in the making: to replace piston engines with a more efficient and powerful alternative.
Decades later, jet engines like the Pratt & Whitney JT9D, would power the largest aircraft ever built—the Boeing 747 “Jumbo Jet.”
Model T, 1908
The first Model Ts were completed on September 27, 1908. And while Henry Ford's creation wasn’t the first automobile, the Model T revolutionized Americans’ relationship to cars.
Noting the efficiency of Chicago’s meat packing plants, Ford brought assembly line production to automobiles. By 1914, he had perfected this continuous, moving chain of production in his Detroit factories. This innovation decreased time and expense needed to build a car, which allowed Ford to lower the price and make the so-called “Tin Lizzie” affordable to the average American.
By 1923, half of the cars on the road were Model Ts. The car itself was also a game-changer. With four-cylinders and 20 horsepower, it was the quintessential and first-of-its-kind “utility” vehicle. There’s little doubt the Model T is the most important car in history.
V-2 Rocket, 1942
The space race didn’t begin with 1957’s launch of Sputnik or Alan Shepard's 1961 orbit, but with the Nazis' V-2 rocket in 1942. The brainchild of German rocket scientist Wernher von Braun, the V-2, or “Vengeance Weapon 2,” was unlike anything the world had ever seen. Propelled by liquid oxygen and alcohol, it was the first large-scale guided missile. When launched, it could rise six miles into the air, had a range of nearly 200 miles, and could carry a warhead payload of up to a ton.
It was quite deadly, used by the Nazis to kill thousands in the latter part of World War II. However, that number doesn’t account for the estimated 10,000 to 20,000 concentration camp laborers who died being forced to construct the weapon.
At the end of the war, von Braun surrendered to American forces. For the next three decades, the controversial scientist put his knowhow to American use, becoming an integral part of NASA and helping to develop the Saturn V rocket, which would ultimately put a man on the Moon.
If you’re reading this, you're likely in front of a computer. Although that computer might fit in your pocket, the Electronic Numerical Integrator and Computer, or ENIAC, was the size of an entire room.
Built to solve large numerical problems, ENIAC weighed 80 tons and took up 1,800 square feet. Recognized as the one of the world’s first modern computers—the ancients had their own fascinating computing machines, after all—ENIAC would become the great-great grandparent of the machines that make modern civilization possible.
It was also considered one of the first data centers ever created, another technology that's essential to almost every industry in the world.
Large Hadron Collider, 2008
On September 10, 2008, the largest and most powerful single machine on Earth turned on. Since then, the collider—a 27-kilometer ring of superconducting magnets with subatomic particles smashing together at speeds approaching the speed of light—has made astonishing discoveries, like finding particles, confirming long-predicted ones, and even potentially creating black holes to other dimensions.
All doomsday nonsense aside, the particle accelerator Large Hadron Collider at CERN in Switzerland is just beginning its mission in unlocking the secrets of our universe. In 2012, the LHC helped discover the existence of the so-called “God particle,” which tells life’s basic building blocks (protons and neutrons) how much mass needs to be collected. Soon, LHC’s next revelation maybe the confirmation of “superpartners” and, perhaps, the existence of multiple universes.
That weekend jaunt to Vegas wouldn't have been possible if it weren’t for the the legendary DC-3. Built by the Douglas Aircraft Company, this supercharged,1,200-horsepower twin engine airplane with a gleaming chrome exterior and retractable landing gear brought flight to the masses and made the skies not only friendlier, but safer. The DC-3 turned air travel into a reliable, quick, and comfortable form of transportation and turned the airline industry into a $700 billion business.
It was also a war hero, modified into the C-47 Skytrain that became the Allies’ main transport aircraft during World War II. It was so utilitarian that it was used in military operations through the Vietnam War. Most DC-3s now hang in museums, but this aircraft made humanity truly airborne.
Hubble Telescope, 1990
High in Southern California hills, astronomer Edwin Hubble and his telescope made the shocking discovery that the universe is continually expanding. Six decades later, history’s most powerful telescope was named after him.
The length of a large school bus and containing a sophisticated collection of mirrors, reflectors, and cameras, the Hubble Telescope continues to this day orbiting Earth at five miles per second, all the while providing pristine views of the cosmos.
NASA claims Hubble is “the most significant advancement in astronomy since Galileo's telescope” and it’s hard to dispute that. Since being launched in April 1990, Hubble has shown us the birth of stars, glimpses of elusive black holes, and that our universe isn’t just expanding, but accelerating.
The Wheel and Axle, 4th Century BCE
Everyone knows that the invention of the wheel was a big deal, but it was really only part of the equation. You also needed to create something to attach to it, and that’s why the pair in tandem is such an instrumental machine in the story of humanity.
In fact, the dynamic pair, and all its subsequent iterations 2,400+ years later, is so fundamental to human development that it's hard to even separate the invention from the species. Simply put, if you don’t have the wheel, you don’t have us.
CT Scanner, 1971
The first human ever to be slid into a CT scanner was its inventor. In 1971 medical care was revolutionized when biomedical engineer Sir Godfrey Newbold Hounsfield had his own head scanned and digitized into a computerized tomography image. CT scans, the compiling of multiple X-rays from various angles into a three-dimensional image, have allowed physicians to peer inside the human body without cutting open the patient. For his work, Sir Hounsfield won a Nobel Prize in medicine.
Gutenberg’s Printing Press, 1440
We didn't rank history's greatest machines here, but if we had, the printing press would likely claim the No. 1 spot.
Johannes Gutenberg’s printing press officially began production in modern-day Mainz, Germany in 1450, a decade after its initial inception. The press revolutionized the old ways of book-making. Before, scribes and monk had to rewrite entire books by hand. But the printing press drastically reduced the cost of books, made education more attainable for millions, kickstarted the Renaissance, and facilitated the beginnings of newspapers and journals, a necessary ingredient for whole systems of governments.
It’s impossible to overstate the importance of Gutenberg and his press.
Bessemer Converter, 1855
Before Henry Bessemer introduced his converter, iron ruled the industrial revolution. It was the material of choice for bridges and railroads—even if they were the cause of some of the 19th century’s worst infrastructure calamities—because steel was just too expensive.
The Bessemer Converter changed everything. The machine blew oxygen through molten pig iron to create steel, and the process dropped its price from $40 per long ton to about $6. The machine also increased the production of steel and required less people to create it. With steel now priced the same as iron, the world's infrastructure changed from the ill-equipped wrought iron origins of the Industrial Revolution, to the better, stronger, and longer-lasting steel of the modern era.
Although the process was eventually abandoned for even better processes, it was the first machine to show the world that the skeleton of human civilization could be feasibly built with steel.
Rocket Locomotive, 1829
George Stephenson’s Rocket locomotive wasn’t the first steam-powered train—it was just the first modern one. Built in 1929, its success in the Rainhill trials, a contest designed to promote passenger rail, proved that these machines could be not only powerful but also reliable. Stephenson greatly improved engine designs by past inventors to create a machine that would be copied into newer, bigger, and better designs until the dawn of the diesel engine in the early 1900s.
But the steam locomotive remained the iron king of the 19th century, becoming instrumental in nation-shaping moments in U.S. history like westward expansion and the Civil War. The steam locomotive were the first machines to begin the divorce between Homo sapiens and horses, humanity’s prefered mode of transportation since the beginning of recorded history.
Bell Labs' Holmdale Horn Antenna, 1964
Sometimes hugely important machines are made with purpose and years and years of determination, and sometimes one random machine—with the right minds behind it—can be one of the most influential pieces of equipment ever made.
On May 20, 1964, astronomers Robert Wilson and Arno Penzias were working at the Bell Labs’ Holmdale Horn Antenna when they heard a strange hum. After eliminating all possible causes, including clearing out pigeons that had taken roost in the antenna, the two astronomers started thinking they “stumbled upon something big,” Penzias recalled.
The Holmdale Horn Antenna wasn’t purpose-built to find Cosmic Micowave Background, but that’s exactly what it did. It proved the most compelling evidence supporting the very origins of the universe.
Developed by the U.S. military after it was shocked two years earlier by Sputnik, TRANSIT was the first operational navigation system ever created. Although its capabilities were limited compared to systems today, the technology not only revolutionized human navigation but also changed the way we think about our own planet.
Its successor, the Global Positioning System, is a constellation of sats that permeates almost every technology that makes modern life possible, including smartphones, laptops, automobiles, and even the watches on our wrists. It’s given militaries unprecedented reconnaissance capabilities and its nearly rendered the map, a tool used by humans for millennia, obsolete.
Although a technology that emerged in several labs in early 80s, 3D printing hit a major milestone when inventor Chuck Hull introduced the first commercial 3D printer, the SLA-1. The father of the machine as well as the equally necessary .STL file format, Hull and his creation would go on to inspire an entirely new way of manufacturing.
3D printing can create big things, such as an entire house, or something as small as a prosthetic arm for a child in need. It can even print food and human bones. NASA found the tech so vital, they even sent one to space.
It’s hard to say exactly how important 3D printing will be in our lives in the next few decades or centuries, but it’s already made a pretty big impression and it’s nowhere near done yet.
Matt is a history, science, and travel writer who is always searching for the mysterious and hidden. He's written for Smithsonian Magazine, Washingtonian, Atlas Obscura, and Arlington Magazine. He calls Washington D.C. home and probably tells way too many cat jokes.
Darren lives in Portland, has a cat, and writes/edits about sci-fi and how our world works. You can find his previous stuff at Gizmodo and Paste if you look hard enough.
6G Is Just Years From Launching, Whatever it is
The Wild Conspiracy That the Titanic Never Sank
Autonomous Vehicles Could Worsen Future Emissions
Pentagon Places Another Bet on Hypersonic Rockets