What Causes Marble Etching?
Etching marks are not stains. While stains are caused by liquid seeping into the pores of the marble, etch marks appear when the acid has corroded the surface a bit. why?
Marble is mostly made of calcite, also known as calcium carbonate, which is alkaline and reacts violently with acids, which can etch the surface of the marble. By the way, calcium carbonate is the active ingredient in Tums, so if you've ever taken Tums to neutralize stomach acid, in a sense, you've been eating crushed marbles. Regardless, it's clear that marble and acid don't get along. And, no matter how quickly you clean up a spill of tomato sauce or vinaigrette, etching begins the moment the two touch.
What should I do if the marble is corroded?
Marble is etched and needs to be polished and polished, and it needs to be polished and polished. You can spray crystal surface treatment agent, grinding and polishing powder, crystal polishing slurry, etc. on the marble to restore the luster of the marble. You can also use sandpaper to flatten the corroded position, then use a cloth dipped in a little toothpaste to polish the marble repeatedly until it is smooth, and finally polish it with polishing wax.
Do I have to remove etch marks from marble?
No. If you're happy with the durable look of etched marble, you can set it aside without worrying about damaging your countertops. A sanded finish also helps reduce the etched look. For more information on marble finishes and sealing, see our About Marble page.
Removing Etch Marks from Marble
While a polished surface makes etch marks stand out, it also makes removing them fairly simple. All you need is a clean rag, marble polishing powder, and some elbow grease for refinishing the surface. One caveat: If you have dark polished marble or are considering installing it, check the polishing product label first. Many polishes are not suitable for black or dark brown and green marble.
Removing etching from polished marble is more complicated. The affected area will need to be resurfaced, and while there are many shortcuts and tricks, the recommended method is to use a diamond abrasive pad. If you have the tools and ability, you can buy a kit and do the job yourself. Otherwise, it's best to call in a professional, especially if you also want to reseal the countertop.
Whether polished or honed, if the marble has etch marks over large areas, or if the etch feels rough to the touch, it's a good indication that your countertop needs a skilled professional.
Therefore, when we usually use artificial marble, try to prevent some acidic substances from getting on the marble. If we accidentally get it, we must clean it up in time so that there will be no etching marks.