Self-Defined Human #31 - What's the Deal with Michael Korman?, with David
Piano and Music Practice
I teach KorMusic, a version of music that is based on deeper human values and mechanics than what is normally taught. I hope you like it better than music.
What you can learn here
I've got a number of articles on a variety of music (KorMusic) topics.
Piano technique is the physical means which allows us to express musical ideas on the piano.
If you approach things the right way, you will be amazed at what you can accomplish.
Mindfulness for Musicians
Connect with your music practice on a deeper level (like, REALLY DEEP) by exploring your own mind.
Two things you might find useful...
- The $5 Piano Lesson (an introduction to meditation for pianists)
- Take Yourself Seriously (an ebook for non-professional pianists)
Music is easy to play when the technical foundation is there. When there are problems in piano technique, pianists will find that music becomes hard to play, and results are unpredictable, and not in a good way! Thus, pianists at all levels should focus on technique.
Blog posts about piano technique
Mindfulness for Musicians
Your mind can be a scary, weird place. However, you've gotta go there, because the mind affects everything you do on your instrument. Your understanding of your mind is the key to successful practice, mental health, and artistic fulfillment.
Blog posts about mindfulness for musicians
Most piano teachers will tell you that you need to study with a teacher for years if you want to make significant progress. Let's put that aside for a minute and take a look at what you can do on your own. If you view music as a task of personal development, you may find that you can be your own best teacher.
Blog posts about practicing music
Work with Me
Ready to learn more? I offer the following products and services for musicians:
- $5 Piano Lesson: how to let go of BS at the piano
- Take Yourself Seriously: e-book for amateur pianists
- How to Make Mistakes: online course to learn how to stop stopping
- Mindful Piano Basics: online course for pianists
- Anti-Perfectionism for Creators: online workshop
- Imperfect Practice: 1-1 coaching program
About the Author
Michael Korman plays the piano.
From the Podcast
Self-Defined Human #10 - What Music Teachers Are Getting Wrong, with David
Self-Defined Human #8 - Meditation for Musicians Play Episode Pause Episode Mute/Unmute
Self-Defined Human #4 - Why I Hate Piano Teachers Play Episode Pause
Sign up for the newsletter
I call my email list a "cult" because it's my inner circle. Don't worry...we're not that kind of cult (yet).
If you join, I'll send you helpful thoughts about meditation, music, practicing, and being human, on a regular basis. It will challenge your thinking. It will make you uncomfortable. But, you'll benefit from it. Even if you hate it.