Uterine Fibroids are the most common non cancerous tumors in women of child bearing age. These uterine fibroids are also called Uterine Leiomyomas or even myomas. Contrary to common fears, they do not normally convert into cancer. Uterine fibroids may be single in number or multiple. Most of the women don’t come to know that they have uterine fibroids because they may not have any visible symptoms. They are discovered only during a routine check up.
What are Uterine Fibroids
Uterine fibroids are benign smooth muscle tumors present in the uterus. These are made up of muscle cells of the uterus. The size of fibroids varies a lot. They may be as small as a seedling. In some cases they may become quite large, so much so that take up almost a complete wall of the uterus. In extreme cases large uterine fibroids have been known to push the uterus up till the rib cage. Usually large fibroids push against the urinary bladder.
What are the causes of Uterine Fibroids
The exact cause of uterine fibroids is unknown. What is known is that the fibroids develop when the cells in the muscles of the uterus begin to overgrow. The growth of the uterine fibroid is influenced by the presence of the hormones estrogen and progesterone. The level of these hormones is the highest during the child bearing age. Therefore the incidence of uterine fibroids is more during this time. Once menopause occurs, the levels of estrogen and progesterone decline and therefore the fibroids start shrinking on their own. In some cases the fibroids disappear completely after menopause.
A few of the factors that have been known in the incidence of uterine fibroids are –
- Obesity- Being overweight is a major risk factor in the development of uterine fibroids.
- Heredity- If one or more of your family members like your mother or sister has or had fibroids, the chances of your having fibroids are much higher.
- Race- Black women are more likely to have fibroids and that too at a younger age.
- Diet- Having a diet high in red meat content and low in fruits and vegetables may contribute to fibroids. At the same time intake of alcohol may also increase risk of uterine fibroids.
- Vit D Deficiency- The deficiency of Vit D may also increase your risk of having uterine fibroids.
- PCOS – Presence of Polycystic Ovarian Syndrome can also predispose you to uterine fibroids.
- Diabetes- It is another common predisposing factor.
- Hypertension- Presence of high blood pressure can also predispose you to fibroids.
Symptoms of Uterine Fibroids
Most of the uterine fibroids, particularly the smaller ones are asymptomatic. This means that there are not too many symptoms. One cannot often diagnose or point towards presence of fibroids from clinical observation. More often than not, small fibroids are found accidentally during routine ultrasounds.
In cases where there are symptoms, the development of symptoms varies from patient to patient. In some patients, the symptoms are very slow to develop. It takes years to develop the symptoms. In some other cases, the symptoms develop very fast in just a couple of months.
The common symptoms of uterine fibroids are-
- Abnormal bleeding during menses- The most common symptom is a change in the normal menstrual bleeding pattern. In some cases, the bleeding may be profuse and protracted. This may last for more than a week. In yet some other cases, the bleeding may be intermittent and start mid cycle.
- Pain during menses- Another common symptom is the presence of pain during menses. This pain may be felt in the lower back, lower abdomen and pelvis.
- Pain during intercourse – There may be pain during intercourse.
- Infertility – In some cases, more so when the fibroids are large, there may be infertility. In other cases, there may be miscarriages.
- Fullness in the lower abdomen – Some females may even feel fullness or bloatedness in the abdomen.
- Anaemia- Profuse bleeding may cause anaemia.
Treatment of Uterine Fibroids
The traditional or allopathic treatment of uterine fibroids is not very effective. Usually some medicines are given that interfere with normal hormonal secretion. These medicines have side effects as they disturb the hormonal balance of a female. The common advice of gynaecologists is to go in for surgery. This is more so if the female is not thinking of having children any more. A complete hysterectomy is often advised. This means that the uterus is completely removed. This causes immediate cessation of menses. Artificial and sudden onset of menopause often leads to complications.
Homeopathic treatment of uterine fibroids
Homeopathy is much more effective in treatment of uterine fibroids. Out of all possible alternatives, Homeopathy is the best non surgical treatment for fibroids. The homeopathic medicines slowly but surely retard the growth of fibroids. Over a period of time, the fibroids disappear completely. This is a far more effective and the most convenient treatment of fibroids.
Uterine Fibroids – 5 best Homeopathic medicines for fibroids
There are more than a dozen homeopathic remedies that are used in the treatment of fibroids. All of them are equally effective when they are indicated. The indications of the homeopathic medicines depend upon matching the symptoms of the patient with that of the medicines. Once there is a good matching, the indicated remedy will surely cure the patient. Having said that, I can say with a good degree of confidence that some medicines are far more commonly indicated.
These 5 best medicines for uterine fibroids are
1. Phosphorus – best medicine for fibroids with profuse and protracted bleeding
2. Sabina- best medicine for fibroids with clotted bleeding
3. Calcarea Carb- best medicine for uterine fibroids with chilliness
4. Sepia – best remedy for uterine fibroids with irritability, indifference and bearing down pains
5. Thyroidinum- best medicine for fibroids with obesity
A brief description of the 5 best medicines with their symptoms is being given below-
1. Phosphorus- best homeopathic medicine for fibroids with profuse and protracted bleeding
When there is prolonged and profuse bleeding with uterine fibroids, Phosphorus is one of the best homeopathic medicines for uterine fibroids. There may even be bleeding in between menses. The mood of the patient is pensive and even weeps before menses.
2. Sabina- best homeopathic medicine for uterine fibroids with clotted bleeding
When there is discharge of dark or black clots with blood, Sabina is one of the best homeopathic medicines for fibroids. The menses are profue and bright. The bleeding is worse from motion. There is pain from the sacral region going down to the pubis in the front. The uterine pains often extend downwards and to the thighs.
3. Calcarea Carb- best homeopathic remedy for fibroids with chilliness
When there is chilliness and cold sweating with uterine fibroids, Calcarea Carb is one of the best homeopathic medicine for fibroids. A Calcarea Carb patient is usually fat, flabby, fair and perspires a lot. There may be sour smell about the patient. The menses may be too profuse and last too long. There is burning and itching of vulva before menses. There may be cutting pain in the uterine region during menses.
4. Sepia – best homeopathic medicine for uterine fibroids with irritability, indifference and bearing down pains.
When the mental symptoms of irritability and indifference to close family members is present, Sepia is one of the best homeopathic medicines for uterine fibroids. There are bearing down pains present in the lower abdomen. The patient feels as if everything would escape through vulva. She feels as if she must cross her legs to prevent protrusion of the contents. The periods are too late and scanty. There may be pain in the vagina during coition.
5. Thyroidinum – best homeopathic medicine for uterine fibroids with obesity
When there is obesity along with uterine fibroids, Thyroidinum is one of the best homeopathic medicines for fibroids. The thyroid gland is often underactive. The tumors may also be present in the breasts.