David Steward World Wide Technology Paper
“We will be mindful of the global nature of the society and economy, and will incorporate issues relating to ethics, diversity and sustainability into our curriculum.” This project is aligned with the Principles for Responsible Management Education (http://www.unprme.org/about-prme/the-six-principles.php) focusing on: “Purpose: We will develop the capabilities of students to be future generators of sustainable value for business and society at large and to work for an inclusive and sustainable global economy.”
Please provide the information below:
You will have space to include complete references for all your sources of information such as websites, databases, and business magazines as the last question of this Project. Please include in-text citations for each source of information you use and then include the complete references in the end. Example: In Question 2.1, you write a sentence with an in-text citation “The growth rate of this industry is 10% per year (Smith, 2018)” and then in the References at the end you include the complete reference “Smith, J. 2018. Harvard Business Review, issue 3, page 50”.
1. Select one entrepreneurial leader of your choice with the following characteristics:
a) represents a minority group (such as gender, race, or ethnic communities) or faces a barrier to employment (such as disability)
b) founded their own organization (for-profit, nonprofit, or for-profit social enterprises)
c) has a leadership role by supporting new practices/values in an industry and serving as a role model or change maker
d) has inspired you by providing lessons valuable for your personal/career goals
Provide the following content (suggested length: 100 to 200 words):
1.1 Provide the name of your selected entrepreneurial leader and the name and website of his/her organization
1.2. Use concepts from Chapter 2 to describe the novel/innovative business opportunities identified by your selected entrepreneurial leader
Example: Identify an entrepreneur such as Daniel Lubetzky, son of a Holocaust survivor, born in Mexico and resident of the United States, founder of Kind Bars and a pioneer of healthier snacks produced in a sustainable manner (https://www.kindsnacks.com/). Describe whether the entrepreneur identified social trends such as increasing consumer interest in healthier foods and/or created awareness of an issue by educating and engaging stakeholders
2. Evaluation of the industry and competitors (based on Chapter 5) (suggested length: 150 to 250 words)
2.1 Use concepts from Chapter 5 to describe the industry of the organization founded by your selected entrepreneurial leader
2.2 Describe whether the industry of this organization has similarities or differences compared to the industry of your own business idea in this course regarding demand/consumer interest towards social and environmental issues
Example: Identify the characteristics of the industry of the organization founded by your selected entrepreneur such as level of competition, power of five forces, and recent changes. Indicate whether this industry has similarities or differences compared to the industry of your own business idea such as whether there has been increasing or decreasing demand/consumer interest in social/environmental aspects.
3. Evaluation of the business model of the selected organization (based on Chapter 4) (suggested length: 150 to 250 words)
3.1 Provide the mission statement of the organization of your selected entrepreneur
3.2 Describe the basis of differentiation of this organization
3.3 Explain lessons from the business model of this organization that can be helpful for you to develop your own business idea regarding the alignment of financial and social/environmental goals
Example: Describe the main features of the business model of the organization of your selected entrepreneur based on the components of the business model canvas such as the organization’s core strategy. Share any lessons you have learned from the experience of this organization about aligning financial and social/environmental goals.
4. Evaluation of the entrepreneurial journey of your selected founder (based on Leadership slides) (suggested length: 150 to 250 words)
4.1 Describe why you consider your selected entrepreneur as a leader, role model, or change maker particularly as a representative of a minority group
4.2 Explain how this entrepreneur has served as an inspiration for you and your personal/career goals regarding the alignment of financial and social/environmental goals
Example: Explain whether you believe this entrepreneur has elements of visionary, transformational, or charismatic leadership. Share how you have learned from the entrepreneurial journey of this entrepreneur such as whether he/she had extensive prior knowledge of the industry prior to starting his/her organization. Explain how this person has inspired you and has the potential of influencing positive change as a representative of a minority group and role model for aligning financial and social/environmental goals.
Please include complete references for all sources of information (such as websites, databases, articles, and books)