The research indicated that their was no population replacement from Mesolithic to Christian period in the Nile Valley. The authors wrote: “While evidence from the archaeology and mortuary archaeology discussed in the
Introduction does not demonstrate any population replacements from the Mesolithic and on, Nubian history is punctuated by extensive contact with other peoples, including the Romans and Egyptians (c.f., Krings et al. 1999; Smith 1998), which might explain the maintenance of similar
levels of extraregional gene flow over time from our first hypothesis.”
In the conclusion the authors noted that: "In this paper, the population structure of Nubians, as constructed from the skeletal record, was examined in relation to the environmental, archaeological, and mortuary evidence in order to interpret population genetics parameters in conjunction with the historic record. It was discovered that the samples mostly clustered by site, which in combination with the
archaeological evidence of social isolation operating on some samples, balanced with their biological similarity to other samples that display evidence of extensive contact with different peoples, suggest that extraregional gene flow was probably punctuated with genetic drift, at least in three of the samples we examined. Our results also discount a population replacement happening during the range of time examined in this study. "
In summary the Nile Valley people even though they have interacted with non-Africans from millenia, they have remained Black . You can read Evaluating Nubian Population Structure from Cranial Nonmetric Traits: Gene Flow, Genetic Drift, and Population History of the Nubian Nile Valley. See: Evaluating Nubian Population Structure from Cranial Nonmetric Traits: Gene Flow, Genetic Drift, and Population History of the Nubian Nile Valley
Tuesday, August 21, 2018
Subscribe to: Post Comments (Atom)
Dear Doctor. I am very pleased to find your studies in this blogg. I am trying to demonstrate the linguistic connection between Kush, Indus and the Kushan Gandhara empire. It is definite that I can demonstrate the African roots of languages, but I need bibliographical material that I can´t buy or find in Latin American libraries.
By the way, on the subject of old African script and scripts it is important to have some visual references of them and on the internet there is no diffusion about it. Thank you very much for your cooperation if you could help me.
Post a Comment