What haze means?
What haze means?
1a : fine dust, smoke, or light vapor causing lack of transparency of the air. b : a cloudy appearance in a transparent liquid or solid also : a dullness of finish (as on furniture) 2 : something suggesting atmospheric haze especially : vagueness of mind or mental perception. haze.
What does catastrophe mean?
1 : a momentous tragic event ranging from extreme misfortune to utter overthrow or ruin Deforestation and erosion can lead to an ecological catastrophe. 2 : utter failure : fiasco the party was a catastrophe. 3a : a violent and sudden change in a feature of the earth.
What does torment mean?
(Entry 1 of 2) 1 : extreme pain or anguish of body or mind : agony She wrung her hands piteously together, looking like a soul in torment.—
What does frolic mean?
intransitive verb. 1 : to amuse oneself : make merry I didn’t choose the school so I could frolic in the quad— Hugh Gallagher. 2 : to play and run about happily : romp children frolicking in the park. frolic. noun.
What does heralded mean?
/ˈher. əld/ to be a sign that something important, and often good, is starting to happen, or to make something publicly known, especially by celebrating or praising it: The president’s speech heralds a new era in foreign policy. This drug has been heralded as a major breakthrough in the fight against breast cancer.
What does frolic look like?
A frolic is a light-hearted, fun, often silly activity. To frolic is to cavort, romp, or run around — to have fun. Ever see two puppies playing in the park, wrestling, chasing, and just having a ball with each other? Flying a kite, playing frisbee, skipping around, and having a picnic could be examples of frolics.
What does complexity mean?
state of not being simple
What is complexity example?
O(n) — Linear time Linear time complexity O(n) means that as the input grows, the algorithms take proportionally longer. A function with a linear time complexity has a growth rate. Examples of O(n) linear time algorithms: Get the max/min value in an array.
What are complexity levels?
Levels of complexity are a tool that measures the skills needed to perform a task. Example tasks for workers in a specific job are assigned levels ranging from 1 (basic task) to 4 or 5 (advanced task). Complexity levels were developed to address the differences in skill needs between occupations. …
What is unnecessary complexity?
The cost of creating a more complicated solution than necessary, a missed opportunity to simplify features, user interface, or code. Unnecessary complexity is intrinsically wasteful and harmful (Maeda, J. 2006.
What is unnecessarily complicated?
2. Labyrinthine, convoluted, unnecessarily complicated. Notes: Today’s is another word not used nearly enough. It has an intensive sense, that is, extremely twisted or tortuous, more complicated than necessary when talking about an argument or explanation.
What is work complexity?
The number of tasks and difficulty within each task. The longer the time-span ‘by-when’ of expected completion time, the more complex the task.
How do you categorize complexity?
According to project management experts Remington and Pollack, there are four types of complexity that determine the selection of projects. These include structural, technical, temporal, and directional complexity.