A warm winter is not all good for wildlife
Overall, our deer population should surge due in part to this mild winter. But turkeys are a different story.
Definitely an oxymoron.
Two contradictory terms … Warm and winter.
These abnormally high Spring-like temperatures have measurable behavioral effects on wildlife, the unfolding of natural cycles of birth and regeneration.
Matter of fact, it has been such an unusually mild winter this year, I for one am glad when the snow flies and the winds are cold from the north in March and April.
Warm weather is not good?
Most human beings, of course, are ecstatic when we have mid-February days of sunshine here in the Northeast with even a couple record-breaking temperatures in the mid-60s. (Many were in their shorts and t-shirts downtown.)
Here in Western New York the very mild winter was record-setting.
According to NOAA and the National Centers for Environmental information, the anomaly in February was 7.4 degrees above average (since 1895). Now in 2017, it was 9.9 degrees above average, too. And that was our warmest February since 1895.
In January, the average mean temperature in New York state since 1895 is 19.8 degrees Fahrenheit. This past January it was 30.6 degrees Fahrenheit.
Whether we pin the increasing temperatures on global warming, climate change, or a natural cycle of warming trends as we peak toward another in a string of Ice Ages, there is no doubt our winters are warmer.
No alternate facts.
The effects of a warm winter on the whitetail deer should be overall pretty positive as they can keep their weight, instead of tumbling toward near malnutrition and starvation which has been chronicled here in late spring, years ago.
Interestingly, researchers say that if pregnant doe are near starvation, they actually will reabsorb a fetus. And on the contrary, if a doe is carrying twins, as usual, or even triplets on occasion, she is well on the way towards successful recruitment (when little hoofs hit the ground) here in May and June.
Fawns should be stronger than average, born into a world of lush grasses and forbs to feed on as they are weaned. But early springs grow early clover and hay. And when farmers harvest early … at first cutting, fawns, nestled down in the thick meadows, are at a much greater risk than those born in cooler Spring-times.
Fawns are much more likely to be out of the meadows if the first cutting in the fields is later in June.
But overall, our deer population should surge due in part to this mild winter.
More:Not all alcohol shipping sales are equal: Cideries, distilleries hope to change NY law
More:New Runnings outdoors store opens in Wellsville: What to know about products, local impact
But turkeys are a different story as they breed in the springtime, instead of the fall like deer. Though the youngsters wind up being recruited at the same time.
Turkey hatches are greatly affected by springtime temperatures.
A lot like apple blossoms.
If apple buds bloom too soon, a hard freeze in early May toasts them. The embryonic apple is frozen, dies and falls off the stem.
We say, “Poor fruit year.”
Turkeys are locked into spring temperatures too in a primordial way … in that they begin to breed.
Gobblers gobble and stutters strut.
And the consequence may be that the hen turkey lays her clutch of eggs too soon, fooled by these early warm winter temperatures.
Spring is here!
But alas, the little turkey poults, aka chicks, hatching here too early in late winter or early spring, so dependent upon protein from insects, find life difficult if not impossible. Especially key for wild turkey poult survival is newly emerging grasshoppers as a food source.
Our turkey population has taken a nosedive in the last 20 years or so. As spring temperatures have gone up, our turkey population has gone down. This is measured by recording hunter kill stats.
In 2001 NYS hunters harvested 45,000 gobblers. In 2021, hunters killed 16,892. Very troubling drop-off.
Why has the turkey population plummeted?
Many posit that our predator population has grown, including coyotes, fox, fishers, crows and raptors.
No doubt that has had an effect.
But part of the answer may also be in precisely this warming trend of early spring temperatures, fooling turkey and allowing them to breed early … too early.
But nature does have a backup plan.
If a clutch fails, or the brood dies, hen turkeys will breed again and re-nest.
That’s why we are beginning to see more and more tiny poults, baby turkeys in August.
Of course, the problem is, those little turkeys have a harder time dealing with a quickly approaching winter than their larger cousins did in the past.
So when it snows in March and early April now, I like to think of it as putting the brakes on a too early springtime here.
— Oak Duke writes a weekly column.