According to Yang Kichang, a researcher at the Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences’ Institute of Agricultural Sciences, China has halved the rice cycle in seedlings by about 60 days using crop technology.
Yang, a senior scientist at the Institute’s Child Care Team, presented experimental rice on the multi-story shelves of the National National Rice Research Institute of China.
The experiment was conducted with LEDs that provide the best lighting conditions in different stages of development.
Things like heat, humidity and carbon dioxide accumulation are under control and produce targeted nutrients based on growth needs.
Two of the six dwarf species were harvested in 63 days, and they produced 9.78 metric tons per hectare, half of the normal 120-day growth period on agricultural land.
Crops are harvested only two to three times a year, and the nursery is expected to produce six generations of crops.
“This method greatly shortens the breeding cycle and improves crop yields, setting a precedent for other crops,” Young said.
Kian Kian, a scholar at the Chinese Academy of Sciences and deputy director of the Rice Research Institute, said efficient farming is the key to ensuring national food security.
Kian says: “It takes many generations to breed the best new breeds, long years, or even decades. The technique in the nursery breaks down time and space constraints. ”
The controlled environment and elements in kindergarten can significantly promote photosynthesis and growth of crops, and the system can be built near breeding facilities without being affected by soil, space, climate and seasonal changes, Yang said.
“In the future, grain production methods can be used, and cities can see more food factories,” he said.
With the scientific support of the central government and the breakthroughs in LED lighting technology, childcare development in China was delayed but was built quickly.
To further develop the technology, he said, China has set up a state-of-the-art farm in Romania and in the United Kingdom.