Snoring & Sleep Apnea
Snoring is such a common phenomenon that most people just dismiss it as something that just happens. In some cases, snoring is simply the result of vibrations of the structures in the upper airway such as the soft palate. As the muscles in these structures relax as a person sleeps, breathing can vibrate the structures to cause snoring. However, that is not the only reason snoring can occur.
Loud snoring is one of the most common symptoms of obstructive sleep apnea. In some individuals, the muscles in the upper airway become too relaxed and collapse, blocking the passage of air.
If you are concerned that your snoring may be connected to sleep apnea, ApneaMed is here to help you recognize potential signs of obstructive sleep apnea as well as help you find the right solutions to treat your snoring and sleep apnea.
What Symptoms Paired With Snoring Can Indicate Sleep Apnea
Not everyone who snores at night will have sleep apnea. But if you do snore at night and are concerned about sleep apnea, there are other symptoms that you can look for which will indicate if you might have obstructive sleep apnea.
- Wake up during the night choking or gasping
- Have frequent morning headaches
- Struggle with constant fatigue and sleepiness
- Cardiac problems such as heart disease, high blood pressure, and strokes
- Often subject to mood swings, irritability, and depression
- Find concentrating difficult
- Wake up with a sore throat and dry mouth
- Often wake up for nighttime urination
If you often snore at night and have one or more of the above symptoms, these signs may point to you having obstructive sleep apnea. But, until you are tested for sleep apnea, you won’t know for sure.
How To Check If Your Snoring Is Due To Sleep Apnea
In the past, to be tested for sleep apnea, you would have needed to sign up for a sleep study. As these studies checked for multiple sleep disorders, there is a long wait list to get into a sleep clinic, and it can be an expensive and cumbersome procedure.
Also, if you are a more private person, it can be uncomfortable to participate in a sleep study, as you will know that someone is watching you snore and sleep. But thanks to advances in modern medical technology, you can have your sleep apnea tested quickly, privately, and affordably in your own home.
With the ApneaMed home sleep test, you can test for obstructive sleep apnea. All you need to do is order your sleep apnea home sleep test, follow the setup instructions, and use the testing unit overnight as you sleep. Once you are done, package up the home sleep test unit and return it to ApneaMed.
After your testing unit arrives, our sleep technicians will upload the data collected while you slept, such as your respiratory effort, heart rate, heart rhythm, breathing patterns, body position, snoring, and blood oxygen saturation. With this information available, our board-certified sleep physician will review it, make a diagnosis, and send you the results of your sleep apnea test.
Treat Your Snoring And Sleep Apnea With The Same Tool
Should it turn out that you do have obstructive sleep apnea, you can have your sleep apnea and snoring treated with the same tool—the ApneaMed AutoPAP machine.
The AutoPAP is similar to the more commonly known CPAP sleep apnea machine. With an AutoPAP, positive airway pressure is output, which helps keep your airway open. Unlike the constant, high pressure of the CPAP which makes it difficult to go to sleep and stay asleep, the AutoPAP detects the vibrations in your upper airway.
This detection allows the AutoPAP to recognize when you need greater air pressure and when to ease off the air pressure, making the machine far more comfortable to use. Also, there is an integrated humidifier in our AutoPAP. With the humidifier built into the machine, it can assist in making sure your upper airway doesn’t become dried out with the increased air pressure from the AutoPAP.
Also, if you need to prove your compliance with either your transportation company regulations or the Department of Transportation, not only is our home sleep test an approved sleep apnea test, but our AutoPAP machine comes with a DOT compliance chip. This chip can track the usage of your sleep apnea machine and give you access to the information so you can easily display your sleep apnea treatment compliance.
Along with the purchase of the ApneaMed AutoPAP, you will receive a free mask and hose. Also, if you ordered and used our home sleep test, you will have a $100 coupon code to use on your purchase of the AutoPAP. That way, you can conquer your snoring and sleep apnea with the help of this one sleep apnea treatment machine.
If you would like to learn more about the AutoPAP, our sleep apnea home sleep test, or your potential sleep apnea risk factors, feel free to contact us today.