Siena is considered to be one of the most beautiful Tuscan cities, and in the past was the European center of trade and banking. It was in the 12th and 13th centuries that its most important monuments were built, including the huge Piazza del Campo square and the Cathedral of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary, which are included in the UNESCO list.
Founded in ancient times, Siena reached its greatest heyday during the medieval period. In the 12th and 13th centuries, the local textile factories sold their products to cities throughout Italy and other countries. The oldest European bank, Monte Paschi di Siena, was also established here. The city had around 100,000 at that time. inhabitants and was one of the largest in Europe.
The period of splendor and prosperity left many mementoes in the city's buildings. The biggest attraction in Siena is the square Piazza del Campo with its unusual shell shape. It is one of the largest medieval squares in Europe. It is surrounded by brick houses, there is also the Torre del Manglia belfry. The place is alive from morning to late night, and residents and tourists hang out both in numerous cafes and restaurants, and directly on the square. The great attraction of Siena is the Il Palio event, which has been taking place in the square since the Middle Ages, during which, in addition to a fair and concerts, horse races take place.
The symbol of the city and its most valuable building is the Cathedral of Siena. It is a Romanesque-Gothic temple built for nearly two hundred years, which means that changes in architectural and decorative styles are visible in it. The walls and columns inside are made of stripes of light and dark stone, which are arranged alternately, which gives the temple a unique appearance. Under the church there is a crypt of the cathedral with preserved 13th century frescoes.
Siena's Old Town is full of interesting buildings from the Middle Ages and Renaissance. During the walk, you can peek into picturesque alleys and find intimate squares hidden among the buildings. To see the panorama of Siena, go to the Medici Fort located on the outskirts of the city of the 16th century.