TTAC is experiencing heavy censorship on many social media channels since we’ve been targeted by the mainstream media sellouts, social media bullies, and political turncoats. Be sure to get the TRUTH by subscribing to our email list. It’s free.
The phrase “death begins in the colon” has seemingly become more popular and provides the simplifying truth of the importance of colon and digestive health.
All throughout history enemas have been used in different cultures as a reliable strategy to cleanse the colon of harmful pathogens and debris. The use of coffee enemas begins with Native American tribes who used organic coffee beans as a liver purifier. Today, we now understand the many health benefits of periodic coffee enemas.
Throughout the centuries numerous cultures such as the Egyptians, Greeks, Romans, Hindus, Chinese, and Sumerians have used enemas to cleanse their colons for improved health. Even the Dead Sea Scrolls, which may have been written while Jesus walked this earth, outline the significance of daily enemas for overall wellbeing.
Enemas were believed to be one of the most valuable tools for whole body health in the United States until the 20th century. In 1971, Dr. Kellogg reported in the Journal of American Medicine that more than 40,000 cases of people with gastrointestinal disease improved remarkably with the simple treatment of diet, enemas, and exercise.
The 21st Century and Our Digestive Health
Today, our liver and colon are persistently challenged with toxins. Our water contains added substances such as chlorine and health-damaging fluoride. Toxic chemicals surround us in the food we consume and toxic air we breathe within our homes as well as outside. Processed foods are one of the toughest obstacles for our digestive health. Such foods are not easily moved along the digestive tract and adhere to our intestines. A mucoid plaque envelopes the stagnant particles and creates a highly toxic fold in the colon.
Not only hard to remove, these folds create an optimal habitat for parasites, and inhibit the movement of feces as it exits the bowel. As food remains immobile in the gut, it begins to rot and release toxins into the bloodstream as it makes its way to the liver. Although the liver can purify the blood, an overburden of toxins for the liver to clean will eventually cause an accumulation of toxins. The liver’s burden of more toxins than it can remove will eventually cause disease.
Colon Therapies and Enemas Benefits
Colon therapies and enemas can improve gut motility and the frequency of bowel movements. Both assist in removing the toxic encapsulation of mucoid plaque stuck to the colon walls and further stimulate the removal of parasites from the gut.
Coffee enemas are also used by individuals to improve energy levels (both physically and mentally), prevent bloating, improve mood, and reduce toxicity of the whole body by prompting liver cleansing and tissue repair.
One added benefit of coffee enemas is that they promote the production of glutathione by the liver. A powerful antioxidant defense system, glutathione protects cellular damage to DNA and stimulates the removal of toxic waste out of cells.
Glutathione and Your Digestive System
Studies have shown that green coffee beans boost glutathione production by up to 600% in the liver and up to 700% in the small intestine. The coffee enema is the most potent way to gain these powerful effects because the enzymes of the digestive tract do not interact with the nutrients before they reach the liver.
Individuals with cancer, gallstones, digestive complications, low energy, autoimmune disorders, and liver conditions can benefit from coffee enemas. Used in most natural health retreat centers in the world, coffee enemas can clean and purify the digestive tract in a short period of time.
The Gerson Therapy and Coffee Enemas
The Gerson treatment for cancer involves a strict protocol of diet, dietary supplements, and coffee enemas. This therapy is designed to remove toxins from the body while simultaneously improving the immune response to fight infection and heal. Developed by Dr. Max Gerson in the 1930s, the Gerson therapy is said to achieve a 50% cure rate and is one of the best alternative cancer treatments today. This is really quite remarkable given that most of his cancer patients were far advanced with the disease. (Learn more about the 4 stages of cancer here)
Dr. Gerson’s purpose was to detoxify the body, provide essential potassium minerals, and supplement oxidizing enzymes for the body’s use. He used forms like green leaf juice in order to create an environment where carcinogenesis can no longer function, ceasing the progression of cancer.
Dr. Gerson believed that our modern day diets maintain an imbalance of minerals such as an abundance of sodium and a deficiency of potassium. He is quoted with saying
our modern agriculture decreased potassium and iodine in our nutrition, precisely the minerals for prevention of cancer.”
Gerson therapy involves a plan fixed on organic foods and the avoidance of processed foods contained in toxic packaging. Along with an improved dietary lifestyle, coffee enemas were used by Gerson to widen the bile ducts to improve excretion processes. Individuals undergoing Gerson therapy receive enemas continually throughout the day and night − every 4 hours. Therapies similar to Gerson’s regimen have shown an improved quality of life in individuals who maintain the treatment plan.
How to Do a Coffee Enema
People suffering from a chronic disease can commit to up to four coffee enemas daily. Otherwise healthy individuals can benefit from enemas weekly in order to detoxify the colon, filtering out debris, toxins, and other substances which have become stagnant throughout the week.
Avoid contaminants by choosing organic, light roast ground coffee and boiling with purified water for 15 minutes. (Add 3 to 4 cups of boiling water over 3 tablespoons of organic ground coffee and simmer in a saucepan for 15 min). Allow coffee to cool. Strain the mixture to remove any coffee grounds (i.e. through a cheese cloth or fine sieve). Pour this into an enema kit and bring to the bathroom. Lie on your right side in fetal position with your knees bent inwards and up towards your stomach. Insert the nozzle about 2 inches into the rectum and allow the coffee to begin flowing.
Tips to Receive Maximum Benefits from Coffee Enemas
Once you become used to coffee enemas you can move around once all the liquid is emptied out of the kit (you can even try some gentle yoga poses). This will help achieve a better detoxification by moving the coffee throughout the intestines. Holding in the coffee enema for about 12-15 minutes is optimal and also challenging as you will have the urge to release the fluid much sooner.
For those allergic to coffee, alternatives include apple cider vinegar that is undiluted and raw, or green juice. Choose what you can tolerate. You may also want to try organic teas such as assorted blends of organic herbs like green tea.
Potential Side Effects of Coffee Enemas
Coffee enemas, however beneficial as they may be, also have side effects. Adverse reactions may include intestinal cramping, loss of appetite, fever, electrolyte imbalance, and diarrhea. These consequences can further lead to dehydration, constipation, and infection. You should seek your health care practitioner’s approval before beginning a daily coffee enema regimen.
Editor’s note: This post was originally published in June 2016. It has been updated and republished in November 2019.
Toxic buildup is the root cause of many diseases.
Click here to discover how easy it is to detox for health and vitality.
Follow, Subscribe, & SHARE:
1. Telegram: https://t.me/TheTruthAboutCancer_Vaccines
2. GAB: https://gab.com/TyCharleneBollinger
3. GETTR: https://gettr.com/user/cancertruth
4. TruthSocial: https://truthsocial.com/@TheTruthAboutCancer
5. CloutHub: https://app.clouthub.com/#/users/u/TheTruthAboutCancer
6. Bitchute: https://www.bitchute.com/channel/vX3lcHH4Dvp0/
7. Rumble: https://rumble.com/c/TheTruthAboutCancerOfficial
8. Brighteon: https://www.brighteon.com/channels/thetruthaboutcancer
Enemas have been used in different cultures throughout history as a reliable strategy to cleanse the colon of harmful pathogens and debris.
Today, our liver and colon are persistently challenged with toxins in our air, food, and water. If the liver is not able to remove these toxins effectively, it will eventually cause disease.
Coffee enemas are also used to improve energy levels (both physically and mentally), prevent bloating, improve mood, and reduce toxicity of the whole body.
Individuals with cancer, gallstones, digestive complications, low energy, autoimmune disorders, and liver conditions can benefit from coffee enemas.
A popular alternative cancer treatment is the Gerson Therapy which involves a strict protocol of diet, dietary supplements, and coffee enemas multiple times per day.
People suffering from a chronic disease can commit to up to four coffee enemas daily.
Seek your health care practitioner’s approval before beginning a daily coffee enema regimen.
Silvia Logan says
Coffee enemas are not something that you drink, but put in your but to cleanse the colon? What shops in Canada will have coffee enemas? Do coffee enemas actually cure people with stage 4 cancer, in which the cancer disappears and never come back again?
Look forward to the response, as I’m turning on a friend to this site I just found has been battling colon cancer.
having learned the Coffee Enema (Gerson) process through a clinic, I highly recommend looking around for a clinic that does these. They are easy to learn, a few visits will give you the idea. I detoxed a load of mercury from my body, that had built up over 35 yrs and was blocking calcium absorption in my body, a very painful feeling in my feet mainly, couldn’t walk far or stand long without aching pain.
make sure you have Electrolyte minerals, Potassium calcium magnesium, as these enemas suck out the good stuff too. But they ARE effective.
the enemas Clear the body and Liver of debris, so the Liver can perform its normal function, immunity will be boosted. its also good of course at clearing the poison from Chemotherapy. Think of Gerson, as the first step that a DO is trained to do, Make sure the body’s immune system is operating at high capacity.
I believe the Gerson site, has a list of clinics that use Gerson therapy, by country.
Krishna Khalsa says
Your coffee enema illustration says to lie on the “right side” in fetal position. This is incorrect. One should lie on the LEFT SIDE in fetal postion, for the simple reason that the duct into the transverse colon (from the gall bladder/liver) is on the right side of the body. This allows the toxic material from the liver to empty by gravity into the colon and out of the body (since the liver is on the ‘high side’). The truth of my comment is reinforced by the fact that the illustration you show is actually of someone lying on their LEFT side (not the right side). I’ve been practicing this coffee enema procedure daily for 18 years, to manage and prevent migraine headaches. It’s very effective.
nicole villare says
This is confusing as to which side to lay on right or left…..I have read and followed Gerson Therapy regarding coffee enemas and according to Gerson its to lay on the right side to stimulate the liver……After reading this I may just be flipping half the time right and the other half left….lol
Gene Witmer says
The book “Healing the Gerson way “on page 165 says “The patient lies on his or her RIGHT side.
Charlotte Gerson was the author.
ANNIE PIERCE says
Krishna, I’ve been using Coffee Enemas for several years since reading how Max Gerson discovered that it was a very effective way to detox the LIVER at a sufficient speed necessary to handle the massive CELLULAR toxic detox occurring in his patients on a daily basis. I have always lain on my RIGHT SIDE as most references suggest, but your reasoning for lying on the LEFT side, seems perfectly logical to me. I will try it and see what happens!
Julie Ciulla says
Yes!! A big yes this helped me beat stage 4 non Hodgkin’s lymphoma !! Here is my story on YouTube
Beating Cancer: Julie Ciulla Shares Her Story
I never get tired of encouraging people how much colon cleansing via enema or colonic was a HUGE part of how I beat cancer!!!
IRVING DRAGOSAVAC says
Was colon cleansing via enema and colonic the main part of your daily healing routine? How long did you do it for? Thank you.
What is your YouTube ? I also have lymphoma
Can I do coffee Enema if I have colon cancer. Tumor is in liver. Had colon and liver resection before.
You are aware that the instructions state to lie on the right side, which would actually be on the ascending colon side and the diagram you (or graphic artist) chose is a figure lying on their left side, descending colon side. So, which is it? Your words or your pictures?
Could you supply us with evidence on what types of cancer in which stages werde cured? I couldn’t find any studies on the subject of coffee enemas and cancer conquerors.
April Barrett says
The drawing of the person in the directions that say “lie on your right side” is lying in his left side. That should be corrected.
What yoga positions facilitate getting the coffee to the liver? Thanks
google, ‘yoga asanas/positions for liver’. I laid flat on my back with knees bent, heels touch butt (as the clinic had me do), position. I did shift to right some, then back.
Kris Keele says
One of the things this article forgot to mention is that if you are going to do a coffee enema, you need to make sure your bowels are cleaned out first otherwise you have a lot of painful cramping and you can’t hold the implant in for very long . When I have done these I always do a preliminary enema first and add Melaleuca oIl to the water and/or coffee kill the Parasites coming out of your colon. One of the health practitioners I consulted about the coffee enema said he has used just regular Folgers coffee and still has good results. I have been doing coffee enemas for over a year and I have been successful in getting rid of mucoid plaque, parasites, systemic yeast infection, and so far avoiding gallbladder surgery.
There are mycotoxins in nonorganic coffee for sure. There are coffees tested to insure no mycotoxins. Very important!
Not a doctor here, but two close family members had cancer. The coffee enemas purpose is to detoxify your body so that it can heal from cancer. To be rid of cancer completely requires death of the cancer’s stem cells. That is an absolute of it not returning when those cancer stem cells are killed. By many holistic methods like cannabis oil, the Person Therapy and an organic diet. Thats the real CURE to cancer.
Kate Law says
Coffee enemas have been the single most helpful thing for my health. Some are so freaked out by the thought of enemas, but honestly, if you are suffering with any health issue, coffee enemas help SO MUCH. Add a 15-30 drops of Eucalyptus oil to the coffee to kill even more intestinal parasites, and probiotic enemas repopulate the gut from the bottom up which is great if you need a fast way to re-populate your healthy bacteria levels. Do a few, and you are used to them.
Leah Cohen says
what is a probiotic enema? What do you add?
Annie Laurie says
What do you use for your probiotic enemas
Yes! How do you do a probiotic enema?
yes, the enema, but especially a hot (not scalding hot) enema takes a few to get used to, but the body seems to like it, seriously. I sensed this, and looked forward to my morning enema. I also lost about 20 lbs, but that all goes back to what you’re putting into your body at meal time.
Jan Klimek says
What is the “Person Therapy”?
Sibely Oliveira says
Gerson is the name of the person that create the Coffee Enemas Therapy. He wrote a book about it.
Coffee enema did a great job for me for my multiple chemical sensitivity. Living microwave radiation free was the first step in reducing my mcs symptoms and coffee enema speeded things up even more!
sawilsons.com is a place you can order the coffee. Happens to be located in Canada. Side note – Coffee enema is an excellent way to get rid of a migraine as the caffeine gets into the system much faster in addition to the detox.
Kris Keele says
Thank you. Do you have a suggestion for the organic coffee I should be using???
Since doing coffee enemas I’ve been getting pain in my lower right side of my back. Feels kind of like a kidney stone. But no fever or blood in my urine. Is this a side effect?
Organic Gold Roast Premium Grind – it will be a nice cream color when you open the bag
I’ve been doing therapeutic green coffee enemas once a week for 10 years as a routine practice to maintain my excellent
health after a healing of severe ezcema. Anyone want to know what I learned about eczema and protocols to heal, just say so.
I have always known to lie on left side until contents are in the intestine. Be sure you only insert tube no more than 2″. Then lie on
right side for the 15 minutes.
I have really bad eczema on my scalp and after 2 years of eating good and doing coffee enemas I have not seen any results. I would love to know what you did to help yours.
I have a teenager afflicted w eczema. Please share your protocol.
I hope they read your comment and see their mistake. It sounds very important.
So, after all that was discussed above, which side one should be while doing coffe enema Right or Left?
Since it has been brought up, Google it to find out what is correct. They haven’t fixed it yet.
Gary Johnston says
Just a warning for those with anxiety disorders at GAD level or above. The caffeine in this amount of coffee will elevate anxiety levels significantly and can overload your system to a very uncomfortable level. If you already hear voices or have other halucinatory effects, DON’T use coffee! Unfortunately mental health issues are often overlooked with these type of therapies.
byrtix Neno says
what means ORGANIC Coffee? Grind or beans? Rosted or green? Sorry, but instructions above are precise, except to describe what coffee to use.
if you have serious disease, the last thing you want in your body is pesticide!! Organic means no pesticide was used in growing/processing the beans. I used Folgers ground. you can buy specialty coffee for this online, I believe several places sell it.
I am an ND student who researched the literature of the benefits of coffee enemas. Your article states that coffee enemas increase GSH. May I see the reference for this information. I could not find anything on this subject in Pubmed. Thank you.
Hi Alec, Please refer to the Sources and References tab that is directly under the article summary.
Rene Peralta says
Thanks Krishna for that most enlightening & imperative detail regarding which is the proper side to lie on for one’s coffee enema!
Wish the website authors would re-post this fact to past & new readers who have used this procedure or are contemplating this colon cleanse such as my self. I’m sure it’s safe to say we all “appreciate” & are grateful on your helpful feedback…
Cherisa Klopick says
Non- organic coffee is also extremely high in pesticides! It is one of the highest sprayed crops. Whether enemas or drinking, coffee should be organic. Best for our bodies and our planet!
Gene Witmer says
Charlotte Gersons book “Healing the Gerson way on page 165 says “The patient lies on his or her “Right side”
before you delete my comment I suggest you read the book.
I have DVD’s The Gerson Therapy volume 1…2…and 3 also Max Gerson “A Cancer Therapy”..The Gerson Therapy..
Gerson Therapy Handbook…! is 148 pages other is 105 pages…DVD “Dying to have known…The Gerson Miracle…
The Beautiful Truth…Cancer is curable Now…Healing Cancer from the inside out.
PLUS on page 171 of “The Gerson Therapy” it says to lie on his or her right side…If due to pain the patient can lie on ones back.
Lie on the left side only as a last resort because the coffee enema goes deeper into the bowel most effectively from the right side”
Gene Witmer says
I have all the Gerson DVDs books plus other DVDs on cancer
Charlotte says lie on your right side for the third time Page 165 Healing the gerson Way “The Gerson Therapy”
page 168 “right side” I also read if painful lay on ones back…and left side at last resort..because the coffee enema goes
deeeper into the bowel most effectively from the right bside.
Gene Witmer says
RIGHT SIDE read Charlottes books
Yes as a nurse any enema the person should lie on their left side….
I was always taught to get an enema lying on your left side…..
Silvia De Los Santos says
I was cured from Breast Cancer stage 0, in only less than 6 months! Coffee enemas twice a day, colonics in the second month, in 2 series of 6; (2 per week). Excercise by walking one hour daily; sleeping 8-9 hours going to bed by 8:30-9:00 and getting up by 6 AM. Food: all natural (not necessarily organic) juices of fruits and greens, specially kale with turmeric, every 2 hours.
Cold showers to help the skin rid of acidity.
I would not do coffee enemas daily as this will remove and/or destroy one’s normal flora in the colon, which we need to live! If one has to do them daily (e.g., for cancer treatment), supplementing with probiotics would be necessary.
Thank u so much for the information but I want to ask can we use coffee bean pure extract as pills ? If it is natural one and Don t have cancer
Thank u in advance
Alan Galloway says
Lina, I think the extract would be digested (dissolved) by stomach acid. Same reason Gerson patients do coffee enemas rather than drinking it.
While detoxing the colon is very important in fighting any disease, everyone should be aware that the first line of defense in fighting disease is a healthy mouth. Teeth act as pumps for bacteria into the bloodstream and if you have issues with gums and teeth and do not act to remedy this situation, then detoxing the colon will never be as effective as it could be.
Remember…food comes in through the mouth and it starts to decay rapidly at that point.
Kris Keele says
Thank you to everyone who has contributed comments on how to effectively do coffee enemas. I think it would be a good idea to have a probiotic enema at least once a week too. For people fighting cancer I wonder if you could alternate a coffee enema with a probiotic enema. Does anybody know if doing them at the same time would cancel out the effectiveness of the probiotics?
Julie Ciulla says
Probiotics daily yes. Bifido bacterium strain has shown in medical research to reduce tumors like B4B has a well researched variety of that strain. I don’t do them after colonics and think that the idea that you lose flora from doing them is not relevant (and something medical doctors say commonly) considering all the flora research that’s come out. Check out Dr McBride an expert on the topic who also recommends enemas (YouTube). I never took them before and did tons of them (over 300 due to stage 4 cancer) and healed so I really think probiotics and colon cleansing are not tied enough to worry about it at all. Flora in the small intestine and its tie to the immune system…focus your research there instead – McBride. Once you really learn the outdo fixation issues in the colon you will gladly use water to get that old stuff out and feel amazing.
In the post it says use 3 TBS coffee to 3-4 cups water but below that in the directions it says 2 TBS coffer to 3-4 cups of water.
And the figure is shown laying on the left side but the directions say to lay on the right side.
Stacey Lara says
I’ve been wanting to try a coffee enema but have been concerned since I’m pretty sensitive to caffeine and don’t drink coffee at all as it makes me feel a lot of anxiety. As this will go straight into the system through the colon my fear is that the discomfort I get from caffeine would be all the more intense. Any thoughts or advice on that? Is caffeine necessary or can organic decaf bring the benefits intended?
Awesome info in the comments and article!!
Hi, I have the same thing with coffee. I still don’t even tolerate coffee when i drink it. Microwave radiation made me sick and also it gave me chemical sensitivity as it breaks down your blood brain barrier and gut. BUT since i live radiation free (i even moved) i don’t have much problems with chemical sensitivity anymore. And also coffee enema helped me a lot. In the beginning i still got tinteling teeth and a real coffee rush. But nothing like drinking it. If i drink coffee it super wakes me up for 15 minutes and then i just crash and since the chemical sensitivitty kicked in I actually can’t drink it a all anymore since it makes my ears hurt. (hard to explain) But enema does only good things for me. It still gives me a wakeup call but no crush afterwards. And i think it was really good for my chemical sensitivity. I do them daily now for about a year and had no side effects at all but that i am still getting better slowly.
Yes, the caffeine is necessary. Dr. Nicholas Gonzalez said most people feel very calm during a coffee enema. He himself did not tolerate caffeine if he drank coffee, but was fine with the enema. You might email the Gerson Institute and ask your question of them. They may be able to refer you to a Gerson practitioner with whom you can discuss your concern. I have read some people end up in the emergency ward after trying the coffee enema.
if you use apple cider vinegar instead of coffee, how would the enema preparation be?
it says t do it with neat cider vinigar
I think it would be insane to put Apple cider vinegar up your bum…. just crazy. It is way too caustic. Just put some in your mouth for a few minutes…Please don’t take vinegar enemas. You’ll be very sorry…
Alan Galloway says
I don’t think so. It would be digested by stomach acid. Gerson patient here. Prostate cancer 90% gone with modified Gerson therapy in 21 months.
I suggest anyone trying natural remedies to always try to do it with organic sourced materials, supplements and foods. There are websites that will tell you about GMO content, pesticide, herbicide and dangerous chemicals in foods, fruits and vegetables – all very tough on the system with damaging impact over the long term. Chemicals are in everything you use unless the label says otherwise, even micro bead plastics inside common soaps.
I tried coffee enema using SA Wilson coffee (I heard cafemam had a good therapy roast too). I was very fearful, but saw how a relative actually improved health with late stage cancer. First few times were tough and not making it the full duration. I also felt cramping near the location where the small intestine meets the large intestine (also where the appendix is located – lower right side). I did enemas in the morning; ate fresh fruit with plain full fat yogurt and organic pumpkin seeds; took systemic enzymes (proteolytic) at night on empty stomach; used organic natural sourced digestive enzymes during meals; ate raw organic mixed greens (with nothing on it… and lots of it- yes it is boring, but it starts to feel good); took a high dosage of 34 strain probiotics after enema on empty stomach (sometimes putting the powder in capsules to ensure more got past the stomach); take a tea that started out as pau d’arco with ginger and tumeric, but evolved to a number of other contents that is incredibly refreshing; eat organic vegetables with small amounts of meat as flavoring and stay away from process foods. Oh and a part of supplements, zinc, D, B12 and several forms of magnesium (threonate, malate, & citrate) – just stay away from additives and corn based sources (GMO content).
I am not 100% better and probably have a long way to go. But after 4 months of therapy starting from being bed ridden for months, I am back to running 7 min mile. I still have aches and I do not always follow my regimin all the time. But I always do the enema, probiotics, supplements, and enzymes (both digestive and systemic). With these 4, I feel the difference. I also feel the difference with mix greens, but I am not always able to do that every day. Natural therapy takes longer, but have a more lasting effect.
I have heard some people try the coffee enema and since they had large parasite load, that what came out was scary. If it comes out, that is good, but you need to make sure you provide easily absorb-able nutrients immediately afterwards. When I first started, it was carrot juice with ginger and tumeric (all organic and fresh) and what a drink that was! Incredibly refreshing, wish I could have it more often, but requires lots of work.
I never dreamed of doing this practice 2 years ago. Now I could never think of not doing it.
Thank you , good read
I have known about using organic coffee for about 40 years. They work. I had a friend travel to the Mexico clinic 35 years ago and she was healed back to perfect health because of this practice. She is a vegan also raw, organic foods is really a must today. She is still going strong. She explained the enemas to me and I have passed them on.They spill toxins from the liver and other beneficial things. I understand that if you get cramps holding the water in for 2 to 5 minutes then release it for you can do plain water 2 or 3 more bags until water runs clean. While water is working then supposedly gently massage in circles your whole stomach area. Feels great and moving material for better release.It is a healing and healthy practice. Suggestion use vitamin E on the tip before inserting. Best of health.
Eddie chew Keonglye lye says
Very true if your cancer is detected and confirmed to pass the 3rd stage. Daily cleansing helps. In addition the use of a good Probiotis such as Pronex is important to replace the good bacteria. This should be supplemented by taking AFA Plus 3 capsules and Linchi or Ganoderma 2 capsules to replace the mineral, vitamins, food supplements to meet the body requirements.
Dee Bradford says
Hi lotus. I would appreciate learning what you’ve learned; I am desperate and really need help. Since Aug 2014 (when I turned 51 and started menopause) I developed itching, burning eczema –red rashes cover most of my body – including lots of raw patches on my back, knees, feet and shoulders that weep yellow fluid then crust over. Very, very painful. Lots of dry, flaking patches also.
I am very thin and have always eaten predominately veggies, fruits, nuts/seeds, and grains. For the last six months, I’ve been on an organic, gluten-free, no refined sugar, vegan diet. For the year before that I tried all organic diet that included some grass-fed meat and bone broth also. Since I didn’t get better, I went back to vegan. (I’m allergic to eggs, nightshade veggies, as well as many other foods.)
I purchased everything for organic coffee enemas but haven’t tried them yet.
I look forward to hearing from you, lotus.
Thank you so much,
~ Denise — My contact info is StopChemicals – at – gmail dot com
Would it be ok (or even possible) for someone having pain & occasional bleeding in their rectum to use an enema? I am already terrified of putting anything up my butt ever, especially now having the pain…i dont want to make anything worse. I dont have a doctor i can talk to about this, soi’d appreciate any thoughts here, thanks!
Alyssa..this is concerning to me. Rectal pain and bleeding is not normal and can be a serious issue. You don’t say how old you are or if you have ever had a colonoscopy. Please find a doctor and make sure you are ok.
You need a doctor
asap! Nancy is correct….not normal
nancy & maura, thanks for your concern. it took me a good while to make the appt and have the colonoscopy done…turns out all is well! just 2 small internal hemorrhoids and a small flat polyp that he removed that was benign. apart from those minor things, dr said i have a very healthy colon! i had also began to use my squatty potty consistently, and have only had a tiny bit of blood once since my comment (it was only ever just a tiny bit each time). also havent had any pain since the colonoscopy…i think the pain may have just been mind created from fear.
Alana Maxwell says
Where do you get a good supply a green ground coffee beans, that ships to Australia?
Sandy Davis says
You can buy organic coffee online. I have used both beans and ground it myself and also organic coffee already ground. I lie on my left side. Be sure to use filtered water like bottled water or even better from reverse osmosis system.
Go on Amazon and type in Gerson coffee enema you will find coffee and kits ! Trust only GERSON the coffee is the best for cancer
What to do if you are an older person and cannot lay down in a tub?
KAF, where do you source your natural enzymes? Thanks in advance.
The real life saver of using this method is a change of awareness.
– one is consciously working with the but and the bowels. A no no as we learned in our youth.
– one is getting aware of the ideas about toxic, it’s uses and abnormal uses (abuse ?).
– one is starting to rely on self-help, instead of relying on all the well-meant Intentions of others.
By doing this we are growing through this life experiences instead of evading uncomfortable situations.
Thanks Ty and all contributors of giving new hopes to all of us.
Dierdre Ashiq says
Taking coffe by pills or as a drink does not have the same affect. Coffee taken through the gut is metabolized by the liver and failes to act as a detoxifier. When taken in through the colon it is picked up by the blood vessels and detoxifcation is the result. The body doesn’t need to metabolize it first.
Definitely a lot of truth to this. Mercury fillings and Root Canals are toxic to your entire body and blood. To find a biologic dentist in your area who safely removes mercury can be found on IAOMT.com website.
Brush with activated charcoal…
Yeah, it’s concerning to me too. Im 40 and I have not yet had a colonoscopy. I am fearful to do so for a myriad of reasons, tho I am talking to a doctors office (that my pcp referred me to) about it. In the meantime I am trying to be healthier. I was thinking to try coffee enemas, because if it is cancer, it could help, but if its something else I imagine its possible I could further harm myself…yet wouldnt that be the case with a doctor sticking an instrument up there?! i guess I’ll have to pass on the enema for now, especially being I havent received any helpful/informative responses. Youre the only response so far. Thank you for that.
Fear is the mind killer. But learning to handle your fear and you will become self-reliant. Treat that fear like you would help an insecure child.
Pain is uncomfortable. Something is not at ease ( dis-ease ). Pain is an electric signal from the area of disturbance to the area for control. Once that signal arrives a myriad of things happen. Feelings arise, associations with other ‘pain events’. It feels like the body hits a panic button.
Then you should find a way to examine what is happening. Distinguishing the real cause and the raised side-effects. In the East people are taught about this. It has many names, and the are a few mainstream practitioners.
Using your imagination to heal can prove to be very effective. Use your imagination to project a golden ball of energy around the affected area. Embrace it as if it was a fright child.
If the pain increases then enlarge the ball of energy and make its light a bit softer until the feelings get more comfortable. Mind you the first times you do this it will feel uncomfortable because the body parts act as if the boss returns on the workplace after a lifetime of neglect. The body parts given a platform to talk to you will jump to that occasion and you can feel overwhelmed by all the reactions. Don’t be alarmed, quiet down. Make the ball of golden energy bigger, it’s light softer. Take your time.
The brains wants to finish quickly, more quickly than the body can handle. Step by step one can clear the body of the anxieties.
As for your specific fear. My brother in law had this specific problem for the last 20 years, but he was to shy to talk about it. It started with him showing lower back pain, very legitimate. So we ( he, his sister, and me ) started on a journey. After treating the lower back pain successfully ( with many relapse) and my wife seeing him secretly wah his underwear to remove the bloodstains we went on the new course. He opened up and told us he had the problem for over 20 years, had surgery for a fistula. The treatment at that time was not to lovely so he tried everything different from that.
I start to explore the internet on all medical issues concerning the colon. In doing so I found enough evidence to convince him that today’s medical examination would not be hurting him. We found a team that could help him. The profiles of these doctors were presented on the hospital’s website. He choose one of them and we made an appointment for examination.
After the examination the doctor explained the cause to be a narrow anal opening, that caused the man to use strong pressure when pooing. That caused the fistula. Tissue was examined and found to be become. My brother in law got instructions how to relax his lower body parts.
He is doing fine now.
Tissue was examined and found to be benign
Yes Leo, fear is ridiculous. I have tried what you suggested, even before reading the first part of your reply before bed last night, and tried it again last night…i cannot envision a ball of light, or light at all, any time i have tried. but I do attempt to focus on and bring awareness to the area (among others) and speak healing and health to it. I have yet to experience what you speak of though, where my body responds overwhelmingly, or at all. It doesnt last long though anyway, as I tend to fall asleep pretty quickly. I am also unable to bring myself to trying this out in my waking hours, but I will try to try to. I dont generally have pain. This all started in about December and apart from the occasional blood appearance i have only had 1 day where it was scary pain wise, otherwise its just something i feel maybe half the time, but not exactly pain. When I read your comment last night, I could swear you suggested some reading, but I dont see it here now. I have read the Power of Now by Eckhart Tolle (and continue to read it here and there) and it has been a great help to me, though I still struggle. I have been stuck in my head and my fear for quite a long time, I know the procedure can be made less painful with sedation, something I feel I would definitely need, which is also a part of my fears around this all, and all the possible risks associated. But i realize not doing it can pretty risky too. Thanks for the reply. Im glad your brother is ok.
Although fear is nonsense still it is there in our senses. So i am not disregarding, i give it a place in me.
A very recent example is following : over the last 30 years i have been doing energy exercises. All goes well, but I do feel the energy of grounding, of connecting with Mother Earth. How I know ?
Well because once I did feel it for a split second. It was a joyous feeling coming from the ground chakras. And then it was gone. Whatever I tried I was stopped by a wall that I could not penetrate.
Recently, 2 years a go, I went for a Thai deep tissue massage, concentrating in the belly. And I felt FEAR, lots of it. The masseur was and is highly qualified and he was very cautious never to thresspass my boundaries. But he touched them. After that he recommended that we would come back in a month’s time, giving it time to sink in. So we did. The next month we came back and it so happened that the best masseurs were busy with my friends, I would wait until the top guy would have me. Then after about 10 minutes an apprentice came in and said she was ready for a client. I had seen her in action, no good ! All my alarm bells were ringing. So I stepped back and took some deep breaths. I became calm and looked at the situation. I realized it was an opportunity for me to get a handle on my fear.
So I approach her and said I am willing to get the massage only I needed my wife to do some translation. First my wife objected, I explained my resolve and asked for her support. And she helped me to keep the masseuse attentive to the job. I got through. It was a very challenging happening. My wife and I were both surprised how easy we could keep the masseuse interested and to the job at hand. At an earlier job we saw her massaging and telephoning at the same time, keeping attention to other things than tne massage.
Still hitting the Wall with my energy energy exercise. Last month i had the idea to use paracetamol to help me coming back to earth. I put one tablet of paracetamol between my lips and wet it a little bit. While i do a breathing exercise into the area of the perineum and I swallow a little bit of the medicine and I send it to that area. Talking to that area that I am taking care.
Now I am busy with that twice a day and I have been making good progress.
There are some typos, sorry for that.
I had a lot of help from people like Neville Goddard and Joseph Murphy.
Checkout ‘Self-Talk Creates Reality’ by Neville Goddard.
And ‘Power of the Subconscious Mind’ by Joseph Murphy.
aha, here are the reading suggestions…thanks!
Alyssa. Do not envision the Golden ball use your intent and just put it there. For true vision we need to be an unbiased observer and that is not us ( not me, for sure).
Your intent is your power, let Faith do the rest.
There is radiation from the earth as well.
Please Silvia De Los Santos
I have had surgery for cancer and the tumor size was 19mm and I had one time chemo but refused to continue, instead I have gone organic and I eat turmeric and sour sop tablet, ginger and garlic, green leafs like kale when I can get organic, cabbage both purple and green. But I do not want anything conventional again as to bring down my oestrogen level as the oncologist say it’s oestrogen receptor positive.
Can you advise on some food or what to take to bring down my oestrogen.
I believe progesterone cream opposes estrogen. And DIM.
The information about using the gerson clinic way to do coffee enemas is excellent. I would definitely use their protocol! Great article & advice!
Hi Valivida, mostly amazon, but sometimes other places such as pureformula, vitacost, etc – depending who is having sales or volume discounts. I tried a few specialty sources/websites, but then went back to mainstream brands available on amazon such as GOL. I hope that answers your question.
sharon kennedy says
I have been using Costco’s organic coffee for years. And yes, using organic coffee is highly important as non-organic coffee has relatively high toxicity levels ~ the very thing we’re trying to eliminate!
How did you get radiation free..i have mcs and ehs..can you personal message me on facebook id like to know how you helped yourself my name is candy sue fite or email me at firstname.lastname@example.org
Julie Ciulla says
Hi Candy, Have you heard of using Organic Sulfur to detox? Amazing stuff. Amazon has it. Sulfur attaches to the toxic heavy metals in our body and pulls them out. It oxygenates our body. It cleanses. Sulfur is supposed to be in our food/soil but isn’t anymore due to commericial farming. I recommend adding that to your considerations for cleansing and dealing with MCS. You can do this Candy! Dig, research, and find things that resonate with you!
Lady Queen says
Please What about someone with HIV can the coffee enema help them as well?
is it wise to mix the probiotics with the coffee?
Michael Snyder says
[To Gene Witmer] I agree. I have all of the Gerson Videos and books and they certainly document to lay on the right side. I like the fact that the Gerson Therapy has been in use over 70 years with success. This long history was a big factor in my using the Gerson Therapy. I have been reducing my Stage 4 Liver and Lung metastasis of Colon cancer. The proof is documented in my RGCC Oncocount number (circulating tumor cell count) is still going down, and my primary natural method is I have been using the Gerson Therapy. I’m a happy camper, no kidding. The coffee time, as I call it, is the most effective boost to how I feel, and it is consistent. I use it on a 12 hour schedule, morning and night, twice a day.
I thought you need to do them 4 times a day?
Ms. Vai says
Hi Alyssa, I have the same problem I have pain and sometimes bleeding when using #2 from my rectum, I have done with my colonoscopy last week and had found a tumor in my rectum, I am waiting for the results, anyways, my cousin introduce me to coffee enema instead of going through an operation, I haven’t try it yet, until I get my result on the 30th Nov. this coming weds…. Should I still try on the coffee enema? please advise anyone.. I highly appreciated any feedback.. Thanks
Ms. Vai says
from Ms. Vai to Leo, Thank you so much for your encouragement about the pain, I have gone through pain, I can’t sit, can’t stand, can’t walk, can’t lie down, once the pain comes I pray to God to take away my pain because he is our saviour, he died for our sins, he’s a healer to all sick people, it’s in all in the bible. only God will ease the pain and I have high faith in him pdg on my results that this tumor will cure.
God is Good all the time… Prayer is the only answers….Amen…
Julie Ciulla says
People with this kind of pain need natural pain relief and detox. I use B4B Organic Sulfur from Amazon. It’s pure, natural and works. My friend had spinal surgery and could barely walk from the damage and pain. She takes this and told me about it.
Linda Garcia says
What enema kit is recommended ?
Julie Ciulla says
I don’t think the type of kit makes much difference. If you can afford Colon hydrotherapy it’s much more effective. I did a colonic once a week for three years and beat stage 4 lymphoma cancer. Clean out the old bad stuff!! Also detox with products from Dr. Shultz and B4B Organic Sulfur on Amazon for pain relief and heavy metal detox. Keep searching! You can heal naturally – it takes time and consistency.
Vincent Philip van Gelder says
I use coffee enemas and feel good after them. I see everywhere that there is researrch proving that glathione from the liver is increased by 600 %
I have researched this. There is no such research. Not on humans. Even the lab research doesnt prove it. That doesnt mean its not beneficial. Its been benefiting people for so long and in so many therapies that its beneficial for sure. But we must be carefull claiming certain scientific evidence if it isnt there.
Mindy Anderson says
The research is there. It was performed by Dr. Gerson back in the 40’s. You must not have looked hard enough. He has several books, pick one up.
Another side effect may be lack of sleep as it has the same effect as drinking coffee.
Lay down in bed with waterproof mat and disposable incontinent pads
Coffee enemas alone are not a “cure” for cancer. It is used in conjunction with a whole cancer-fighting protocol.
its the same reason why its better to sleep on your left side!!
When I watched Ty’s docu-series, someone in that said that it’s not regular coffee that you buy in the store that you use for the coffee enemas, so I always wondered, well where do you get this special kind of coffee? But this article makes it sound like you just use a light coffee that you buy in the store. Is that right?
The specialty coffee I use for enemas is S.A.Wilson company out of Canada. This coffee is a very light roast which increases the caffeine content. Please read their explanation of the procedure and the why of it.. some of the stuff I read on here is not quite clear… it’s definitely a liver cleanse not a colon cleanse… by the way good luck trying to do yoga poses while doing your enema if so be real close to a toilet😜
Good question, Maureen. I went to the store this.very evening for Light Roast, Organic coffee. Many choices. Wide-ranging prices from $4.99 to $20. I bought somewhere in the middle tho im hoping for high end results. Not a coffee drinker, how does one know the level of quality from one brand to the next, besides the tyoe of beans or is it subjective?
Colleen McLeod says
It causes blood tumor levels to increase because no matter how pure coffee its coffee. BEWARE!!!!
I am enquiring about if the water has to be filtered for enemas. We have rain water and do not use town water with all their added nasties. Is tank water alright to use as is? If not where would you get that much filtered water all the time?
Customer Service says
Hello Barney, filtered, distilled, or pure spring water is recommended for coffee enemas. Thank you so much for reaching out.
where can I buy enema coffee?
Amy Simpson says
I learned to do these many years ago using an extension tube to deposit the coffee about 18 inches into the colon. What would be the differences in the purpose or effectiveness of the two options?
Amy Simpson says
I have done these in the long-ago past and have been wanting to use them again, but I’m no longer physically able to maneuver into position or reach around myself to insert the tube. What sort of health service or practitioner would I look for to get help with it?
Amy Simpson says
Is there an advantage to boiling the coffee grounds? I have always done this (long ago) using coffee brewed in a drip pot. What would be the difference?
Can the coffee expire. I bought some coffee meant for enemas and I’ve had it for 8 years. Do you think it is still ok to use for an enema. Thanks.