Why a Run-on Checker Is So Important for Your Grammar
Good grammar in writing remains as important as it ever has been despite this being an age of tweets and texts. Using grammar correctly allows you to communicate your message clearly and our run on sentence checker can help. The value of grammar isn’t just limited to academic settings. Good grammar is important in almost all forms of written communication, be it letters, articles, blog posts, memos or resumes. It affects how the reader perceives you, how well your message is received and whether or not your message is properly understood. One of the most common types of grammatical errors is the run on sentence. Our run-on sentence detector is a writing tool that can help you identify run on sentences and other grammatical errors as well as offer suggestions on how to correct these mistakes quickly and easily.
What You Should Know About Run on Sentences
A run on sentence is when two or more independent clauses are joined incorrectly. Either there are no coordinating conjunctions or punctuation marks separating the independent clauses or the independent clauses are separated using only a comma. Just knowing the definition of a run on sentence doesn’t necessarily mean you will be able to avoid them in your writing. The following are the answers to some common questions about run on sentences that can help you better understand them.
How Do You Identify a Run on Sentence?
If you want to know is my sentence a run on, you need to understand what an independent clause is. An independent clause consists of a subject, a verb and expresses a complete thought so that it can stand alone as a complete sentence. Two or more independent clauses combined into one sentence without the use of any punctuation marks or coordinating conjunctions are a run on sentence. When two or more independent clauses are separated only by a comma this is also a type of run on sentence known as a comma splice. In addition to doing it manually, you can check run on sentences online using a run on sentence and comma splice checker such as the one we provide. Checking your written text with this writing tool will identify run on sentences in your writing.
What Are the Most Common Causes of Run on Sentences?
Run on errors can occur for numerous reasons. Sometimes they are simply the result of typos and carelessness. They also occur because the writer may not understand the rules governing run on sentences or they aren’t clear what an independent clause is. Comma splices are probably the most common type of run on sentences and happen because the writer feels that two closely related ideas shouldn’t be separated by something as abrupt as a period. Whatever the cause of the error, our run on sentence helper will identify the mistake and offer suggestions on how to fix run-on sentences in your text. This has the added benefit of showing you how to identify and correct run on sentences on your own.
How Do You Tell the Difference Between a Run on Sentence and a Fragment?
When two or more independent clauses are combined incorrectly into one sentence this is known as a run on sentence. An independent clause is basically a simple sentence and can stand on its own. It consists of a subject (person or thing performing the action), a verb (the action) and expresses a complete thought. Every sentence must have a subject, a verb and express a complete thought to be a sentence.
A fragment, also known as an incomplete sentence, lacks at least one of these elements. It is missing either a subject, a verb or it fails to express a complete thought. Using our run on and fragment checker is the easiest way to differentiate between fragments and run on sentences. It can be confusing when you start trying to identify independent clauses and incomplete sentences. The best way how to fix fragments and run on sentences is to detect them using our run on sentence detector, and then correct them by making the corrections suggested by our tool. Even if you don’t know how to fix an incomplete sentence on your own, our free incomplete sentence corrector will make suggestions so that you can correct the mistake once it is detected.
What Are the Fastest and Most Effective Ways to Fix Run on Sentence Errors?
If you are asking yourself “how can I eliminate any run-on sentences in my text”, the answer is to use a sentence corrector app such as the tool we offer. Most people have two major concerns when editing for run on mistakes. They want to catch and fix every run on mistake and they want to do it quickly. Even skilled and experienced writers have to invest a fair amount of time into the editing process when doing it on their own, and even then some mistakes may be overlooked. Using a tool like our run on fixer allows you to catch and correct every run on mistake in a fraction of the time it would normally take. Not only that but you can detect and fix fragments at the same time with the “find the incomplete sentence online helper” while you are at it. Tools such as our not only save you time but they also improve the overall quality of your writing. They catch mistakes that may be overlooked through carelessness or human error as well as provide suggestions on how to correct mistakes you might not know how to fix on your own.
What Are the Additional Functions of Run on Fixer?
Our run on detector is a fantastic tool when it comes to doing a grammar check for run-on sentence and fragment sentence errors and correcting those mistakes, but it can do much more to assist you during the proofreading and editing process. You will find it to be a valuable tool for a comprehensive check of your written text because of the other functions it performs. In addition to being a run on detector it functions as a punctuation checker, dictionary checker and spelling checker. Another useful feature is that our tool identifies whether you are using active or passive voice and suggests adjustments you can make to ensure you are using the appropriate voice to deliver your message. Our tool also examines the tone of your text as well as your word usage. One of the features that makes our sentence checker so exceptional is that it can be used for any type of text. This includes academic papers, essays, letters, blog posts, articles, memos, emails or any other type of writing.
Run on Errors That Can Be Fixed with Our Run on Sentence Detector
There are three types of run on sentences. Our run on checker will locate any of the below type of error. It also assists you with repairing run on sentences by suggesting changes you can make to your text to correct mistakes.
A fused sentence is when two or more independent clauses are combined into one sentence without the use of any punctuation marks or coordinating conjunction. Example: “My dog is named Rover he digs holes in the yard.” There are two independent clauses in the example: “My dog is named Rover” and “He digs holes in the yard”. In the example there are no punctuation marks or coordinating conjunctions separating the independent clauses making it a fused sentence. Our tool works as a fused sentence identifier and will detect any such errors.
A comma splice is when two or more independent clauses are combined in a single sentence using only a comma, with no coordinating conjunction. Example: “Mary had a kitten, its fur was soft.” “Mary had a kitten” and “its fur was soft” are both independent clauses separated only by a comma with no coordinating conjunction (for, and, nor, but, or, yet, so). This makes it a comma splice. A tool like our comma splice finder will identify all of this type of run on error.
Run-on Errors Examples and How Our Run-on Checker Fixes All of Them
The question for many will be “can your tool correct my run-on sentence?” The following are some examples of run on sentences and corrections made using our sentence fixer:
FUSED SENTENCE RUN ON EXAMPLE
“Some of the people surveyed were highly educated professionals others lacked even a high school diploma.”
Correction 1: “Some of the people surveyed were highly educated professionals, while others lacked even a high school diploma.”
Correction 2: “Some of the people surveyed were highly educated professionals. Others lacked even a high school diploma.”
COMMA SPLICE RUN ON EXAMPLE
“Mary went through with the corrective eye surgery, she could see better after having it.”
Correction 1: “Mary went through with the corrective eye surgery, and she could see better after having it.”
Correction 2: “Mary went through with the corrective eye surgery. She could see better after having it.”
Using Our Run on Sentence Detector
An aspect of our online sentence corrector that users appreciate is how easy it is to use. No special computer or technical skills are required. The entire process can be done in a few simple steps:
ENTER YOUR TEXT
Copy and paste the text you want analyzed into the provided field.
INITIATE THE TEXT ANALYSIS
Begin analyzing the text by clicking the button. The analysis process with take anywhere from a few seconds to a minute to complete.
RECEIVE YOUR REPORT
You will be provided a report identifying run on errors and other mistakes in your text. The report will include suggested corrections and adjustments to be made.
MAKE YOUR TEXT SPARKLE
Make the suggested corrections and adjustments as per tool’s recommendations