Introduction. At the Junction of Theories and Paradigms
Grinin L. E., Korotayev A.
The present volume is the third issue of the Almanac series titled ‘Evolution’. The first volume came out with the sub-heading ‘Cosmic, Biological, and Social’ (Grinin et al. 2011), the second was entitled ‘Evolution: A Big History Perspective’ (Grinin, Korotayev, and Rodrigue 2011).
When we started the publication of the Evolution Almanac, we proceeded from the idea that we need epistemological key terms in order to understand the changes occurring in nature and society in their entirety and similarity of patterns and laws of development etc. There are quite a few scientific notions that сan be employed as such key terms.
Volgograd : Uchitel, 2013
, , et al., , in : Teaching & Researching Big History: Exploring a New Scholarly Field. : Volgograd : Uchitel, 2014. P. 7-18.
Big History has been developing very fast indeed. We are currently observing a ‘Cambrian explosion’ in terms of its popularity and diffusion. Big History courses are taught in the schools and universities of several dozen countries, including China, Korea, the Netherlands, the USA, India, Russia, Japan, Australia, Great Britain, Germany, and many more. The International ...
Added: October 9, 2014
, Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences 2016 Vol. 236 P. 174-180
The paper examines how English is used by Russian speakers to convey various meanings and how these meanings are linked to language ideologies circulating in contemporary Russia. Discourse analysis and ethnographic methods (interviews and surveys) are used to conduct several case studies, each focused on a certain communicative niche affected by globalization. ...
Added: October 6, 2020
, , , , in : Globalistics and Globalization Studies: Aspects & Dimensions of Global Views. : Volgograd : Uchitel, 2014. P. 321-328.
Global studies can be made not only with respect to the humans who inhabit the Earth, they can well be done with respect to biological and abiotic systems of our planet. Such an approach opens wide horizons for the modern university education as it helps to form a global view of various processes. However, we ...
Added: October 9, 2014
Volgograd : ‘Uchitel’ Publishing House, 2019
Our Yearbook ‘History and Mathematics’ has already celebrated its 10th anniversary and has confidently entered its second decade. The common feature of all our Yearbooks, including the present volume, is the usage of formal methods and social studies methods in their synthesis to analyze different historical phenomena. The present Yearbook (which is the seventh in the ...
Added: November 14, 2019
, , , , in : Evolution: A Big History Perspective. : Volgograd : Uchitel, 2011. P. 5-19.
A macroevolutionary approach and the new field of Big History seek to develop an inclusive view of the Cosmos, Earth, life and humanity by erasing boundaries between disciplines. Big History is a versatile study that brings together constantly updated information from Astronomy, Physics, Geology, Biology, Chemistry, Anthropology, Psychology and other scientific disciplines, and then merges ...
Added: October 14, 2014
, , , Сложные системы 2013 № 3 (8) С. 4-50
The global evolution of the world community as an integrated self-organizing and self-developing system is studied in the article; and some main features and laws of its evolution are exposed. The attention is focused on the consideration of cyclic character of evolution, of periods of the global history of mankind, of the growth of complexity ...
Added: November 18, 2013
, , , , in : From Big Bang to Galactic Civilizations. A Big History Anthology Volume III. The Ways that Big History Works: Cosmos, Life, Society and Our Future. : Primus Books, 2017. P. 158-199.
Comparison of biological and social macro-evolution is a very important issue, but it has been studied insufficiently. Yet, analysis suggests new promising possibilities to deepen our understanding of the course, trends, mechanisms and peculiarities of the biological and social phases of Big History. This article analyzes similarities and differences between two phases of Big History ...
Added: October 23, 2017
, Saarbrücken : LAP LAMBERT Academic Publishing, 2011
The present book is entitled ‘The Evolution of Statehood. From Early States to Global Society’. Such a combination is not accidental. Without analysis of the statehood development, it is almost impossible to understand the course of human history. That is why it is so important to deduce the correlation of the state development and social ...
Added: October 13, 2014
, , Век глобализации 2016 № 3 С. 16-31
The integral and synthetic opportunities of the Big History concept, which has been rapidly developing in the late decades, are considered in the article. The conception is close to the approach of universal evolutionism but has its peculiar features which are significant for establishing constructive principles of management, global strategic vision, futures studies, and effective decision-making in the global context. ...
Added: September 25, 2016
, Век глобализации 2011 № 1 С. 80-94
The paper investigates the historical aspect of globalization and analyzes the main integration processes that have been taking place during the last several thousand years. In this respect the history of Afroeurasian world-system formation, development and its transformation into contemporary planetary World-System gives large possibilities. That is why this research has been made in the ...
Added: October 13, 2014
, , World Englishes 2016 Vol. 35 No. 3 P. 440-456
The study examines language practices in Russian offices of two international companies. We surveyed and interviewed employees about corporate language policies, their rationale of language choice in different contexts, and ideological underpinnings for the use of English in theworkplace. Following Blommaert (2010), both offices are theorized as polycentric communicative spaceswhere English represents the global interactive regime stemming from the ...
Added: October 6, 2020
, , World Futures: Journal of General Evolution 2009 Vol. 65 No. 7 P. 477-506
Added: March 7, 2013
, , International Journal of Multicultural Education 2014 Vol. 8 No. 3 P. 146-160
Purpose – The current paper aims to investigate whether the structure of international migration system and its country-to-country distribution have remained stable through the recent turbulent changes in the World System, or experienced any visible alteration. We also seek to outline some of the main factors which likely exerted the most influence upon any recent ...
Added: October 7, 2014
Volgograd : Uchitel, 2011
This issue of the almanac aims at filling the gap in the mega-evolutionary research. The Editors believe that the present Almanac, which brings together scientists working in different areas of the vast evolutionary field, will hopefully make a contribution to this process.The contributions to this volume are subdivided into three sections:‘Universal Evolution’, ‘Biological and Social ...
Added: October 14, 2014
, , , Вопросы психолингвистики 2019 № 1(39) С. 82-101
One of the under-researched areas of linguistic globalization is the expansion of American English communication norms into other cultural contexts. This phenomenon is especially obvious in the service sector where the interaction of English and Russian is quite intensive. The impact of Global English reveals itself, among other things, in the individual-focused customer communication and ...
Added: October 5, 2020
Новый мировой порядок и эпоха глобализации. Ст. 2. Возможности и перспективы формирования нового мирового порядка
, Век глобализации 2016 № 1-2 С. 3-18
The author argues what and why should change for the formation of the new world order and what will be the directions and patterns of the formation of this new world order as well as what will be the foundations of this world order and possible mechanisms of its establishment. The author proceeds from the ...
Added: June 14, 2016
, , Globalization of Russian Cities: Towards a Construction of Large Urban Regions / . 2019.
This study explores how to delineate Russian cities in order to make them comparable on the world scale. In doing so we introduce the concept of large urban regions (LUR) applicable to the Russian urban context. This research is motivated by a principal research question: how to construct a statistical urban delineation, which would allow ...
Added: October 14, 2021
Формирование билингвизма в свете современных требований к профессиональной подготовке специалистов таможенной службы в России
, В кн. : Язык и коммуникация в современном поликультурном социуме. Сборник научных трудов. Москва, 2014. : ТрансАрт, 2014. Гл. 17. С. 325-333.
The article addresses the problem of building bilingual competence of future customs officials as an integral part of their professional competence. The author analyzes professional requirements for professional language training of modern customs officials in the age of globalization and expanding economic and culturalties of Russia with foreign countries. She further comes to the conclusion ...
Added: March 1, 2016
Litchfield Park : Emergent Publications, 2013
We see globalization as the growth of the sizes of social systems and the increase in the complexity of intersocietal links. Thus, in certain respects, globalization may be regarded as a process connecting the past, the present, and the future—as a sort of bridge between the past and the future. The title and the composition ...
Added: April 17, 2013
, , Белгород : Константа, 2014
Учебное пособие предназначено для исследования актуальных проблем регионального развития. В учебном пособии рассматриваются основные категории и понятия региональной конкурентоспособности. В работе проведен анализ широкого круга зарубежных и российских исследований по проблеме конкурентоспособности регионов. Определены основные факторы и условия конкурентоспособности. Выделены основные методические подходы к оценке региональной конкурентоспособности. Особое внимание уделено анализу и разработке направлений повышения ...
Added: April 21, 2017
, В кн. : Двенадцатая Конференция по типологии и грамматике для молодых исследователей. Тезисы докладов (Санкт-Петербург, 19–21 ноября 2015 г.). : СПб. : Издательство Нестор-История, 2015. С. 69-72.
Исследование особенностей русских двувидовых глаголов при помощи корпусных методов ...
Added: November 22, 2015
, , et al., , in : Growth Poles of the Global Economy: Emergence, Changes and Future Perspectives. Vol. 73.: Springer, 2020. P. 1001-1008.
The purpose of the work is to develop a new concept of social justice in the globalizing economy. Methodology: During development of a new concept of social justice in the globalizing economy, the authors use the global goals in the sphere of sustainable development, adopted by the UN in 2015 (for the period until 2030), ...
Added: August 2, 2019
, Вестник международных организаций: образование, наука, новая экономика 2009 № 2 С. 1-4
Дорогие читатели! Представляем Вашему вниманию первые результаты исследовательского проекта«Европейский союз как коллективный актор в международном пространстве: Европейский путь создания глобального общественного блага на основе формирования многосторонних партнерств и опоры на международные институты». Проект выполняетсяпри поддержке Европейской комиссии в рамках Программы развития Европейских исследований «Жан Моне». В работе отражается динамика роли ЕС в процессах глобального управления, представлен анализ ...
Added: April 4, 2013