Distance learning is an incredible modern innovation. Students now have the opportunity to learn from anywhere in the world and from the comfort of their own homes. But the lack of a traditional in-person classroom setting can be a problem for students who don’t know how to manage their time and set boundaries while learning from home. Luckily, students can quickly adapt to distance learning with a bit of knowledge and planning.
#1 – Create a Separate Study Space
While it’s tempting to open your laptop and start learning from under the covers in your bed, it’s important to separate your study space from your everyday living space.
Creating a separate space for study and course work will help your brain enter a more work-orientated, productive state during class time and allow your brain to relax and unwind when you leave your work area.
A separate room is ideal, but if you live in a studio or small apartment, just setting up your desk and chair in a corner of the room will work just fine.
#2 – Remove Distractions
It’s tempting to turn on the TV or keep your phone nearby while studying at home. There isn’t a teacher or other students in the room to remind you to put away your phone.
When it’s time to study, turn off all electronic devices and set your phone in a drawer, on silent mode, or in another room. If you expect an important call, you can schedule a few breaks to leave the room and check your phone.
#3 – Create a Schedule & Routine
It’s easy to stay on a schedule when you live on a college campus and are required to arrive at physical locations on time. But distance learning can be self-paced, so creating a schedule and routine is crucial to your success.
Use an online or physical calendar to create a schedule for yourself for studying, writing papers, and meeting with your instructors, just like you would at any college.
#4 – Set Boundaries With Family and Friends
If you have roommates or family and friends who visit you often, it’s important to set boundaries with them about when you’ll be unavailable due to studying.
Friends and family often think that because you are learning from home, it’s okay to come over and visit, call, or ask you for favors because your schedule is flexible. Make sure you are clear with your peers and loved ones about when you’ll be available to them and when you need uninterrupted time to do your work.
#5 – Ask For Help
Just because you are doing distance learning doesn’t mean you should maintain an emotional distance from your peers and instructors. Distance learning can feel isolating, so staying connected to your support system throughout your schooling is essential. Our student services department is there for your benefit. If in doubt, reach out!
Christian Distance Learning at Global University
To find out more of what we offer you can contact us. Alternatively, you can request a copy of our prospectus by emailing firstname.lastname@example.org.
Global University UK is a National Office affiliated with Global University.