Fire refers to the diamond’s brilliance and sparkle, which is created when white light hits the facets of the diamond and then is reflected back in a rainbow of colors.
What Is Fire Brilliance?
Fire brilliance is a characteristic of a diamond that catches and reflects light, dispersing white light into colored flashes of rainbow colors. The more fire the diamond has, the more it will sparkle and create a beautiful brilliance or scintillation. The amount of fire and brilliance depends on how well the diamond has been cut and polished, as this will determine how much light is reflected off its facets. Without proper cutting and polishing, the diamond will not have as much fire or brilliance because it won’t catch or reflect as much light. Therefore, it is important to consider how much fire a diamond has when assessing its quality and beauty.
Fire is an important factor in the overall brilliance of a diamond because it adds to the stone’s sparkle and reflects light. The fire in a diamond is created when it is cut in an ideal proportion so that the angles of each facet allow light to enter and reflect off the stone, creating a sparkle. When a diamond’s symmetry and proportions are perfectly balanced, its fire will be maximized, allowing for maximum brilliance and scintillation
Fire affects a diamond’s ability to reflect and refract light. The higher the degree of fire, the more light is dispersed and reflected back to the eye, creating a beautiful display of color and clarity. Cut diamonds with strong fire will have a high degree of brilliance and sparkle, due to the amount of light dispersion they can produce.
Fire is an important factor when considering the look of colored diamonds, as dirt impedes light from entering and exiting the diamond. When looking at yellow or pink diamonds, fire is essential in creating brilliance, as it alters the color of the stone by reducing the effects of dirt. In contrast, whiter stones will benefit from less fire, as too much fire will create a ‘milky’ effect. Too little fire can also affect their color and brilliance, as accumulated dirt can block light from entering and exiting the diamond. Therefore, make sure to consider the fire of a diamond before buying it.