How to Reduce Internet Safety Risks
The convenience of the Internet comes with safety risks. From problems with wireless networks to websites that have insufficient protection for login information, online risks can put your business and client information at risk. By taking steps to close up the holes in your company's Internet security plan, you can protect your data and finances.
Major operating system manufacturers release regular updates to their software. Many updates contain security patches that fix known weak spots and make your computer safer. Perform regular software updates on all of your business desktop and laptop computers by running your computer's software updating program, such as Windows Update on Windows 7, or setting it to allow automatic updates. Follow the installation prompts and restart your computer to complete the process; in many cases, the security updates do not go into effect until the computer reboots.
Monitor your use of wireless Internet networks, particularly when sending or downloading confidential information, financial information or other sensitive data. Whenever possible, connect to password-protected, encrypted networks, which are difficult for hackers to access. On your office wireless network, use routers equipped with Wireless-N security, which offers better protection than Wireless-G. When you must use open public wireless networks, avoid sending or receiving any sensitive information. To prevent accidental security leaks, set your work laptops to request permission before connecting to open wireless networks.
Strong, frequently changed passwords are a crucial part of an Internet security plan. When you create accounts for websites or applications that use the Internet, choose strong passwords that are difficult to guess or break by including a variety of characters and using both capital and lowercase letters. Change passwords often and tell your employees to follow suit; if they have difficulty following through, enact a specific company policy.
Most businesses use a range of websites to manage confidential data online. When you are doing anything online that requires data transmission, such as online banking or payroll disbursement, verify the security. On any website that you use to manage your business data, look for an "https" in the URL and a lock icon on the login page.
Links and Attachments
Links and attachments present a serious potential security risk for businesses; many viruses get into your computer when you download an infected file or click on a dangerous link in an email. Before you open an attachment, check out the file name and the sender's email address to verify that the file is legitimate. If you are suspicious of an attachment, do not open it.
Elizabeth Smith has been a scientific and engineering writer since 2004. Her work has appeared in numerous journals, newspapers and corporate publications. A frequent traveler, she also has penned articles as a travel writer. Smith has a Bachelor of Arts in communications and writing from Michigan State University.