The internet can be a dangerous place if we are not careful. Nasty viruses are lurking everywhere but more dangerous are certain malware that can range from simply being annoying and wasting your time to really devastating and trying to hijack your operating system or browser.
Malware attacks have become more apparent when downloading freeware. Free downloads are some of the usual places where these nasty bugs are luring and trying to catch you. Being prepared and careful will save you a lot of trouble and guarantee safe download. It’s makes perfect sense – just like we would use a Betting calculator before placing any bets online, we should use antivirus to protect ourselves from risk when downloading free things.
Here are some ways that you can follow to protect yourself against malware.
Only Use Reliable Antivirus and Malware Software
In order to really protect yourself and your computer, reliable malware programs are necessary. Sure, there are many that come for free but don’t offer the full scope of protection that a prime version might. If downloading free software was what got you in trouble in the first place, then adding a reliable malware software is the least you can do.
Configure Regular Scans and Monitor Settings
In order to help yourself against malware, regular scans need to be implemented. This, of course, means having an antivirus program first. There are actually many people in the US that do not have any sort of protection when it comes to software. This is highly important and should be taken seriously. In order to ensure protection one also needs to configure scan settings and monitor them. Scans should be conducted regularly and at hours when you are not using your computer. Also, it is necessary that the computer remain turned on at all times during the scan, so turning off idle or screensaver options is helpful.
Update Your Operating System
We can’t stress enough how important it is to update your system. Malware attacks happen often and sometimes the cause of it is lack of defense. This vulnerability can come with the lacking defense of your operating system, particularly if it is an old version. If you are one of those people who skip updates and things that they are unnecessary, you are wrong. Updates come with patches and more secure versions of protection which will ensure that your system is not attacked nor left vulnerable to any attacks.
Browser Common Sense
If downloading free software was the first thing that got you into trouble with malware, then you should employ some browser sense. This is the same as street sense, meaning that if an area is known for being dangerous you are probably going to avoid it and not venture in it. Thus avoid shady sites for free downloads. Always make sure to read the comment section first as there might be warning posts. Also, ask around, don’t let be by a comment that assures you that the software is safe. We are not saying that you should avoid sites that provide freeware altogether, just make sure to go to reliable sources and minimize the risk of getting a bug.