The Influence of Virtual Forest Walk on Physiological and Psychological Responses
Article dans une revue avec comité de lecture
JournalInternational Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health
The authors of this paper sought to investigate the impact of virtual forest therapy based on realistic versus dreamlike environments on reducing stress levels. Today, people are facing an increase in stress levels in everyday life, which may be due to personal life, work environment, or urban area expansion. Previous studies have reported that urban environments demand more attention and mental workload than natural environments. However, evidence for the effects of natural environments as virtual forest therapy on stress levels has not yet been fully explored. In this study, a total of 20 healthy participants completed a letter-detection test to increase their stress level and were then randomly assigned to two different virtual environments representing realistic and dreamlike graphics. The participants’ stress levels were assessed using two physiological methods that measured heart rate and skin conductance levels and one psychological method through the Profile of Mood States (POMS) questionnaire. These indicators were analyzed using a sample t-test and a one-way analysis of variance. The results showed that virtual forest environments could have positive stress-relieving effects. However, realistic graphics were more efficient in reducing stress. These findings contribute to growing forest therapy concepts and provide new directions for future forest therapy research.
Files in this item
Showing items related by title, author, creator and subject.
Article dans une revue avec comité de lectureSYED ABDULLAH, Sharifah Shuthairah; AWANG RAMBLI, Dayang Rohaya; SULAIMAN, Suziah; ALYAN, Emad; MERIENNE, Frédéric; DIYANA, Nadia (MDPI AG, 2021)This study aims to review the key findings of past studies that assessed the impact of virtual environments, such as nature and forests for stress therapy. Previous research has found that virtual reality (VR) experiences ...
Article dans une revue avec comité de lectureMOHAMAD YAHAYA, Nur Ain; AWANG RAMBLI, Dayang Rohaya; SULAIMAN, Suziah; MERIENNE, Frédéric; ALYAN, Emad (MDPI AG, 2023-02-02)Numerous studies have reported the beneficial effects of natural environments on human health and wellbeing. Virtual games may offer a practical approach to experience the illusion of being in a natural setting for those ...
Communication avec acteOMAR, Mohd Yusoff Bin; RAMBLI, Dayang Rohaya Awang; SULAIMAN, Suziah; SHIRATUDDIN, Mohd Fairuz; MERIENNE, Frédéric; VANHALLE, Delphine (IEEE, 2019)The gamification of stroke rehabilitation may increase patient's motivation and engagement towards their rehabilitation activity and hence contributes to faster recovery. Apart from the interactive experience that games ...
Sensory Feedback and Interactivity: Enhancing Motivation and Engagement for VR Stroke Rehabilitation Communication avec acteMOHD ZUKI, Fatin Shamimi; SULAIMAN, Suziah; RAMBLI, Dayang Rohaya Awang; MERIENNE, Frédéric; MOHAMAD SAAD, Mohamad Naufal (IEEE, 2021)Stroke is a condition that happens when the brain is cut off from blood supply. Patients are at risk of disabilities. To help patient recover, gain mobility, and independence, rehabilitation starts as soon as possible. ...
Gamification, sensory feedback, adaptive function on virtual reality rehabilitation: a brief review Communication avec acteZUKI, Fatin Shamimi Mohd; MERIENNE, Frédéric; SULAIMAN, Suziah; RICCA, Aylen; AWANG RAMBLI, Dayang Rohaya; SAAD, Mohamad Naufal Mohamad (IEEE, 2022-12-01)Feedback is often linked to rewards element in gamification to motivate users. However, there are more to feedbacks than rewards elements. Feedback can provide user with useful information and at the same time feedback ...