(Investigation questions) What can we learn from each kind of stellar spectra?
Explain how each of the three kinds of stellar spectra is formed, and what kinds of objects
create each kind
Discussion Question #3: (Investigation questions) What can we learn from each kind of stellar spectra?
Notes to help you address this prompt concisely:
Explain how each of the three kinds of stellar spectra may provide information about the temperature, chemical composition, and speed of stars and galaxies.
a) Citation format:
If you are familiar with the APA, MLA or any of the citation style standards, you may follow the style you are familiar with. If you are not familiar with any of the citation styles and don t want to take the time to learn about them then I expect you to include the following in your citations:
1) "author name" or " the "institution full name" ( if the individual authors' names are not stated)
2) The authors credentials (if available)
3)"title" of the article or study
4) The date it was "last updated or published" ( if available)
5) The date "you accessed or retrieved it, and
6) The URL address: Make sure to include it as I need to check your resources
Mikolaj Sawicki, Professor of Physics at John A. Logan College "Myths About Gravity and Tides" Last updated: December 31, 2005. Accessed: May 29.
2022 https://www.researchgate.net/publication/228380411 Myths about gravity and tides
If you are citing a book or article, state the following:
the author name, title of the article, book or study, edition or volume, page numbers, publisher, and publication date.
Example Shipman, Wilson, and Todd (2014) , An Introduction to Physical Science, "Thirteenth Edition", pp 60-62, Houghton Mifflin company
Take few minutes and check the following tutorial over Evaluating the Credibility of Web Sites: https://vccs.libguides.com/c.php?g=647106&p=4536816
Check the "Evaluation Criteria Checklist" table.
Although Wikipedia is a good educational website. Note that anybody can post there as it is an
Professor Shihabi, Page 3 of 3
open source site. Therefore, it is not considered "authentic" source of information. I suggest you
focus on scientitic and academic institutions and universities sites. Not on v because of the
academic credentials its authors have. but also because these institutions strive to maintain good reputation and hence scrutinize the information carefully before publishing them. You may still use Wikipedia to look for resources.
c) Avoid Attachments
Post your participation in the message
This question has already been tackled by one of our writers and a good grade recorded. You can equally get high grades by simply making your order for this or any other school assignment that you may have.
Every Student Buys Essays from us, here is why!
Pressed for time to complete assignments or when you feel like you cannot write, you can purchase an
essay on our website. Some students also want model papers to use as samples when revising or
writing. There are also students who approach our essay writing service to beat deadlines. We handle
every type of homework, assignment, and academic writing tasks. You can buy college essays and other
assignments here. At a glance, here are some reasons students prefer our website.
100% Original Essays and Papers
You can be sure that you are getting a paper that is custom written based on your instructions. We do
not sell papers that are pre-written. Instead, we write every essay from scratch. When you say “write my
essay,” we respond by giving you a paper that is 100% original and free of any plagiarism. The essays you
purchase from us have never been sold anywhere.
Flexible & Affordable Prices
It does not cost a fortune to get academic writing help on our website. If you have a question from class,
place an order, get a discount, and get cheap essay writing services. What you see as the price is what
you pay for. There are no any hidden charges. If you need urgent papers, they might cost a little more,
but the price is worth the quality you get in the end. Hire a professional academic writer beginning from
$13 a page.
Anonymity, Privacy, and Confidentiality
No one will ever know that you purchased an essay or assignment from our website. The essays you buy
from us are written by experts. Your data is only used to coordinate the essay writing services you get.
No one can access your personal information and data. Go ahead and order an essay from our website.
It is safe, secure, and convenient.