Learning Goal: I’m working on a finance project and need an explanation and answer to help me learn.Question 1 – CLA ( 5-6 pages required with Conclusion & 6 Reference papers) – GRAPHICAL REPRESENTATION Strongly REQUIREDGRAPHICAL REPRESENTATION – 1 Graph Required for each topic of CLO’S (CLO #1 – CLO # 8) Module 15• Reading: Managerial Economics and Business Strategy (10th edition)• Review all chapters covered that will assist in the completion of the CLA 2 assignment Module 16• Reading: Managerial Economics and Business Strategy (10th edition)• Review all chapters covered that will assist in the completion of the CLA 2 assignment Course Learning Assessment #2CLO #1 – Describe how goals, constraints, incentives, and market rivalry affect economic decisions.CLO #2 – Analyze demand, supply, equilibrium prices, and price elasticities as a quantitative tool to forecast changes in revenues.CLO #3 – Evaluate alternative ways of measuring the productivity of inputs and the role of the manager in the production process.CLO #4 – Assess the economic trade-offs associated with obtaining inputs through spot exchange, contract, or vertical integration.CLO #5 – Investigate the conditions under which a firm operates as perfectly competitive, monopolistically competitive, or a monopoly.CLO #6 – Explain how beliefs and strategic interaction shape optimal decisions in oligopoly environments.CLO #7 – Identify examples of networks and network externalities, and determine the number of connections possible in a star network with n users.CLO #8 – Evaluate and present the economic basis for limit pricing, and identify the conditions under which a firm can profit from such a strategy.Analyze a competitive situation or industry practice in a 4 to 6 page, APA formatted written paper. You should choose a topic early on in this course. All papers must be strategy papers, meaning they must be about firms. However, there is a great deal of flexibility in the choice of topic. Step 1First, choose an industry, based on interest in the industry. Examples of industries range from advertising to zoos, and include digital watches, private jets, diapers, over-the-counter cold and flu formulas, photographic film, automobiles, airlines, football, romance novels, dating services, banana production, or pre-stressed concrete, computer printers, pagers, business schools, used cars sold over the web, movie theaters. Step 2Having chosen the industry, you will need a question or issue on which to focus. Such questions could be broad (What strategies are most likely to sustain profitability?) or narrow (Should firm X build a new plant? Where?). Good questions encourage you to think strategically, and thus should include the likely responses of rival firms to any hypothetical actions. Plan to include your question in the topic proposal. A different approach is to choose a story about the behavior of a firm from a newspaper or other source, and research this story. For example, the defense contractor Lockheed-Martin announced a friendly takeover of Northrop-Grumman, and then later dropped the plan after the Department of Justice filed an antitrust complaint. This story contains a dozen potential paper topics. How is the defense industry organized? Why did they want to merge? Why did the DOJ want to block the merger? Choose a topic in which you are interested rather than one that looks easy. Topics that look easy can be treacherous and unpleasant if they are boring. Step 3Develop your written response. An important aspect of business communication is the elimination of the extraneous. Supporting exhibits are not counted in the page total. Using a few well-chosen exhibits is a better strategy than many irrelevant exhibits. It is important to provide references for facts you rely on in the analysis. The paper’s focus should be on analysis, with industry description provided to support that analysis. A common mistake is too much description, too little analysis. Do not choose a situation from a case reading from this or another class. Do not revise a paper you wrote for another course as a project without discussing it with me — it would have to be a new paper to be approved. This project is intended for you to perform hands-on strategic analysis. If you were handed a project to analyze a strategic situation by the CEO of your company, what would you hand back? Successful CLA #2s Include:When you have collected a great deal of information and begun to rough out your topic, run through this list of tools and ensure that either they are used well, or aren’t relevant. • Five Forces o Entry barriers, rivalry usually, but not always, the most significant • Complements • Differentiation o Is one dimension enough? • Cooperation • Pricing• Market segmentation • Rivalry • First mover advantages and disadvantages
Requirements: Professional Assignment – 5-6 pages
Delivering a high-quality product at a reasonable price is not enough anymore.
That’s why we have developed 5 beneficial guarantees that will make your experience with our service enjoyable, easy, and safe.
You have to be 100% sure of the quality of your product to give a money-back guarantee. This describes us perfectly. Make sure that this guarantee is totally transparent.Read more
Each paper is composed from scratch, according to your instructions. It is then checked by our plagiarism-detection software. There is no gap where plagiarism could squeeze in.Read more
Thanks to our free revisions, there is no way for you to be unsatisfied. We will work on your paper until you are completely happy with the result.Read more
Your email is safe, as we store it according to international data protection rules. Your bank details are secure, as we use only reliable payment systems.Read more
By sending us your money, you buy the service we provide. Check out our terms and conditions if you prefer business talks to be laid out in official language.Read more