This section provides an overview for hair nets as well as their applications and principles. Also, please take a look at the list of 1 hair net manufacturers and their company rankings.
Table of Contents
A hair net is a mesh cap worn inside a hair cap for the purpose of preventing hair from falling out.
This fine mesh prevents hair and dander from falling out and causing contamination.
On the other hand, the top of the head is made of a relatively rough mesh, which allows for ventilation and reduces the feeling of stuffiness.
Hair nets are available in disposable and washable versions.
Hair nets are used in places where foreign substances such as hair should not be allowed to come in contact with the wearer, such as food processing plants, precision equipment manufacturing plants, laboratories, and medical facilities.
Especially in the food industry, the revised Food Sanitation Bill, which made HACCP mandatory in June 2020, has made sanitation management even stricter in the future.
The scope of HACCP covers all businesses that manufacture, process, prepare, and sell food, making it a system that has a broad impact.
HACCP is a hygiene management method that aims to ensure the safety of food products by eliminating hazardous factors that may occur in the process of food production.
While some foreign countries had already made HACCP mandatory, only a few major companies in Japan had adopted it.
As a result, facilities that have already adopted HACCP are required to educate and train their employees in accordance with the guidelines and to comply with the prescribed manufacturing processes.
Therefore, hygiene control will become even stricter than before, and the handling of hair nets will become even more important.
In most food processing plants, hair nets are worn at the beginning of the production process.
If worn correctly, hair nets will properly cover the hair, thus ensuring good hygiene.
Know the tips and wear it in the correct way, as follows.
First, tuck your hair back.
Next, turn the inner cap inside out to make sure there are no foreign objects inside.
Then, turn the cap inside out and place it on your forehead so that the center part is in the middle of your forehead.
Keep your forehead in place and turn the hem over with the other hand to cover your head.
Then, while holding it in place so that the center does not shift, pull it on.
Finally, make sure that the hair is not sticking out.
The key to wearing the hairpiece is to turn it inside out and put it on while securing it to the forehead.
In this way, the hair can be worn back without disrupting the bunched-up state of the hair.
If you wear it from the top as usual, the hair will stick out from the bottom.
Hair and dirt on the head can fall out without the wearer noticing and become mixed in with foreign matter.
Hair nets are used in a wide range of workplaces, such as food processing plants, precision equipment manufacturing plants, laboratories, and medical facilities, and it is important that they be worn correctly.
Risks can be reduced by first selecting a size that fits the wearer, secondly, ensuring that hair is securely placed inside the hair nets, and thirdly, observing the rules for removing and putting on the cap, if any.
*Including some distributors, etc.
Sort by Features
Sort by Area
Number of Employees
Newly Established Company
Company with a History
This is the version of our website addressed to speakers of English in Canada. If you are a resident of another country, please select the appropriate version of Metoree for your country in the drop-down menu.