Concept of Women Empowerment in our times
Sayed Mohammad Mehdi
The concept of Women’s empowerment has become a significant topic of discussion in development and economies. Women empowerment is empowering the women to take their own decision for their personal dependence. Empowerment of women helps them to take their own decision by breaking all personal limitations of society and family.
Women empowerment also refers to the creation of an environment of women, where they can make a decision of their own for their personal benefits as well as for society. It is to bring equality in the society for both males and females in all areas; by increasing and improving the social economic and political and legal strength of women.
It is also necessary to ensure equal rights to women and to make them confident to claim their rights, such as free live their life with a sense of self-worth, respect, and dignity. They should be given complete control of their life, both within and outside their home and workplace.
They should also be given the right to take their own decisions and also to make their own choices. It is very important to give them equal rights to participate in social, religious, and public activities. Women should be given an equal social state in society by giving them equal rights for social and economic justice.
Every woman should be given an equal opportunity for education and they should also get an equal employment opportunity without any gender bias. It is very important to provide them with a safe and comfortable working environment. To make this possible, we all have to make efforts and take responsibility on our shoulders. Unless we make a safer society and provide security to our women, we cannot call ourselves a developed nation. This cannot be achieved in a day, but we have to work relentlessly in this direction till the day task is done.
- Author is a social worker in Jammu and Kashmir. He contributes on various issues including the gender and equality.