The Attachment Theory: How Childhood Affects Life
The attachment theory argues that a strong emotional and physical bond to one primary caregiver in our first years of life is critical to our development. If our bonding is strong and we are securely attached, then we feel safe to explore the world. If our bond is weak, we feel insecurely attached. We are afraid to leave or explore a rather scary-looking world. Because we are not sure if we can return. Often we then don't understand our own feelings.
Support us to educate more parents about Attachment Theory:
Course on parenting:
Conscious Parenting Mastery helps new parents build those critical emotional bonds to their children. Sing up for a free masterclass here: https://go.mindvalley.com/sprouts-parenting
Dealing with Attachment Issues:
For those who feel like they can’t help themselves, or can’t find trust through their partners of family, we recommend looking for professional support through a therapy. Here three of therapies that those with such issues may want to look at:
1. Psychoanalysis. The aim of psychoanalysis therapy is to release repressed emotions and experiences, i.e., make the unconscious conscious. In order to do that, the therapist might try to bring back some childhood memories, to work at the root cause of the problem.
2. Cognitive behavior therapy (CBT). CBT is a psycho-social intervention that is widely used for improving mental health. Instead of trying to bring you back in time, it aims to explain to you what's going on inside your brain and how to cope with irrational feelings or fears. It’s the only form of therapy that’s widely recognized in Western countries as being effective.
3. The Hoffmann Process. This 7-8 day's guided process, designed by the American psychologist Hoffmann, brings participants back into their childhood to reconnect with their parents at the time when an attachment is formed. It's very intensive and could potentially be harmful if no proper supervision is being offered the month after.
Special thanks to our Patrons: Ville Medeiros, Chutimon Nuangnit, Cedric Wang, Mike, Eva Marie Koblin, Julien Dumesnil, Mathis, and the others. You are wonderful !!! If you feel helpful and want to support our channel, write a comment, subscribe and spread the word or become a patron on www.patreon.com/sprouts.