Black Vultures far more attractive than the alternatives
Black vultures need our protection, so they can protect us—from even uglier scavengers.
Last week the Virginia Senate voted 39-1 in favor of a bill that would allow farmers to apply for permits to kill black vultures preying on their livestock.
More importantly, the black vulture would be exempted from protection by the Virginia Department of Game and Inland Fisheries.
Okay, the black vulture is not the pileated woodpecker, or the kingfisher, or the ruby-throated hummingbird. It's not a lovely bird--at least, not to many. Its shadow sliding across a grassy lawn does not have us looking up at its majestic beauty or gesticulating with wonder at it hovering just above the treeline in a slow circle. We reserve that response for hawks, bald eagles, and our neighbor's spy drones.
But there's a certain respect the bird commands. Their wings are sturdier and rounder than their cousin the turkey vulture (more on him below), and seen from below the big white markings at the end of their wings brings to mind the fierce fighter planes of the Great War. They're quiet and unassuming. And, unlike most urban and suburban wildlife, they're big. And how much big wildlife can we actually see in our backyards?
So what if there are fewer black vultures? The alternatives are not so great.
Everyone knows the important part scavenger birds play in our environment. Simply put, they can eat stuff that nothing else can eat. Dead stuff. Dead stuff full of bacteria. They help stem the spread of infectious diseases by eliminating the food source of more worrisome earth-bound scavengers such as rats with which we are far more likely to come into contact.
There's another reason why we need to protect the black vulture, and it's purely aesthetic. Nature abhors a vacuum—unless it's a vacuum of championships for the Washington Redskins and Nationals—and so as the black vulture population is thinned their place will be taken by their close relative, the turkey vulture.
And turkey vultures are just plain ugly. Sure, they serve the exact same purpose. But the black vulture has some mythic power to command respect, even seen at close range, because of the uniform darkness of his being. The turkey vulture seen up close, with its sagging red flesh and a head that seems small and shriveled and which makes its feathered covering look like an ill-fitting sweater from the 1980s, just reminds us what we're all going to look like if we're lucky enough to live that long.
Is it good to be reminded of one's own mortality, and in fact meditate briefly on what portion of our own lives is akin to being a scavenger, and to what portion we will in fact be scavenged when we're done inhabiting these bodies? Perhaps. But I'd rather meditate on the lofty visage of the black vulture—sentry of the cell phone tower, protector of us all, until such time as we're ourselves in a state fit for being scavenged.
I'm not against farmers protecting themselves from vultures. They have enough corporate vultures to worry about, pecking at and flying away with the fruit of their labor. Aside from that, the black vulture needs continued protection in non-agricultural settings. In the long run, by protecting the black vulture we're protecting ourselves.