We all want to be productive and we all dream of being the perfect student who sticks to his or schedule without wasting even a minute. However, it doesn’t come true for most of us due to many reasons. There are many external factors that may seem to be the culprit of procrastination; however, distractions are a reflection of a lack of self-discipline and motivation. That is the sole reason why we may find the excuse to deflect our responsibility on something or someone.
So, how can one become “indistractable”?
The first step to solving a problem is to actually admit that there is one to begin with. Ignorance of one’s own ignorance is the biggest barrier to success and it is of paramount importance to realise the pattern of distraction to address the root cause. Living in denial doesn’t benefit.
The most common misunderstanding is surrounding the ideas of traction and distraction. Traction (obviously not in a literal sense), typically means the extra friction that requires you to actually get to your desk to start work. This can be attributed to your lazy attitude which stems from an unhealthy body. “Distraction” on the other hand refers to the external stimuli that may trigger you to steer away from work while you are trying to focus.
Instead of blaming objects and people around you, taking ownership and admitting that you are getting distracted and thereafter trying to find the reason for your lack of motivation will be the real game-changer.
DON’T LABEL YOURSELF
It may be tempting to give yourself labels when talking about yourself to your peers or when introducing yourself to someone new. We say things like, “I have a short attention span”, or “I am a very impatient individual”, or, “I get easily distracted” to others. Quit labelling yourself as such, because it does great harm and no good.
As human beings, we are constantly evolving each day in various aspects such as, in terms of ideas, thoughts, likes and dislikes. For example, as a child you may have hated the taste of vegetables but as an adult you may have embraced healthy eating and now you just can’t have a meal without your veggies. Does this difference mean that you were a different person 10 years ago?
Nothing is constant, so do not make the mistake of ingraining such a label into your subconscious mind!
There are many experienced tutors are ready to tutor students who are struggling with being disciplined with their schedule. With a private one-to-one tuition, students who have problems focusing will get a strong grip and be able to sit at one place to work on a task with a tutor’s guidance.
Tutoring agencies have their best tutors available to teach students and motivate them to push the grades at the fastest rate possible, without compromising on quality. Home tuition provides a healthy wholesome approach to teaching and a tuition teacher will have undivided attention on his or her students!
Most people find themselves getting distracted as they transition from one task to another; they would end up convincing yourself that a break is mandatory. The only way to break this cycle to ask yourself if you ”want” the break or whether you actually “need” that break. Often times, we don’t see the clear difference between needs and wants which attributes to poor decision making and poor results.
It is absolutely possible to defeat distractions; you just need to admit that there is a problem and solve it as soon as possible with the right guidance.
Roman philosopher Lucuis Annaeus Seneca once said, “People are frugal in guarding their personal property; but as soon as it comes to squandering time, they are most wasteful of the one thing in which it is right to be stingy.”
So, be stingy with your time; don’t give it away and utilise it to the best of your ability!