The nasa’s ingenuity mars after going through all four test flights on Mars, NASA’s Ingenuity Mars Helicopter is ready for its graduation. NASA had announced that the Ingenuity will be shifting. From the proof-of-concept technology demonstration to a more ambitious mission gauging.
This will include understanding how techniques such as aerial scouting. The other functions may benefit the exploration of the Red Planet. Moreover, a 30-day planned project extension. That outlined at the control center of NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL).
The successful phase 4 four of the flight was estimated at about 2-minutes. Based on the data returned, it was determined that then the helicopter covered a round trip distance of 872 feet. Which is equivalent to three football fields. Moreover, the helicopter flew at a height of 16 feet, which equivalent to the normal ground surveillance work. However, the results were quite similar to the second and third flights in terms of altitude. After such successful trials, it expected. That NASA will involve more projects in regards to proving sustainable life on Mars.
New Stage Of NASA’s Ingenuity Mars Helicopter:
This new stage will start after the helicopter completes its next two flights. Then the decision to add a demonstration of operations came as a result of the Perseverance rover ahead of schedule with a thorough examination of all vehicle systems since landing on February 18, and then its science team chose a spot near the crater for its first detailed explorations.
With the Mars helicopter power, and in-flight navigation systems performing beyond expectations, the opportunity has arisen to allow the helicopter to continue exploring its capabilities through a demonstration of operations, without significantly affecting the probe schedule.
“It was a huge success,” said Thomas Zurbuchen, associate director for NASA’s Science Mission Directorate. “With Ingenuity still in excellent health, we plan to use it to benefit future aerial platforms while setting priorities and moving forward with the near-term science goals of the Perseverance rover team.”
Sixth Helicopter Flight:
The operational demonstration will begin in approximately two weeks. Until then, creativity will be in transition that thus includes its fourth and fifth forays into the scarlet sky of Mars. The fourth flight will send the helicopter about 436 feet (133 meters). South to collect aerial photos of a potential new landing area before returning to Earth.
At the Wright Brothers Field, which is the name for the Mars airport telecommunications. Where Ingenuity’s maiden flight took off. Then the return effort of 873 feet (266 meters) will exceed then the range, speed, and duration achieved on the third flight. Prowess is programmed to carry out the fourth flight on Friday.
Thus with takeoff at 10:46 AM ET (7:46 AM PDT, 12:30 PM LST). First data return at 1:39 PM. EST (10:39 AM PDT). The fifth flight will dispatch Ingenuity on a one-way mission, and land at the new location. If the dexterity remains healthy after those trips, the next stage can begin.