Mahavir jayanti 2023: Significance and Date Of Mahavir jayanti
Mahavir Jayanti is celebrated on the Trayodashi date of Shukla Paksha of Chaitra month. Followers of Jainism celebrate Mahavir Jayanti with great enthusiasm. Lord Mahavir Swami was born in 599 BC in the Raj Gharana of Kundalpur, Bihar. His mother's name was Trishala and his father was Siddhartha. The childhood name of Lord Mahavira was Vardhaman. Vardhaman, who grew up in a royal family, left home at the age of 30 years and attained Kaivalya knowledge by performing severe penance for 12 years and was called a Tirthankar. Lord Mahavir accepted the Digambara form and did silent meditation by remaining naked. Every year those who believe in Jainism celebrate Mahavir Jayanti with great pomp. Jain temples are decorated with flowers on this day and duly worshiped. Processions are taken out at many places. Let us know about the date, auspicious time, and importance of Mahavir Jayanti.
Mahavir Jayanti Date and Auspicious Time
Mahavir Jayanti Date 2023: 14 April, Thursday
Trayodashi date starts: On 06:24 AM on Apr 03, 2023
Trayodashi date ends: On 08:05 AM on Apr 04, 2023
Significance of Mahavir Jayanti
Mahavir Jayanti is considered a very special day for the followers of Jainism. Lord Mahavira established five rules for humans to attain salvation which we know as Pancha Siddhanta. These five principles are non-violence, non-violence, celibacy, truth, and non-violence. Lord Mahavira is worshiped on this day and efforts are made to follow the principles given by him by remembering his teachings. Religious programs are organized on this occasion. On the birth anniversary of Lord Mahavira, people worship Lord Mahavira and give charity to the poor.
What is Kaivalya Gyan
In the Hindu religion, Kaivalya knowledge is called wisdom. This is a state of salvation or samadhi. Samadhi is timeless which is called salvation. This salvation is called Kaivalya Gyan in Jainism and Sambodhi and Nirvana in Buddhism. In Yoga, it is called Samadhi. The height to which Mahavir Swami touched 'Kaivalya Gyan' is incomparable. It is like that silence of space in which no substance can be present. Where there is neither sound nor energy. Pure Self only. Lord Mahavir was not the founder of Jainism but the exponent. He gave a systematic form to the tradition of Shraman Sangh. Lord Mahavir did silent penance and intense meditation for 12 years. In the end, he got 'Kaivalya Gyan'. After attaining Kaivalya Gyan, Lord Mahavir started teaching for the welfare of the people.
Inspirational Thoughts Of Mahavir Swami
Every soul is blissful and omniscient in itself. Happiness is within us, don't try to find it outside.
Have mercy on every living being. Hate only leads to destruction.
Conquer yourself. Because this one thing is better than conquering a million enemies.
Enlightened by the light of truth, the wise man rises above death.
God has no separate existence. Just by putting your all efforts in the right direction, you can find the gods.
Mahavir Swami was born on Trayodashi of Shukla Paksha of Chaitra month. E Mahavir Swami was born in 599 at the house of Maharaj Siddhartha and Queen Trishala of the Lichhivi dynasty of Bihar. Mahavir Swami's childhood name was Vardhaman. Lord Mahavira enunciated five principles, which lead to a prosperous life and inner peace. These principles are non-violence, truth, brahmacharya, and aparigraha. If you want to know more about Mahavir Jayanti then take an astrology phone consultation.