You’ve heard of Antivirus software before? Of course, you have – It’s that piece of technology that helps prevent nasty viruses from infecting your PC… or so it used to be back in the 90’s. Today, the “threat landscape”, as security experts like to call it, is changing. That means the approach to protecting your privacy and your data should also evolve.
Antivirus alone can give you some protection, but as we’ve moved from a PC-centric world of desktop computers to one in which you’re likely to have multiple internet-connected devices across your home and as you travel, it may not be enough.
What is antivirus?
Antivirus software helps protect your computer against malware and attacks from cybercriminals. It looks at the data that travels over the network to your devices— web pages, files, software and applications. It searches for known cyberthreats and monitors the behavior of all programs, becoming alert at suspicious behavior or malicious code. It seeks to block or remove malware as quickly as possible.
When looked at simply, a computer virus is similar to a flu virus. It’s designed to go from one infected computer or device to the next, copying itself, and spreading malicious codes and programs that can damage and infiltrate your operating systems. Viruses are designed to give cybercriminals access to their victims’ devices.
Antivirus software provides protection against these types of cyberthreats by performing key tasks:
- Pinpointing specific files for the detection of malicious software
- Scheduling automatic scans
- Scanning either one file or your entire computer at your discretion
- Deleting malicious codes and software
- Confirming the safety of your computer and other devices
Installing antivirus protection on your devices is a must to provide basic protection, given the array of constantly-emerging cyberthreats. If you don’t have protective software installed on your PC, laptop, smartphone or tablet – you could be putting yourself at risk of picking up a virus or being targeted by other malicious software that can remain undetected, potentially causing significant havoc on your devices and leading to data or financial loss.
Do I need protection beyond antivirus?
With antivirus software installed you may think your perfectly secure. But it might not be that straight forward. If there’s any gaps in your cybersecurity defenses it leaves your privacy at risk. Cybercriminals are constantly tweaking their methods and could still try to find a way in.
Did you know that public Wi-Fi could be unsecure? This could be another point of access for cybercriminals to access your sensitive data. If your connecting to public Wi-Fi, you should be using a VPN (Virtual Private Network) to encrypt the information you send and receive.
How do you manage your passwords? Passwords are the keys to your most private of information – email, financial and online accounts –and if they get into the wrong hands may leave you vulnerable. Having the same password across all your accounts is no longer an option and securing access to your online accounts is important.
Do you regularly back-up the information on your devices? Backing up your data is one of the best ways to securely store important files and documents as a preventive measure against data loss due to hard drive failures, stolen devices and even ransomware.
Considering all of the risks mentioned above, having the right protection that goes beyond antivirus is important. It can mean the theoretical difference between browsing online more safely — with your financial and personal information inside your lockbox at home, or going shopping with your personal and financial information available for the taking.
Introducing NEW Norton 360 Deluxe. Protection for your devices, online privacy and more.
NEW Norton™ 360 Deluxe is an all-in-one security solution that features Norton top-of-the-line defenses and advanced detection against these cyberthreats, helping to safeguard your personal information and online transactions.
Not only do you get advanced protection for your devices against viruses, malware, spyware, phishing and other cyberthreats, but also included is Norton Secure VPN to help keep your data safe when connecting to Wi-Fi with the reassurance of bank grade encryption.
Norton Password Manager provides the tools you need to generate and store your passwords and logins. Cloud Backup for your PC helps securely store important files and documents as a preventative measure against the loss of your data due to ransomware or hard drive failures.Also included is SafeCam for PC, to alert and help you block unauthorised access to your webcam.
It’s smart to remember that antivirus software alone isn’t enough to protect against cyberthreats. Cybersecurity also means protecting not only your devices, but also your online privacy and with NEW Norton™ 360 Deluxe you can have the tools at your disposal to better secure your digital world.