Life nowadays is fast, people have a lot of ideas and plans they want to accomplish. Millennials have a lot of options and choices and they try to push themselves to the limit to do more in a very short time without maintain their minds and body Although Digitalization and Internet have a great Influence and benefits on our life especially in learning and the ability to work from any place in the world, but they have a great pressure on nowadays generation and make them lost in a lot of opportunities and chances.
I found this topic important because I relate it to me and my entire generation. As millennials are experts in this modern digital world, but they lack the experience to use it safely without drifting with it. A lot of studies stated that Millennials mental disorders rates are very high, since they facing stress on a regular daily basis, specially college students are more anxious. This happens unconsciously because of the competitive pressure with their peers, also Millennials seeking completeness, perfectionism and have great expectations.
This paper discusses millennials bad behaviors and harsh attitude towards themselves as they keep pushing to gain unrealistic goals and forget about mental health.
Millennials are generally positive, achievement oriented, ambitious, skillful at multitasking, and successful. On the other hand, they have an increasing rate of anxiety and depression (Brat et al., 2017). Authors mentioned that the priority on extended achievements and the social pressures of achievement have led to millennials turning into the most stressed generation in American history. Many millennial college graduates experience a personality dilemma as they seek for external recognition and outstanding results. Also, millennial college undergraduates enthusiasm with achievement and performance generates rising of stress levels among them, which precisely corresponds to their psychological status. Many millennials report rising of psychological strength troubles because of the stress provoked from demanding to stabilize and harmonize facets of their ways of life like managing studying load, social connections and working out (Brat et al., 2017). Flatt(2013) addressed that psychological troubles that millennials are being dealt with while studying are rising in severity, as suicide rates have tripled over the previous 60 years, bringing suicide to be the second reason of death for that age (Flatt, 2013). Furthermore, an analysis conducted in the United States of supervisors of campus psychological counseling centers, noticed that over 95% of the supervisors informed dealing with an acceleration of students that showed significant psychological issues (Flatt, 2013). The good conclusions about this generation, show that this generation values assessment, counts on the efforts of their institutions, and values expertise, it is smoother for the millennial college undergraduate to pursue specialist guidance for their stress. Those psychological problems have a significant influence on the near future as their influence will extend into the industry. Millennials by 2020, will occupy 70% of the overall labor market (Brat et al., 2017).
2. Reasons for Millennials Stress and Anxiety
2.1 MEDIA Multitasking
The term multitask was original introduced in 1965, in the IBM representation of their computer IBM System/360, to express the capacity of the operating system to manage different processes in the same time (Stamenkovi? et al., 2018), as mentioned a computer device but not a human brain.
According to the study done by (Stamenkovi? et al., 2018) on a students of the Faculty of Philosophy from journalism department, High number of participants access social media to discover and know information. While watching television, participants often look at events on social media besides during commercials, and before the start of the film or play. Thus this have negative affect like disturbance, lowering focusing , shifted attention (Stamenkovi? et al., 2018).
2.2 Academic Pressure
Millennials are having stress to get excellent grades in the university, also parental push for excellent grades causes student stress, panic, and depression. especially for smaller families, as parents put more attention on their children. Millennials undergraduates mentioned having academic stress in response to the economic status, as it refers to jobs conditions, with the greatest rates of stress being noticed by final year graduates. This pressure has led to a raised level of academic competition, as graduates try to exceed their colleges grades to ensure future career or academic accomplishment (Brat et al., 2017).
For many students, university and college are a new experience as they live away from their parents, and they have to parent themselves. However, many of the decisions created by undergraduate students, including diet, work out, alcohol drinking, and sexual behavior, can have negative mental health effects. Obesity because of a low diet and absence of exercise is frequent among undergraduate students and this off course increase stress. Students who work out more generally are less likely to have depression or panic disorders. Exercise helps ease symptoms of depression. Not only are students presenting themselves at risk for psychological problems by not eating well and not working out, they may also miss the chance to mitigate depression and anxiety (Brat et al., 2017).
Another dangerous lifestyle decision that some students make in college is alcohol over drink. Many students believe that drinking is an essential part of their university experience. A notable number of students enter university with established drinking usages, in fact, undergraduates are more likely to misuse alcohol than their peers who did not join the university (Brat et al., 2017).
Often, alcohol overuse and unsafe sexual actions are related. Risky sexual action and casual sex are likewise correlated with poor self-esteem, guilt, and depression, among girls, Casual sex becomes become a common occurrence, with 70-85 percent of adolescents between the age of 12 and 21 reported having engaged in sexual intercourse outside a romantic relationship. Depressing symptoms are linked with both casual sex and unsafe sexual attitudes. In fact these sexual acts produce a circular pattern: students cope with stress, depression, and anxiety by involving in sexual intimacy, which only provokes the stress, anxiety, and depression, while putting the student at risk for transmitted disease or sickness (Brat et al., 2017).
2.4 Excessive Coffee drinking
Drinking coffee makes the human body more alarmed and supports to produce better on small tasks. But it can further make people anxious, annoyed and nervous, if theyre previously disposed to anxiety. Sensitivity to caffeine is in fact, increased in people with panic disorder, and caffeine can provoke panic attacks in some people. Caffeine is further an urinative which can lead to dehydration (Beaton, 2017).
2.5 Netflix and Hanging Out
In a particular investigation, participants had depression and anxiety after viewing just two hours of TV than those who didnt. Also, those with panic and depression consume considerably higher time on the computer and watching television. While resting reduces anxiety in short-term, analysis declares that its effect is limited, especially compared with work out (Beaton, 2017).
3. Solutions to the problem
Millennials should not spend a lot of time on social media, which leads to shortage of encouragement to learn. Also, avoid stressful pressure from the family, In conclusion millennials should make a schedule for learning hours, pause times and social media time. (Al-Qudah & Baioumy, 2018).
In case of high life goals another suggests. establishing the appropriate targets and manageable career planes. One useful exercise is establishing goals around how a person wish to feel at a time or add value to his or her business, relations or the world. Another approach by avoiding perfectionism and unrealistic possibilities. While normal high expectations can inspire people to make wonderful objects, perfectionism feeds addiction and causes them depressed. One significant point to reduce anxiety is to communicate and meet with people who care and can help with dealing with stress like friends and family (Beaton, 2017).
The main points of the psychological challenges facing millennials have been presented. After a general explanation of challenges key problem. An overview of the main techniques for overcoming these psychological effects has been pointed out.
Psychological problems facing millennials are seriously impacting young generations because of digitalization and wide spread of social media along with media multitasking. There are many causes affecting the psychological condition of young generations. However, current paper presented some factors which contribute on millennials mental health include academic pressure, media multitasking, lifestyle choices, Excessive Coffee drinking and spend free time in unusual habits and routines. It is also necessary to recognize the present actions in higher education to enhance the mental health of the students, including increased psychological support and academic programs planned to support healthy atmosphere and reducing studying loads (Brat et al., 2017).
It would be necessary for analysts to study differing individuals with different backgrounds like international students with various cultures, or even students with different races, ethnicities, sexual and gender identities, and social classes as those have more pressure and stress than others.