These images are probably making lot of noise in the chemtrail community.
So what is this odd black line in the sky over Honeymoon Island, Florida? Contrails? Chemtrails? Shadows?
It looks like a beam coming from above, like descending from the sky, behind a cloud, to the sea. Impressive and up to now remains unexplained.
Well, I searched quite a long time to discover what this weird sky phenomenon could be!
After looking on websites about chemtrails I actually figured out that people who think persistent contrails indicate some kind of conspiracy (which they call “chemtrails”), sometimes point to the “dark lines” that sometimes accompany contrails.
This first video shows a contrail edge shadow:
Since they can’t immediately think of why these dark lines should be there, they assume it’s part of the conspiracy. Either there is some kind of “dark chemtrail”, or the plane is projecting a dark beam of some kind of negative energy, or it is following a dark beam.
In this second great video of a space shuttle launch, a dark shadow forms in the last 30 seconds:
But in reality these “dark lines” or “black beams” are simply various kinds of shadows. There are actually three main kinds of dark line related to contrails:
- Parallel shadow: The contrail is simply casting a shadow on a layer of cloud beneath it. The cloud layer is thin enough so you can see through it, but it’s visible, so you can see the shadow on it.
- Self shadow: The contrail itself is in shadow and appears dark.
- Edge shadow (volumetric shadow): The most interesting type of contrail dark line is when the contrail is lined up with the sun. This produces a slice of shadow through the atmosphere that looks like a dark line when viewed edge-on.
Well looking at the videos and at the different pictures, I pretty much think that the dark line (two first pictures of this post) photographed in the sky over the Honeymoon Island was a so-called edge shadow.
What’s your opinion about these weird lines in the sky?
GIPHY App Key not set. Please check settings
I live in new Bedford ma. & on 4/10/14 I saw these black lines form in the sky out of nowhere in one area it made a X there was no plane making these lines they appeared & disappeared I don’t know what made the lines but we ended up seeing more lines in another area some look like they were 30ft to a quarter mile long the lines started to spread & fade I have no explanation for what we seen but after that we started to see a lot of aircraft around the airport ?
Sometimes these black lines are also created by shadow of small and almost invisible clouds to the naked eye. I would look in this direction instead of trying to explain this weird phenomenon with surreal things… All the best
Skeptics can’t understand or accurately explain spiritual phenomena and it’s looks dumb to let a skeptic try to explain unexplainable things. With no faith, you have no knowledge and so you talk about things you don’t understand as if you’re an expert. The paranormal or spiritual realm has been misinterpreted because of this exact thing. Stop doing that please.
I’ve seen one of those just before right outside my window. There were a few chemtrails going by but there was one that had it just going straight onto the black line. I never seen that in my life before. I wanted to take pictures but I had my phone and of course it was dead to even be switched on. It’s scary and sad as to what type of world we could truly be living in and yet not many people are even realizing it.
I’ve seen these “black beams” 3 times now. One time from watching a chemtrail being sprayed & like a light switch, there it was & faded away. It is definitely not a shadow. I also have a few other friends that have seen them & we know that it’s not some kinda shadow.
I seen a perfect line in the sky exactly like the ones in these photos two days ago here on the west coast. As I looked another 4 engine jet came across at full altitude and arched over the sky following exactly all the way in the dark line. This plane created the normal contrail which was very bright on the clear sky. I got a clear photo of it before disappearing over the city skyline. My only thought was this plane was following a very precise standard course and there was some mark left in the sky from the previous flight. The question there is why was the dark line straight and the contrail from the plane I seen drifting in different directions after being buffeted by natural turbulence? There was no change in weather conditions at ground level. I can not remember seeing a contrail remain exactly straight for more than several seconds, so how could the dark line remain unchanged for a very long period if it was created by the previous plane ?