A slow PC can be incredibly frustrating and getting to the bottom of the problem isn’t always that easy. You might have tried using Task Manager (or at least heard of it), but learning to utilize it properly can boost your PC’s performance and transform it into something much more usable.
Task Manager provides information about a computer’s performance and all its processes and applications that are running at the time. It can be used to terminate processes and applications that are slowing down your PC, as well as change the processes' scheduling priority. Task Manager generally becomes most helpful when your PC comes to a sudden standstill as it allows you to quickly and easily close the processes or applications that are making your computer feel ‘stuck’.
If you notice that your PC is running unusually slow, you can open Task Manager in the following ways:
Windows 8 and 10:
On your keyboard, press ‘Ctrl+Shift+Esc’ simultaneously
Open ‘Start’ and search for ‘Task Manager’
On your keyboard, press ‘Ctrl+Alt+Del’ and click ‘Task Manager’
On your keyboard, press ‘Win+X’ and Click ‘Task Manager’
When Task Manager is open, you will see a list of processes running on your computer and a CPU column. Each process or application is measured in terms of the percentage of your computer’s CPU that it’s using. CPU stands for ‘Central Processing Unit’ and is essentially the ‘brains’ of your computer, so you can use this information to determine whether you should shut the program down. If you have a modern version of Task Manager, its columns will be color-coded for you to help you make this decision. Red will signify high CPU usage, amber means moderate, and green means low or healthy CPU usage.
Although Task Manager can tell you which applications are using high CPU (and as a result which applications are causing your PC to run slowly), it will not tell you why or how to stop the application from taking up too many resources in the future. That’s where CCleaner comes in. Instead of a short-term fix, it provides easy-to-use tools that will deliver all-round maintenance for your computer, helping you to gain control of your PC and optimize its performance in the longer term. It also helps protect your privacy and boost your security by deleting any online trackers left on your PC by websites and advertisers, and updating your software to close any security holes. Download CCleaner today for free.