Evan loved to play in the ocean. He would make sandcastles, splash in the water, and paddle on his boogey board until he could ride the waves back to shore. One day, he swam far out to sea. Out of the corner of his eye, he saw a huge fin in the water. Shark! he thought. No, it was bigger than a shark-- this was a megalodon! Before he could swim away, the shark's head popped out of the water. 

"Excuse me," the megalodon said. "I have something stuck in my teeth. Could you help me?" 

The shark opened his enormous jaw, and Evan saw seaweed tangled around one of the shark's teeth. The shark seemed friendly enough, so Evan paddled over and crawled into its mouth to remove the seaweed. 

"Pweas be cahfuh," the megalodon told him, unable to speak properly with a boy in his mouth. "I'm vewy tickwish." 

Evan couldn't understand what the shark was saying as he crawled along a massive tongue that was rough like sandpaper. He yanked the seaweed out, but suddenly the shark erupted in laughter and Evan tumbled toward his throat and down into his belly.

"I'm sorry!" exclaimed the shark. "I didn't mean to eat you. I'm just very ticklish." 

That's what the megalodon was trying to say, Evan thought. "How do I get out of here?" he asked.

"I don't know," said the megalodon. "This has never happened before."

Evan looked around him at the walls of the megalodon's belly. After he ate something, it either came out in one of two directions, and he didn't want that to go any farther. He had to find a way back up the shark's throat. Then, he got an idea. Evan ticked the sides of the megalodon's stomach harder and harder. The walls shook as the shark laughed. A wave of vomit crashed over Evan, carried him up the megalodon's throat, and tossed him into the ocean. He looked at his sticky arms, covered in throw-up. "Yuck," he said.

"Sorry about that," said the shark.

"That's OK," replied Evan. "Hope you feel better."

The shark nodded. "Next time, I'll try to get the seaweed out on my own, though. That way no one gets eaten."

And they both laughed, then said goodbye.
