The water-based structures of Minecraft
The water-based structures of Minecraft – Ocean Monuments, Underwater Ruins, and more!
Much like the real world, large bodies of water can be found all over Minecraft in abundance. You’ve got lakes, rivers, oceans, and even waterfalls! All sorts of fantastic water-based structures generate naturally in the overworld and are part of what makes Minecraft such a beautiful and exciting game.
Now, let’s talk about oceans. They’re vast, deep, and are home to some of the most exciting structures in Minecraft. You’ll definitely be needing a boat if you plan on traversing one of these biomes.
Did you know that there are multiple different kinds of ocean biomes? Warm oceans are the most vibrant ones as they feature colorful coral reef structures and are home to various kinds of tropical fish. If you come across this biome on your adventures, you'll no doubt be shocked at how amazing it looks. There are even sea pickles dotted about that act as light sources, illuminating their surroundings underwater.Both sea pickles and coral blocks can be mined, so be sure to take some home with you. They’re great for displaying in aquariums alongside fish and seagrass.
Indoor plumbing is possible with mods. It’s not as prone to issues as real-life plumbing. No need for Melbourne leak detection services in Minecraft. You can just design to your heart’s content, and try to keep creepers away!
On the opposite end of the ocean spectrum, you've got frozen oceans. The surface of the water here is frozen solid in most places and large icebergs can often be seen scattered around the landscape. If you're lucky, you might encounter a polar bear or two in this biome! They're passive mobs, so don't worry about getting attacked randomly, though take care not to aggravate them as they're quick to fight back if hurt.
Other variants include lukewarm oceans, cold oceans, and deep oceans. Deep oceans are about twice as deep as regular oceans, and they’re the only place you’ll find ocean monuments spawning. What are ocean monuments, you might ask? Well, that’s what we’re going to go over next.
Ocean monuments – what you can expect
Ocean monuments are some of the largest naturally generated structures in Minecraft and feature randomly generated chambers within them that can be a challenge to navigate. If you’re planning on exploring one of these structures, make sure to bring some potions of water breathingand some good armor otherwise you won’t be making it very far.
One of the main reasons that players explore ocean monuments is because of the potential to find sponges. They're very useful blocks that instantly absorb the water around them when placed down. Sponges can only be found in these monuments so they're some of the rarest items in the game. Often you'll find sponge rooms in the monuments you explore, but they're not always guaranteed, so there's a bit of luck involved too.
The deadly guardians
One final thing to note is that you won't be alone when you explore an ocean monument. Guardians inhabit the structures and will put up a fight whenever you come into contact with them. They're vicious and deadly creatures, so be sure to take them out as quickly as you can. You can even find 3 more powerful variants of guardians, known as elder guardians, in each monument. If you're searching for a challenge then you won’t have to look very far. You'll also be rewarded with a unique achievement if you're successful in taking one down, so good luck!
Underwater ruins and their plentiful loot
Underwater ruins are some of the best structures to come across because almost every ruin structure has a loot chest hidden inside, often under some sand or gravel. Always be sure to check these ruins out if you come across them because the chests you find can contain rare items. Some of the best loot you can get includes gold, emeralds, enchanted items, and even buried treasure maps!
The protectors of the ruins
As you might have guessed, claiming the loot doesn't come without its risks. Much like the ocean monuments, underwater ruins are always guarded by hostile mobs, so you'll have to fight your way to the treasure. The ruin mobs are known as Drowned, and they're underwater zombie-like creatures. They're often easy to deal with but beware of trident-wielding Drowned as they can be deadly if you're not careful.
Shipwrecks and pirate treasure
As well as ocean monuments and underwater ruins, you might occasionally stumble upon a shipwreck when exploring the oceans. These wooden structures resemble pirate ships and often have parts missing. They're usually pretty safe to explore and aren't crawling with mobs, so be sure to check them out! You're almost always guaranteed to find a treasure chest or two stashed away somewhere.
by Stephanie Scott on 2021-01-30 04:12:00
No comments yet.