Thermocouple & RTD
A Thermocouple is a transducer that converts thermal energy into electrical energy and is constructed by joining wires made from dissimilar metals to form a junction OF Thermocouple & RTD. Voltage is produced when the temperature at the junction changes. The concept of the thermocouple is based on the See beck Effect, which states that if dissimilar metals are joined at a point they will generate a small measurable voltage when the temperature of the point of connection changes.
The amount of voltage depends on the amount of temperature change and the characteristics of the metals. A broad range of applications and settings, often presenting people with the dilemma of choosing to use either RTDs or thermocouples. Each kind of temperature sensor has its own advantages and disadvantages that make it suitable for certain conditions and circumstances.
RTDs are constructed of a resistive material with leads attached and usually placed into a protective sheath. The resistive material may be platinum, copper, or nickel; the most common is platinum because of its high accuracy, excellent repeatability, and exceptional linearity over a wide range. It exhibits a large resistance change per degree of temperature change. The two most common RTD sensor styles are wire-wound and thin-film.
RTDs are temperature sensors that gauge local temperature changes by monitoring changes in the electrical resistance of Thermocouple & RTD metals. The electrical resistances of the metals used in RTDs must be known to individuals and recorded for easy reference in order for the results to be interpreted. As a result, RTDs are frequently made of the metals copper, nickel, and platinum.
Food processing equipment; de-icing; Plating baths; Medical equipment; Industrial processing; Pipe tracing control; Packaging equipment; Industrial heat treating; Refrigeration temperature control; Oven temperature control; and Liquid temperature For Thermocouple & RTD measurement.
RTD is used in power electronics, computer, consumer electronics, food handling and processing, industrial electronics, medical electronics, military, and aerospace.
RTD sensor is used in automotive to measure the engine temperature, an oil level sensor, intake air temperature sensors. In communication and instrumentation for sensing the over the temperature of amplifiers, transistor gain stabilizers, etc…
RTD VS Thermocouple
It is impossible to determine whether RTDs or thermocouples are the better choice overall because the words comprise entire ranges of temperature sensors designed for usage under a variety of situations. In order to allow customers to make a decision based on the unique requirements of their companies, it is more helpful to evaluate the performance of RTDs and thermocouples using specific features like price and temperature range.
In terms of price, durability, measurement speed, and the range of temperatures they can measure, thermocouples are generally superior to RTDs. Although RTD installation is less expensive than thermocouple installation on average, the difference in installation costs is not enough to tip the scales in favour of thermocouples.