Table of contents:
Video: 10 Foods High In Cholesterol
10 foods high in cholesterol
What is the rate of cholesterol in the blood of men and women, what types of cholesterol is, what is the rate of its amount in the blood, what is cholesterol in general, what is it like, why did nature come up with it, etc.? We have already written about this earlier.
Today we will consider selectively a few foods containing high cholesterol.
TOP 10 foods high in cholesterol
1. Brains. Brains belong to category 1 by-products. As a rule, offal contains 20-80% water, 12-20% protein and up to 12% fat. For example, beef brains have a high protein content of 11.7 grams and a low fat content of 8.6 grams per 100 grams. Brains contain vitamins PP, B1, B2, E, as well as calcium, magnesium, sodium, potassium, phosphorus, iron and iodine.
Brains are valuable for their high phosphorus content. In addition to the above, they also contain lecithin necessary for proper metabolism in the human body. However, in addition to lecithin, this product contains 2000 mg of cholesterol per 100 grams. Probably, it's not for nothing that people use brains very rarely (calorizer), if not to say more - they don't eat them at all. However, in restaurants such a dish is served and gourmets value veal and beef brains higher, since they are larger and more tender.
Brains are consumed fried.
2. Kidneys. They, like brains, belong to category 1 offal. Kidneys have a specific taste and smell, however, if cooked properly, they can be removed. To do this, they are soaked or blanched.
For a healthy person, properly cooked beef kidneys will be an extremely healthy product. The main harm lies in the cholesterol content. They contain about 1126 mg of cholesterol per 100 grams.
If you have chronic diseases, you should not use the kidneys or only after consulting your doctor. I am glad that culinary dishes with kidneys, even if they are very tasty, are not particularly popular with consumers.
However, in many restaurants, kidneys are used for making saltwort, pickles, and second courses.
3. Shrimp. All shellfish (shrimps, crayfish, lobsters, crabs, lobsters) contain a large amount of cholesterol, which can enter fat into the cell, and maybe remove it. Shrimp cholesterol introduces fat into the cell. Therefore, of all seafood, shrimp is the most dangerous product in terms of high cholesterol levels. Shrimp do contain a lot of cholesterol compared to other seafood.
With just 130 grams of this popular seafood, we get our daily dose of cholesterol. 100 grams of shrimp contains 150 mg of cholesterol. It is a pity that we can eat such a useful product in such a small quantity (calorizator). After all, shrimp are rich in protein, contain iodine, all fat-soluble vitamins - A, K, E and D, trace elements, in particular, potassium, magnesium, zinc.
If your cholesterol level is normal, then you can eat a small portion of shrimp 2 times a week, but if you have high cholesterol, then shrimp are forbidden to you, or are allowed in very small quantities.
4. Fish roe. An interesting fact is that the cholesterol content is the same in red caviar, black caviar, and capelin caviar. 100 grams of fish roe contains approximately 100 mg of cholesterol.
But the good news is the high content of Omega-3, Omega-6, and lecithin, which neutralizes the fatty alcohol found in the eggs themselves. Caviar contains a rich set of vitamins and minerals, which makes it a healthy dish.
However, it is worth remembering about the content of cholesterol in caviar, and about the presence of salt, vegetable oil and other preservatives during salting (glycerin, sorbic acid, sodium benzoate, preservatives). This means that a person should not eat more than three tablespoons of caviar per day.
5. Pork. Pork meat is the most demanded type of meat consumed all over the world, with the exception of some countries. Contains a lot of proteins and fats, and, accordingly, cholesterol. Eating one pork chop - a standard 200 grams, we get 200 mg of cholesterol, i.e. 100 grams of pork (medium fat) contains 100 mg of cholesterol, lean meat - 88 mg.
When choosing pork, try to give preference to leaner pieces, trying to cook it without frying. The best way to cook pork is in the oven in foil or in a slow cooker. You can boil it, but in this case, the meat will give some of the nutrients to the broth.
Only animal products are rich in cholesterol. But do not give up completely from animal products, they contain many useful and necessary vitamins and minerals for the body. You just need to limit their consumption.
6. Fish carp. It is considered an oily fish that raises cholesterol. However, carp also contains fish oil, which is beneficial to the body. In addition, carp is rich in vitamins and minerals, which makes it even healthier. The phosphoric acid contained in carp is involved in the construction of numerous enzymes (phosphatases) - the main engines of chemical reactions in cells. The tissue of our skeleton consists of phosphate salts.
Lovers of this fish will surely be upset to learn that they are not advised to eat more than 100 grams of carp per day, because if they eat only 100 of this fish, they will receive as much as 250 mg of cholesterol. By the way, from stellate sturgeon and horse mackerel we also get a lot of cholesterol (see the table below). But this amount will be quite enough for the body to obtain useful substances.
7. Cheese. It is made from milk and lactic acid bacteria. Cheeses are high in protein, milk fat and minerals. Cheeses are rich in vitamins A, D, E, B1, B2, B12, PP, C, pantothenic acid and others. The dithyrambs are singing about the benefits of cheese.
This is so, but if you look at the cholesterol content in 100 grams of hard cheese, then there is already 120 mg of it, in soft and salty cheeses - about 70 mg. The high cholesterol content is due to the fact that any cheese is made from milk that contains milk fat. It is estimated that a kilogram of cheese contains more of it than a kilogram of meat.
Therefore, you cannot eat more than 160 grams per day of this wonderful product. But even this amount is able to endow the body with all the necessary beneficial vitamins and minerals.
8. Egg yolk. Chicken, duck and goose eggs are most often eaten. But turkey, quail, ostrich eggs and eggs of other birds are also eaten.
In a chicken egg, the yolk contains neutral fat - 23%, protein - 16%, phospholipids - 11%, cholesterol - 1.5% and minerals - 3%. At the same time, 100 grams of egg yolk "give" us about 1200 mg of cholesterol. Of course, this is a lot, but the weight of a chicken yolk is only about 16-18 grams, respectively, 1 yolk contains about 200 mg of cholesterol, so you can use the yolks in moderation.
To reduce the level of cholesterol consumed with eggs, it is worth using 1 yolk from 2-3 eggs, from the rest, take only protein. The appearance and taste of such a dish will not change much, but the benefits will be higher.
And remember, don't just eat raw eggs, always cook them.
9. Cream with 20% fat. In its composition, 20% cream (medium fat) contains several groups of vitamins: A, PP, A (RE), beta-carotene, B1, B5, B2, B6, B12, B9, E (TE), C, H, D, choline and chemical elements represented by calcium, sodium, magnesium, potassium, chlorine, phosphorus, zinc, iron, iodine, selenium, copper, fluorine, manganese, molybdenum and cobalt.
However, 70 mg of cholesterol is contained in 100 grams of 20% cream. This means that it is strongly discouraged to consume more than 1.5 cups of cream a day due to its high fat content, especially if there are problems with blood vessels and heart.
Cream is good to add to tea and coffee or to prepare a variety of sauces from them.
10. Butter. The food is high in fat and calories, which leads to an increase in cholesterol levels. Butter contains 185 mg of cholesterol in 100 grams. A person needs to eat one large buttercream brownie to get their daily cholesterol intake.
However, along with the harmful properties, butter is beneficial for the body, it is rich in fat-soluble vitamins such as vitamins A, E, K, D, as well as vitamins C and B. Butter has a beneficial effect on the condition of the skin, nails and hair.
Therefore, moderate consumption of butter will not harm your health. You can eat 10-20 grams of oil daily, either as a separate meal or as part of meals.
We looked at 10 foods with the highest cholesterol content - these are kind of "champions". But how much cholesterol is contained in other foods we eat every day or occasionally, only on holidays? Let's start with the “worst” ones.
Cholesterol content in staple foods
Drawing a conclusion from the information read, we can say the following: the most dangerous for a person are not those foods in which cholesterol "rolls over", but those that we use most often, believing that they only bring benefits, without taking into account such an indicator, as the amount of cholesterol in this product. You need to learn to eat right yourself and teach your children to choose more “correct” and wholesome foods, to know when to stop in foods rich in cholesterol.
When we sit down to have lunch or just have a snack, we never think about the cholesterol in our dishes. Eating as much cake as you like, or drinking, for example, a couple of glasses of heavy cream, does not seem dangerous for us. In the meantime, it is the acquired cholesterol that becomes the culprit for the development of many terrible diseases. We hope that this article will help you build your diet more correctly and always be healthy!
Author: Anna K. (specially for Calorizator.ru)
Copying of this article in whole or in part is prohibited.