Table of Contents
Where is Pollux located?
RA 7h 45m 19s | Dec +28° 1′ 34″
What constellation is Pollux in?
Pollux is a star that lies in the constellation Gemini. Along with Castor, Pollux is one of the two main guideposts for the asterism, which is sometimes nicknamed “the twins.” The star is a red giant that has finished fusing hydrogen in its core and is now fusing other lighter elements into heavier ones.
Where is Castor and Pollux located?
The Temple of Castor and Pollux (Italian: Tempio dei Dioscuri) is an ancient temple in the Roman Forum, Rome, central Italy. It was originally built in gratitude for victory at the Battle of Lake Regillus (495 BC).
Where do we find our star on the HR diagram?
Hot stars inhabit the left hand side of the diagram, cool stars the right hand side. Bright stars at the top, faint stars at the bottom. Our Sun is a fairly average star and sits near the middle.
What galaxy is Pollux located in?
|Primary Name||Pollux||The Sun|
|Binary or Multiple Star System||Yes||No (officially)|
|Star Type||High proper-motion Star||Main Sequence Star|
|Colour||Orange to Red||Yellow (Atmosphere) / White (In Space)|
|Galaxy||Milky Way||Milky Way|
Where can you see the Gemini constellation?
Gemini is the 30th largest constellation in the sky, occupying an area of 514 square degrees. It lies in the second quadrant of the northern hemisphere (NQ2) and can be seen at latitudes between +90° and -60°.
Where can I find a Gemini?
Finding Gemini Constellation Gemini looks like two long strings of stars extending down from Castor and Pollux, which are the heads of the twins. The easiest way to find it is to look for Castor and Pollux east of the vee-shaped Hyades cluster, which makes up the face of Taurus the Bull.
What is the symbol for Gemini?
Gemini is also commonly known as The Twins (Gemini is the Latin word for twins) and the Gemini emoji ♊ usually depicts the symbol of Gemini, which is the Roman numeral II referring to two people (who are twins).
Who is Pollux?
Pollux, also known as Polydeuces in Greek mythology, was one half of Dioscuri with his twin brother Castor. His mother was the princess Leda, whom he shared with Castor. Pollux, though, was the son of Zeus, who disguised himself as a swan in order to seduce Leda, making Pollux a demigod, unlike his human brother.
Where on the H-R diagram would we find stars that look red?
If you look at the M3 cluster H-R diagram (figure 6b), you see that the main sequence only extends part way to the upper-left, and then the stars appear off the main sequence to the upper right, in the Red Giant area of the H-R diagram.
Where are red giant stars found on the H-R diagram?
Red giants are found top right hand side of H R diagram.
Is Pollux in the Milky Way?
On moonless nights or in those places free of significant light pollution, stargazers can locate Gemini’s feet in the Milky Way. Its brightest stars, Pollux (yellow-orange) and Castor (bluish-white) mark the heads of the Twins. They are just 5 degrees apart, making for a very good celestial yardstick in the sky.
Which is the other spectral standard for Pollux?
Pollux has served as a spectral standard for its class, K0III, since 1943. The other spectral standard for this class is Aljanah, Epsilon Cygni A, a single-lined spectroscopic binary star system located near the Veil Nebula in the constellation Cygnus.
How old is Pollux the main sequence star?
With an estimated temperature of 4,666 K, it shines with a luminosity 43 times that of the Sun. The star’s estimated age is 724 million years. Pollux (Beta Geminorum), image: Wikisky. Pollux is believed to have started its life as a main sequence star of the spectral type A, but eventually spent its supply of hydrogen and evolved
Where did the name Pollux come from in astronomy?
In early Arabic astronomy, Pollux was called Al Thani al Dhira, meaning “the Second in the Forearm,” but later came to be known as Al Ras al Taum al Mu’ah.h.ar, or “the Head of the Hindmost Twin” and as Al Ras al Jauza’, or “the Head of the Twin.”
What’s the difference between Castor and Pollux stars?
The two stars are about 18 light years apart. Even though they are referred to as twins and appear similar in brightness, the two stars are very different. Pollux, which is slightly closer to us, is a single star, while Castor is a star system consisting of six stars.