Can Babies Eat Flax Seeds?
Flax, common flax or linseed is a food and fiber crop cultivated in cooler parts of the world. It has been domesticated for the linen and for the linseed oil. Bed sheets, underclothes, table linen are made out of flax. In ancient Egypt priests wore only linen, because flax was considered as a symbol of purity.
The flax flowers are pure pale blue, and the fruit itself contains glossy brown seeds. The seeds can be ground into a meal or turned into flaxseed oil. Flaxseed oil can be used for human consumption as a nutritional supplement, but also as an ingredient for various wood- finishing products.
Flaxseeds can be of two colors: brown and yellow. The nutritional facts of most types of these basic varieties are almost identical, however there is an exception in the yellow type flax, the so called solin, which has an entirely different oil profile and is lower in omega-3s.
Flaxseeds are rich in calories, protein, carbs, fibers, fat, omega-3 fatty acids, vitamin B1, copper, molybdenum, magnesium and phosphorus.
Can Babies Eat Flaxseeds ?
Flaxseeds or linseeds are a great source for fiber, which help with digestion. They can be given to babies starting at the age of 7-8 months old, but you should start with ground flaxseeds or with flax oil, to avoid choking on the whole seeds.
How Much Flaxseed Should a Child Take ?
The recommended dosage for babies until 12 months old is of 500mg per day, children between 1-8 years old can have more, 700mg per day. After the age of 8 years old, the daily dosage for boys and girls differs, but it is between 1-1.6 grams per day.
What Are the Side Effects of Flaxseed ?
Although flaxseed has many beneficial effects like helping nerve function, reducing inflammation, lowering cholesterol and regulating blood pressure, it can also have side effects like allergic reactions, diarrhea, bloating, constipation. It is important to pay attention to the dosage.
There are many ways to use flax in your baby’s food recipes: you can add ground flax to purees and smoothies, sprinkle it into soups or stews, put flaxseed oil into smoothies, or simply to pimp up homemade yogurts.
What are flax seeds?
Flax, common flax or linseed is a food and fiber crop cultivated in cooler parts of the world. It has been domesticated for the linen and for the linseed oil.
How healthy are flax seeds?
Flaxseed has many beneficial effects like helping nerve function, reducing inflammation, lowering cholesterol and regulating blood pressure.
When can you start giving flaxseeds to your child?
You can give babies flaxseed starting at the age of 7-8 months old.
The risks of giving flax seeds to your baby?
There is the choking risk until a certain age, and if you exceed the recommended dosage a day, flaxseed can have many side effects.