Coconut breaking ritual in hindu temples is a quantum intention accelerator experiment, origin of tradition, reasons and significance, butterfly effect, similarity with Jesus Christ shedding his blood. Coconut water spilling electrolytic plasma similar to water of RBC in human blood. It has lauric acid content similar to breast milk.
Coconut is NariKela in sanskrit, where nari is water and kela is fruit.
Young, tender coconuts are extracted when they have maximum water.
In older days, few humans used to offer blood as sacrifice to pure themselves and get relief from bad karma (similar to Jesus Christ shedding his blood to clean up the sins of fellow humans).
In later days, human sacrifices were banned and coconut with 3 dark spots (assumed to be similar to human head with 3 eyes.
Offering coconuts in temples is not mentioned anywhere in vedas.
This tradition emerged after sage Brahmarshi Viswamitra fought against human blood sacrifices, while freeing Sunahsepa and created coconut as an alternate to human head.
Coconut Breaking Ritual, Quantum Intention Accelerator Experiment
Coconut breaking ritual is a form of bloodless sacrifice.
Humans who want to clear their negative karma, remove obstacles in life would assume coconut as their head and offer it to god by breaking it.
Coconut water is electrolytic plasma, similar to what is found in RBC of human blood.
The idea here is to offer something similar to human head and blood and breaking it signifies, breaking of human ego and karma.
It causes the Butterfly Effect, as explained in quantum physics.
Human intentions are sent into cosmic consciousness through scalar waves when Beej Mantras are recited and rituals like this are performed.
There is nothing on earth purer or more sterile than tender coconut water. This water has a divine quality as it contains lauric acid found in mothers breast milk.
Because of its capacity to dissolve numerous substances in large amounts, pure water rarely occurs in nature.
There are three eyes on top of the coconut shell. Only piercing the middle one will allow you to access the water inside. This middle eye is referred to as Lord Siva’s third eye. Rather it is the mediator of yin-yang or tamas-rajas (mediator being sattva guna).
Coconut water is an electrolyte and boosts circulation and is also anti bacterial.
During this coconut breaking ritual, one has to intend properly. Only then one can tune himself to the quantum level energy matrix, and this energy is transferred to his DNA.
Human intention can create quantum fluctuations in the Zero Point Fielf, a vast unharnessed energy source.
We resonate in Zero Point Energy and human intention can influence the universe.
Nikola Tesla was introduced to this ocean of energy (Akasa or Ether) by Swami Vivekananda.
He told Tesla that the “emptiness” of empty space is in fact not empty, but a great ocean of seething energy!
This included the empty space within the atom in which electrons zoomed around.
Akasha is the womb of creation bringing forth every physical aspect that can be perceived with the senses according to ancient Indian traditions.
Consciousness, is a form of EM energy, that focused thought, with intent can achieve extraordinary things.
Each individual mind has access to the universal mind. Human perception occurs because of interactions between the subatomic particles of our brains an the quantum energy sea. We literally resonate the Cosmos.
The quantum field or pure consciousness is influenced by intention (Sankalp).
calar waves from your mobius supercoil DNA couples with intention and consciousness. Intentions enhance the body’s natural flow of scalar energy produced by DNA. Your DNA can send and receive powerful data through the universal network of ether.
Intention is like the tuning fork which causes other forks to resonate to the same frequency.
The seemingly magical operations of psychoenergetics, sometimes called “psychotronics,” cannot be achieved with ordinary transverse EM wave energy. But they are possible with longitudinal scalar waves because the mind itself is scalar in nature.
When thousands of human minds have similar thoughts and perform coconut breaking ritual, the frequencies produced resonate with cosmos.
When you break the coconut you must shut off your internal mind chatter, be in the moment for the brief alpha state without ego, make your “intention” ring the tuning fork of your consciousness, to resonate to the quantum level energy matrix, as a vortex of group coherent memory.
Then unleash the scalar waves at speed of thought, and wait for them to do their own miracle.
If the coconut does to break into two halves, it is a divine indication that what you intend may not succeed.
Coconut is revered as a symbol of a Brahmin hence it is advised not to remove the Shikha from it before breaking it.
Only after breaking into 2 halves, shika is removed and offered to god.
The speed of light (communication), or electron to electron reaction, is slower than the speed of gravity, or quark to quark reaction – hence the higher the scalar wave frequency, the faster the time rate.
This is the reason why intention of doctor and positivity of patient are more important than prescribed medicine.
The same applies to a spiritual guru – disciple relation, when a mantra is initiated by guru.
Consciousness affecting reality is called the Placebo Effect. Our body is brought back to the original DNA blue print state. It is about “remembered wellness“.
Quantum healing works outside the fabric of space time, and does not follow cause/effect rules. Human brain is the ultimate pharmacy which releases natural body friendly chemicals in the right dosage without side effects.
Nutrition from Coconut and Medical Usage
Coconut water is the clear liquid inside young green coconuts (fruits of the coconut palm).
If the shell of the coconut has not been cracked, the coconut water inside is usually sterile – that is, free of bacteria for many months.
1942, Dr Pradera in Havana, Cuba filtered coconut water and injected it into the veins of 12 children, at rates of around one-to-two litres per 24 hours. He reported no adverse reactions.
During World War Two, both the British in Sri Lanka and the Japanese in Sumatra regularly used coconut water when the standard intravenous fluids ran out.
Coconut water is not identical to the human blood plasma. Instead, it is closer to the liquid inside the red blood cells, with low sodium and high potassium.
By drinking coconuts we give ourselves a instant blood transfusion.