In an undergraduate (UG) medical education program, the educational environment is a critical factor of effective outcomes. Because it is a proven approach for this assessment in medical schools, the Dundee Ready Education Environment Measure (DREEM) was employed in this study.1. To assess the student’s perception of the educational environment using the Dundee Ready Educational Environment Measure (DREEM) questionnaire among 1st-year undergraduate medical students. 2. To identify the strengths and weaknesses in student’s educational environment.A cross-sectional study was carried out among first-year medical students. To obtain student perceptions of the educational environment, a widely accepted DREEM questionnaire was employed. The DREEM questionnaire is divided into five sections, each of which has 50 statements that are rated on a five-point Likert scale (0–4). The questionnaire was distributed to consented individuals (n=150) after receiving ethical approval. The filled questions were collected and statistically evaluated. The data were presented as mean and standard deviation, frequency, and percentages. The responses were analyzed and interpreted using McAleer and Roff's practical recommendations.There was a 100% response rate. The average DREEM score was 124.9 ± 50 (62.46%). Among the five DREEM dimensions, students' perceptions of learning received the highest score (65.63%), while students' perceptions of the environment received the lowest (59.31 %).Statements “I have good friends in this college”, “My social life is good” and “I am confident about passing this year” scored ≥ 3 of 4 points.“A more positive than negative perception,” according to the total mean DREEM score. Student confidence, social life, instructor knowledge, encouragement to participate in a teaching session, teacher preparedness, and having excellent friends on campus received the most positive answers. However, there is space for development in areas where there is a lack of expertise, such as student ennui and creative teaching.