Paragliding in Turkey
EQUIPMENTS OF PARAGLIDING
The paraglide is a simple instrument. However, it is the outcome of long, painstaking and complex design studies. Length differences of the ropes or, simple differences in the cutting of the fabric, may cause much better or worse conclusions. Here are the sections of 'hill parachute' for you:
CANOPY: The fabric part of the 0bject is called 'canopy' or 'wing'. Canopy is made of two layers of fabrics folded onto each other, and it is meant to collect the air inside when on air. In order for the air to be able to fill into the wing, front side, which is called 'attack side', must be open, and the back side that prisons the air inside, which is called 'escape side' must be closed. Thus, because the fabric is air-proof, the wing prisons the air inside and takes a certain shape. When the canopy is completely filled up with wind air, it takes the shape of a plane wing, which is flat bottomed and curved top side. In a typical canopy, there exist 40-60 cells. Length of these cells gives an elliptic shape to the wing when looked at from above. This shape is called a 'platform'. To the sides of the canopy, balancing pieces, which are called 'ears', are placed. 'Ears' keep the parachute in balance and by applying force outwards, they keep it strained. Wings are produced according to: the weight of the pilot, different flight conditions, length/width proportions. At the edge of the wings, the cells that called 'stabilizators' are closed. Stabilizator takes the air form the side cells, it gets filled up and enlarges.
ROPES: Separates into two as 'hanging' ropes and 'brake' ropes. In order to decrease the weight and friction, ropes are produced from strong, enduring materials such as carbon fibers and darcon. Brake ropes are produced in different colors in order to be distinguished easily.
joins fabric with harness. Usually ropes gather at the metal rings and joins
with the columns. In general they have 25mm of breadth. columns form a single
point from which pilots can control all of the ropes at once. At the back of the
columns, there are little metal rings from where brake ropes pass and little
snap fasteners onto which the wheel-cross (brake controllers) are fastened.
FLIGHT-TAKE OFF- LANDING
You can't just go do it. You'll have to take lessons for a brevet. Without a brevet you're not allowed to fly and most of all without a brevet it is very dangerous for you and other people The best thing to do is to go to a place or country where there are mountains. It is also possible to fly in countries where there are no mountains. A long running path is necessary for the pilot. Streamer and windsock must be fixed vertically next to the run path. To escape the turbulences, there must not be another hill across. A clean field is necessary to spread out the parachute.
Controls: At the beginning,
the wind must come from the front with at most 30 degrees. For the experienced
pilots it can be 90 degrees. Last controls have to be done. Control ropes must
be checked if they are at the bottom and open. After putting on the helmet
harness is entered. First the leg columns and then chest columns are fastened.
Leg columns are not fastened so tight in order to leave a space for action.
Stand right in the middle of the wing. Usually there's a sign at the wing that
points at the mid-point. Arms are opened to the sides. In side the hand must be
the controlling ropes and the front column. Other columns must be on the
shoulders. In this position running starts. Important point is: handles must be
pushed not with arm powers but with the power of the chest. When the wing is on
the top point, handles are left, so inside the hands only controlling ropes
stays. When running towards the take off, if leaned on to the sides, a run must
be made towards the inclined direction so the wing gets straight. After
straightening of the wing running continues. Be careful at this point. Even
after taking off running never stops. 'Running' is the part you will have
difficulties with at the beginning. To stop running and sitting into the harness
after the take off, is one of the frequently made mistakes. This mistake causes
injuries and harm to the Harness.
25-30 meters to the ground, the wind must be taken from the front. Harness is left and 1 or 2 meters to the ground brake ropes are pulled till the end. This act is called 'dynamic stall'. When necessary, ropes must be wrapped around the hand and pulled till the end. From the moment of touching the ground, running starts. While running continue pulling the brake ropes. When wing lies back, running stops and packing of the wings must start. First, not to tangle the brake ropes they must be affixed to the snap-fasteners on the column. Meaning of 'stall' in paragliding dictionary is 'losing altitude' and 'disordered flight'.
EMERGENCY DURING FLIGHTS
Breaking of the ropes of brake is, even though not frequently, an encountered situation. In similar situations, in order to make the turns without the brakes, different methods might be tried. To pull the back column on the side that will be turned to or better weight inclining method will help to make the return.
One of the frequently confronted situation in paragliding. The ratio of these closures changes according to the structure of the wing or the strength of the turbulence. One side of the wing is closed and the other is open. And from the closed side, with the effect of the friction, movement of turning begins. In these cases what must be done is to slow down the turning as much as it is possible, and moving to the closed side and leaving. Excessive application of brake may put the wing into (stol).
In case of decrease in the load that's on the front ropes or because of a strong turbulence, wing's front closure happens. What must be done is to pull the strings till the end, and by letting them free getting the wings to their normal position.
Getting Dragged In Strong Wind To The Back Of The Hill
As soon as you realize that the wind is changing direction, idea of 'landing' is the best. Because it is possible to get dragged to a hill-back and it may be imminent to face with a rotor turbulence. If the wind gets over our limits, all possibilities to escape must be tried. Brand new 'speed system' can reach to an over 10km/h and makes leaping forward possible for the parachute. In cases of lack of this system, in order to speed up, both of the column A's may be leaned forward a little. But, over leaning may cause front closure, so one must be careful. If none of these methods works out, by closing the ears, landing as quick as possible must be tried. While approaching to the ground, to close the parachute soon, you should prepare the necessary order when on air. Never make a brake in order to stop the parachute, it give a negative reaction.
Opening The Supplementary
Supplementary parachute is used in cases it is thought that our parachute isn't able to land us. Supplementary parachute, holding it from its handles, must be thrown away from being tangled with the wings, and it must be packed immediately.
If rain starts during the flight, direct landing must be done. Because, water will enter into the escape side, the mass will increase the weight and the parachute will have a stol. This will limit your movements.
This is the case of fabric part of the wing enters between the ropes. This happens in cases of vingoverden, spiral and not coming out of the stol. When faced with this situation, turning must be slowed down, and brake must be applied. Which is closed must be opened. If not, without panicking, the supplying parachute must be opened.