How Color Therapy or Chromotherapy Can Heal Your Body
We all know that light is composed of colors. Along with colors, light also consists of chemical and emotional elements since it emits heat, electricity and magnetism. Thus, light, along with its component colors, can be used for healing the mind, body and spirit. This is the basic principle behind Chromotherapy or color therapy.
Different colors have different effects on the mind and body. Today, there is enough evidence that has documented these organic reactions in the flora and fauna of earth. The potencies and qualities of every object are determined by the color of that object. Our bodies have two invisible energy transport systems. One is the meridian system, a system meticulously charted in ancient China, which delivers the energies of light to organs and glands throughout our bodies. The other is the chakra system, charted in ancient India, which stores the energy of light in the region of the major nerve ganglions along the spine. The chakras are spirals of energy that function like pumps or valves to regulate the flow of light or color through our nervous system and throughout the body. The body seems to act like a prism as each of the seven chakras has a concentration of a particular color.
A Light System Within Our Bodies
Evidence to support the existence of chakra centers was discovered by medical researcher, Dr. Candace Pert, Ph.D based in the US. She found that areas in the body that are particularly rich in neuropeptides correspond to the location of the seven chakra centers. Neuropeptides are natural healing chemicals. Evidence to support the existence of the meridian system and the way it conducts light was discovered by Dr. Pankratov, a Russian researcher. His team applied light to a specific area of the body and then noticed how a spot of light spontaneously appeared at another location—an area connected by a meridian.
Light is absorbed through our eyes and our skin. Two specific ways our bodies disperse light throughout the body are the meridian system, discovered in ancient China, and the chakra system, discovered in ancient India. The purpose of color therapy is to help bring balance to the body—mentally, emotionally and physically.
Chromotherapy for the mind and spirit
According to author Carol Jackson, in her book “Color Me Beautiful”, chromotherapy or color therapy, can be used to enhance one’s mind and spirit. She gives the example of how certain colors used in one’s attire can help bring out the color of the wearer’s eyes ,hair etc. Since some colors help flatter and compliment us, we naturally feel more confident wearing them. By choosing a color palette that suits our personality, we can actually perform better in our professional and personal lives.
Today, there is enough scientific evidence that shows how we respond emotionally and psychologically to colors. Even in the past; artists like Rembrandt and Michelangelo used colors to symbolically convey messages in their paintings. Likewise, modern color therapy is known to stimulate emotions and feelings such as: Vitality and passion (Red), Optimism and expansion (Orange), Healing and growth (Green) and Joy and Creativity (Yellow).
Color Therapy for the body
Chromotherapy, when used for healing the body, utilizes colors based on their electrical and heating properties. Some colors actually cool and soothe the nerves (e.g. dark-violet, indigo etc) while some can excite or heat the blood (e.g. red-orange or dark red etc.)
Best colors used in Chromotherapy to heal different body parts
Brain and nerves– Nerve soothing colors like blue, violet and indigo.
Neck and thorax– Cobalt blue for its cooling and heating properties.
Digestive disorders– Red and yellow to stimulate digestive juices as well as blue and violet to stimulate saliva.
Lower limb disorders– Warm colors like orange and orange red.
Caution and contraindications of Chromotherapy
Colors can heal, but they can also have injurious and disastrous effects. For example, when the nerves are over-excited or irritated, or when a patient is suffering from palpitations, high fever, inflammation and neuralgia etc, yellow or orange reddish tones must not be used. Similarly, blue, indigo and violet must be avoided in cases of paralysis, gout, rheumatism or cold etc as these colors are extremely cooling and constructive in nature.
Color therapy or Chromotherapy is one of the most ancient healing therapies and has been used in several parts of the world. When used correctly, it can assist in harnessing the energy of the sunlight to boost the natural healing ability of the body, not only to cure diseases but also prevent them.