Forest School is an international and alternative education model that uses outdoor learning.
The creation of the Forest School is associated with the Scandinavian countries. The first Forest School was founded in 1952 on the outskirts of Copenhagen, Denmark’s capital.
The first Forest School was created on the initiative of a Danish mother, Ella Flatau, who created a “walking kindergarten”. These forest kindergartens, called Skovbørnehaver in the local language, were originally intended for children aged 2 to 6 years. Soon the forest became a classroom, and outdoor activities became part of the national curriculum.
In 1957, retired Gösta From founded the first Forest School in Sweden. School was named Skogsmulle. He was inspired to create this school by the work of the German discoverer Friedrich Froebel, who established the first kindergarten in 1840.
Forest School Azerbaijan was founded in 2017 on the initiative of a group of education leaders and teachers. This educational movement, which began various interactive activities in nature with schoolchildren under the name “School without walls” (“Divarsız məktəb”), has become popular in our country in a short time.
The main goal of Forest School Azerbaijan is the development of students in 6 areas – physical, intellectual, social, emotional, spiritual and in the direction of character formation through the organization of various on-site educational events, project studies, master classes, expeditions, thematic camps, where children are in harmony with nature.
The main activities of Forest School Azerbaijan are the following:
According to the Forest School Azerbaijan educational program, child can join group meetings and events from the age of 6.
Forest School Azerbaijan events for schoolchildren are held for the following age groups: 6-10, 11-14, 15-17 years old. Programs are provided according to the learning needs of each group.
Azerbaijani, English, Russian
Russian or English speaking children regularly take part in our events, expeditions and camps. Children form language groups and are taught by a Russian/English-speaking pedagogy-leader. A separate language group is formed upon enrollment of 6 children. In other cases, translation is provided for all types of activities.
To join Forest School Azerbaijan, you need to register as a member on the www.forestschool.az site.
Forest School events are organized by specially trained pedagogy-leaders. All leaders are professionally trained and have many years of outdoor training experience, as well as local and international first aid certifications.
In camps with an overnight stay, participants are accommodated in cottage-type recreation centers, hotels with access to nature, and villas type country houses. According to the standards, each participant is provided by a pedagogy-leader, and a 24-hour control system is used for safety.
All pedagogy-leaders have received special training in the organization of safety and health protection. During each event, the pedagogy-leaders have a first aid kit. pedagogy-leaders have local and international first aid certifications. The choice of safe areas for organizing events and monitoring the safety of children is the responsibility of every pedagogy-leaders.
During daytime or overnight events, all participants are provided with health insurance and a contract is concluded with them on it.
Master classes are organized by specialists from various fields, artists, scientists, interested members of the community, as well as зувфпщпн-leaders of Forest School Azerbaijan in accordance with the Forest School concept.
Yes, there are fees for events. Some joint projects are organized on a free basis. Only regular participants who are members of Forest School Azerbaijan can take advantage of this opportunity.
Weekend group meetings:
Expeditions (without overnight stay):
Seasonal campsites and expeditions:
You can pay online (by card) through our website or in cash.
Participants and parents are notified in advance about the place where the events will take place. During the events in Baku, the participants come to the venue on their own or with their parents. Younger children are picked up by the pedagogy-leaders of the Forest School Azerbaijan team and transferred to their parents after the event. During the events held in the regions and during the camps, the meeting place is announced in advance. Transportation is provided by the Forest School Azerbaijan. In exceptional cases, the parent may bring the child to the camp and / or pick him up. This must be agreed with the organizers.
It is possible for parents to participate in events that are intended for joint participation with parents. This applies mainly to family events and camps. Parents are NOT ALLOWED to participate in children’s events.
The following are the conditions for the refund of the amount paid for the services (camping, expedition, training, and other related activities) organized by Forest School Azerbaijan and received by you:
The certificate is issued if it is planned by this type of event. All events are based on the international concept of Forest School education. Participants must be a long-term members in an educational program to receive a certificate.
All of our events are regularly posted on our website and social media. You can access our digital platforms and social channels through the links below.