5 Tips to Prevent Tooth Substance Loss
Preventing tooth substance loss should be a priority if you are serious about keeping tooth decay at bay. Tooth decay is one of the most common health issues right next to a common cold, and it is easy to fall victim to it when a person fails to follow proper oral hygiene.
How tooth loss occurs
Tooth decay can be caused by the foods people eat and the bacteria that live inside their mouths. These microorganisms feed on these particles, and they excrete acids that are damaging to enamel. The constant exposure of teeth enamel to acids is what leads to tooth decay. The acids can directly destroy the structure of a tooth in the foods that are being consumed.
The bacteria that lead to tooth decay thrive on the sugars found in the foods and drinks that people regularly consume. The result is the formation of plaque. The plaque is a sticky, thin film that sticks to teeth surfaces. When left on teeth for prolonged periods of time, plaque eventually turns into tartar. Tartar is a hard, yellowish substance that is the perfect haven for teeth-damaging bacteria. It can only be removed with a professional cleaning performed by a dentist.
Plaque and tarter are not your friend
Plaque and tartar create acids that remove essential minerals from teeth enamel. This is the protective outer layer of teeth, and everything else goes downhill once this is compromised. The first stage of tooth decay is the formation of cavities. Cavities are tiny holes inside a tooth. With time, the holes can expand until it reaches the pulp chamber.
Once the pulp chamber has been compromised, bacteria and anything else in the patient's mouth can now reach the nerves and pulp inside the tooth. An infection is imminent at this point. An infection requires a root canal treatment or an extraction of the tooth to prevent it from spreading further.
Factors that put people at an increased risk of having tooth decay include:
- Smoking tobacco products
- Consuming sugary foods
- Not practicing good oral hygiene
- Failing to get regular dental checkups
- Dry mouth
Now, let us take a look at five great tips that help to keep tooth substance loss at bay:
1. Brush twice daily
Brushing twice a day is an effective way to reduce the plaque in the mouth. Using a fluoride-infused toothpaste gives the patient enhanced protection.
2. Floss daily
Flossing helps to remove plaque and food particles from the tight spaces between teeth that only brushing cannot reach.
3. Use mouthwash
A quality mouthwash helps to clean areas of the mouth brushing and flossing cannot reach. An antibacterial mouthwash also helps to lower bacteria count, freshen breath, and re-mineralize teeth.
4. Limit sugary foods
People who are serious about being tooth decay free should avoid sugary foods as much as possible. Sodas, candies, and desserts are some of the biggest offenders. People should rinse their mouth with water after eating any of these to wash the sugar away.
5. Regular visits to the dentist
Regular visits to the dentist give them the opportunity to detect any developing issues before they lead to complications. Patients also get a cleaning, which removes tartar.
Have more questions about tooth decay and how to fight it?
Want to learn more about fighting off tooth decay? Contact one of our dentists today!
Request an appointment in our Pomona dentist office here: https://www.pomonadiamondbardentist.com.
Some people may not realize how improper oral care can have a negative impact on their overall health. Untreated tooth decay does not heal without treatment and usually worsens over time. When those with multiple cavities ignore their dental needs, they may be putting themselves at risk for a variety of other medical problems, some…
The fact is that sensitive teeth are oftentimes painful, and the only way to treat the issue in many instances is to visit the dentist for in-office care. By fully understanding the more concerning signs indicating that a trip to the dentist office is necessary, you can get the treatment you need and prevent a…
Some dental issues start early on, meaning your child might need a dental checkup at an early age. Even if the child is relatively young, there could be tooth decay or white spots. It means you should think about making your child’s dental appointment as soon as possible. Keep reading to learn more.If there are…
Much like a routine visit to the doctor’s office, a Dental Check-up is a good way to assess how you are doing with oral wellness. It is easy to get busy with life and forget about making this important appointment. However, you should make this a priority for yourself and everyone in your family.A dental…