Shrink Wrap, or Shrink Film, is a material made of polymer plastic commonly used for packaging and wrapping goods. When heat is applied to the shrink wrap, it shrinks tightly around the covering item. Heat the Shrink Wrap with an electric or gas heat gun and a heat sealer. Passing the product in Shrink Wrap through a heat tunnel on a conveyor is another common way to apply heat to this material.
Type of Shrink Wraps
The three main types of Shrink Wrap commonly used as a packaging material are Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC), Polyethylene (PE), and Polyolefin (POF). Each Shrink Wrap has slightly different characteristics, like thicknesses, clarities, strengths, and shrink ratio, making these materials suitable for specific applications.
Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC)
Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) is one of the most commonly used Shrink Wraps, primarily due to its high durability, lightweight, and low cost. PVC Shrink Wrap also has disadvantages, mostly related to the dangers to health during the creation of this material and when heated, since PVC releases strong, harmful odours during these processes. PVC is recommended for use in well-ventilated facilities.
PE, Polyethylene, is commonly used for Shrink Wrapping in several different forms, including Low-Density Polyethylene (LDPE), Linear Low-Density Polyethylene (LLDPE), and High-Density Polyethylene (HDPE). PE is often used for protective packaging due to its high strength and durability. The main downsides of this material are lower than the other types, shrink rate, and lower clarity.
POF, or Polyolefin, is another popular type of Shrink Wrap that is getting more popular worldwide due to its robust characteristics and versatility. It has higher durability and clarity than the other kinds of Shrink Wraps. The packaging material is made from fully recyclable materials, making it an excellent choice for environmentally conscious users. POF demonstrates quality results in the shrink rate as well. The only downside of POF is the higher cost compared to other kinds of Shrink Wrap.
Here in Stream Peak, we also offer other forms of packaging solutions for food products. Desiccants, oxygen absorbers, and ethylene absorbers are available to prolong the shelf life of food products and maintain their freshness and quality. Please find out more shrink wraps from our blog.
- Applicable for a wide variety of products
- Provides protection against moisture and other contaminants which may damage and affect the quality of products
- Economical, durable, puncture-proof