The pecan tree is native to North America and grows well from Illinois down to Florida and across the
south to Texas. The tree may reach 70 to 100 feet in height and 40 to 80 feet
in width. As a member of the Hickory family, the wood is very good for building
fine furnitures or for general construction, however it is not as hard as
hickory. The pecan nuts are a true delight. Pecans are heart-healthy,
containing 87% unsaturated fatty acid. They are high in vitamins and minerals,
containing over 19 vitamins and minerals. The pecan offers antioxidant properties
that reduce LDL cholesterol (Bad cholesterol) build-up. Pecans are prized
mainly for their lumber and for their delicious nuts.
Pecan trees are generally sold as either seedling trees or paper-shell grafted trees. The
seedling trees are of less value producing the smaller, hard-shell nuts. Talbott
Nursery and Poultry offers both fine paper-shell grafted pecan trees and the
commercially grown nut trees…all good for shade! These pecan trees are of orchard quality
producing larger, paper-shell nuts that sell at a higher price. The oil content
and nut quality of our select varieties are superior selections for your home
When planting pecan trees,
they need to be spaced 40 to 60 feet apart in orchard plantings and no closer
than 40 feet for home plantings. However, pollination may occur between trees
over 200 feet apart. To ensure production of nuts, you must plant two
varieties. Some self-pollination may occur, however it is highly recommended to
plant at least three varieties together for maximum pollination and production.
We classify the pollination periods of each tree as either protandrous (Type 1)
or protogynous (Type 2.) You should mix Type 1 and Type 2 for best pollination
and highest yields.
Pecan trees will grow
in a variety of soil types, except poorly drained soils. When planting pecan trees,
dig a hole that is, at least, two feet wide and three feet deep and back fill
with well drained soil. Also, do not apply fertilizers for the first two years.
After that time, in the Spring apply one pound of 10-10-10 with micronutrients
around the root zone of the tree. Then, you should apply one pound of zinc
sulphate and another pound of fertilizer in July. Zinc is especially important
for pecan trees so you will need to continue to apply one pound of zinc sulfate
each year. You should also increase your fertilizer by one pound each year. We
sell our trees bare-root and recommend pruning 1/3 to 1/2 of the top of your
new tree to encourage vigorous growth and rapid establishment. Talbott Nursery
and Poultry will assist you with making your pecan tree selections and offer
expert advice for all of your pecan tree needs.