What is an Acrobat Ant?
They get their common name from their ability to acrobatically raise their abdomen over their thorax and head, however, if their colony is disturbed, these ants may sometimes bite. There are various species of this light brown to black ant found throughout the United States.
- Color: Light brown to black, sometimes multicolored
- Legs: They have 6 legs
- Shape: Heart-shaped abdomen
- Size: Workers average 1/8” (3.2 mm) in length
- Antennae: Yes
“Superior job by Allen the tech who came to ck for mice and found other issues not related. And no extra charge. Went the extra mile That you don’t see these days. Will definitely use this company again and ask for Allen. Who is very professional and easy to ask questions to.”
What Do Acrobat Ants Look Like?
Acrobat ants are light brown to black in color. They are relatively small, their abdomen is the shape which resembles a heart. These ants possess a stinger.
Signs of an Infestation
The most obvious sign of an acrobat ant infestation is the presence of actual ant trails on wires, utility lines and pipes coming into walls. Acrobat ants will occasionally forage up to 100 feet away from their nest for resources, so you might spot them trailing along the foundation in search of food. Additionally, debris such as dirt and wood scraps that acrobat ants deposit as they excavate their nests can serve as another telltale sign of an infestation. If the home has siding, look for pieces of foam insulation, which could indicate an acrobat ant nest behind the siding.
Homeowners should also check for moisture damage around the structure of the home, which could attract acrobat ants, carpenter ants and other wood-nesting pests like termites. We are happy to inspect your crawlspace for peeling paint, mold or fungal growth, or deteriorating wood along soffits and around window frames.
Acrobat Ants Prevention
There are many techniques that can be used to prevent acrobat ants. First and foremost, it’s important to keep a close eye on the exterior of the home for visible signs of an infestation as described above. PMi provides quarterly service that keeps an eye on areas for possible infestations.
Keep all food, including pet food, stored in sealed plastic or glass containers.
How to Get Rid of Acrobat Ants
If you suspect an infestation in your home, contact PMi to conduct an interior and exterior inspection and work with you to develop an ant treatment plan. We may inquire about past water leaks, plumbing problems, etc., which could indicate an infestation. In the yard, we will likely check logs, stumps, firewood, tree cavities and loose bark for ant nests. Once the ant species is properly identified, the appropriate control measures can be taken.
Outside, most species of these ants nest under rocks or in logs, firewood and trees where wood decay allows them to create tunnels. They also build their nests in abandoned cavities carved out by other insects such as termites and carpenter ants.
full-service pest control company and technicians