DEN HAAG, Netherlands (PRWEB) January 06, 2015
Global warming has been an issue that had taken a significant share of the community's concerns since the second half of the 20th century. Yet, even with all the updated evidence coming out to support the claim, it is noteworthy how many people remain unaware of the real impact of global warming to the environment and humanity, as a whole. Sharing this view, author Leon Saracini pens "The Five Fingers of Global Destruction" (published by Xlibris UK). This nonfiction simplifies the nitty-gritties of global warming to any reader without a need for prior knowledge in ecology or tedious scientific jargon.
The book explains in five steps all the consequences of global warming through the conversation of two friends, Mr Donoti and Mr Noel. They meet for a drink in a bar somewhere on the northern hemisphere during the month of July. It is summer but raining heavily. While commenting on the weather, Mr. Donoti explains to Mr. Noel the reason for such weather and the global warming process. He does this by explaining and asking questions on few topics in order to also explain that the general belief of some natural processes is wrong, such as that more Oxygen is produced by phytoplankton than the Amazon.
Candid, satirical and truthful without being too scientific, "The Five Fingers of Global Destruction" aims to raise awareness among the multitude to contribute to conservation efforts that have dragged lackadaisically despite decades of advocacy that have gone unrequited. It provides an eye-opener for people from all walks of life and promotes a sense of urgency for active participation and cooperation towards a common goal.
“The Five Fingers of Global Destruction”
By Leon Saracini
Hardcover | 6x9in | 50 pages | ISBN 9781499091687
Softcover | 6x9i in | 50 pages | ISBN 9781499091670
E-Book | 50 pages | ISBN 9781499091694
Available at Amazon and Barnes & Noble
About the Author
Leon Saracini is a former student of astronomy, a father, a husband, a son and a brother. He has vast experience in international peace organizations and media and journalism. Saracini has also been a part time DJ, inventor, first aid instructor, multilingual and animal rights advocate who is greatly concerned about the lack of people's willingness to learn and understand the true consequences of Global Warming and to do something about it.
Xlibris Publishing UK, an Author Solutions, LLC imprint, is a self-publishing services provider dedicated to serving authors throughout the United Kingdom. By focusing on the needs of creative writers and artists and adopting the latest print-on-demand publishing technology and strategies, we provide expert publishing services with direct and personal access to quality publication in hardcover, trade paperback, custom leather-bound and full-color formats. To date, Xlibris has helped to publish more than 60,000 titles. For more information, visit xlibrispublishing.co.uk or call 0800 056 3182 to receive a free publishing guide. Follow us @XlibrisUK on Twitter for the latest news.