1-2-3 Come Do A Valentine Storytelling Craft With Me
Do you read "There Was An Old Lady Who Swallowed A Rose" by Lucille Colandro?
My students absolutely love this collection of stories, and they are perfect for practicing the “sequencing and retelling a story” standards.
If you don't have the book, and would like to familiarize yourself with the story, click this LINK to find it on YouTube.
With that in mind, I designed these quick, easy & fun storytelling "Slider" and "Wheel" craftivities that will help your students retell the story in the proper order.
Either craft is simple enough as a great addition to your Valentine’s Day party too.
First up, the "There Was an Old Lady Who Swallowed a Rose" storytelling SLIDER:
There are 4 “cover” options available:
Pick your favorite or give children a choice.
All of them are easy-peasy to cut, as they are in a box shape; however, you can also choose to cut around the little old lady’s head.
I took pictures of both samples so that you can decide which you like best.
There are also 2 size options available.
Both heads are bigger, with a larger "slider strip", while the rose & granny's body are smaller (on a half page). They have a smaller "slider strip" as well.
You decide which best suits your students' abilities.
Children color, cut & glue their slider strips together, then insert it into the “slits” of their cover.
As they pull on the end of the “slider” the various pictures go through the “window”, so that children can take turns retelling the story to a partner.
I introduce the lesson by reading the story, then share my sample with the children.
We retell the tale together, using the picture prompts on the slider.
My students now know what’s expected of them, and are very excited to transition to making a “There Was an Old Lady Who Swallowed a Rose” slider of their own.
As always, both color, as well as black & white patterns are included.
For a quick, easy & interesting way to assess comprehension, there's a “Let’s sequence the story” worksheet, where students color and trim the picture tiles then glue them in the correct order on their worksheet.
Use the teacher’s colorful copy as a whole group sequencing activity, by passing the cards out to your students.
When you get to that part in the story, the child with the matching card, comes up & places it on the ordinal number mat. (Use magnet or Velcro dots to adhere the cards).
After the story, I pass the cards out to different children for a final review.
Remember to grab that teachable moment to practice ordinal numbers as well.
Both the Slider & Wheel packets include a “Here’s What Happened…” writing prompt worksheet, as another way to check comprehension, plus practice sequential writing.
Use the colorful template to do this as a whole group activity with younger kiddos, discussing beginning, middle & end.
Finally, the storytelling wheels are also a super-fun way for your students to practice the sequencing & retelling standards.
There are 3 wheel “cover” options to choose from.
Choose your favorite, or give students a choice.
When everyone is done, practice telling “There Was An Old Lady Who Swallowed A Rose” using the manipulative.
Simply turn the wheel & call on a child to explain what’s happening in that graphic.
Afterwards, have students pick a partner and take turns retelling the story to each other.
Sometimes we do this with our older, reading buddies.
For more reinforcement, as well as another way to assess comprehension, I’ve also included 2, “color, cut & glue” puzzle worksheets.
Use the two, full-color versions for an independent puzzle center, where children arrange the pieces on a 5-piece pie grid.
There is puzzle for the first half of the story, plus another puzzle for the second half of the tale. To make this center self-correcting, number the pieces on the back using two different colors, which will make sorting easy-peasy.
Another super-fun thing for students to do is to play “Speed”. Children pick a partner & race eachother to see who will be the first to complete their puzzle.
Add to the fun by using a dice for the first puzzle.
Whatever number a child rolls is the number that they put on their puzzle.
If they roll a 6 they lose their turn.
When doing the second puzzle, children play with two dice, which will help practice simple addition.
Today's featured FREEBIE also has to do with Valentine's Day.
It's a simple, (rip & tear) "I love you to pieces" valentine card, that's lots of fun for your kiddos, while being a great way to help strengthen their finger muscles.
It's perfect for your valentine party day, and is generic enough so you can use it for Mother's Day, Father's Day or Grandparents Day as well.
Well that's it for today. Thanks for stopping by.
We just had 5 inches of snow dumped on us, so it's time to do a bit of shoveling.
Wishing you a toasty & warm week.
Click this LINK, and come join the fun on Face Book for my exclusive FREEBIES & Monthly GIVEAWAYS.
Check out my educational Pinterest boards by clicking HERE.
"The Giving of love, is an education in itself." -Eleanor Roosevelt
1-2-3 Come Do Some Valentine Party Day Activities With Me
Do your kiddos rip into their valentines and are done with that activity in about 5 minutes, when you were hoping to stretch that out a bit for more sanity-time on party day?
With that in mind, I designed some "Print & Go" easy-peasy valentine worksheets, that students complete using their valentine cards.
There are 4 worksheets to choose from (plus one also has a boy & girl option).
Pick what fits your needs, or do all 4 and simply print back-to-back for a 2-pager.
Your students will enjoy pouring over their valentine cards to complete the quick, easy & fun worksheets, which practice a variety of math & literacy skills, and you'll have some time to yourself to relax a bit before the next activity.
I've included colors, 2D shapes, counting, sorting, sight words, tally marks, greater & less than, graphing, plus a Venn diagram for comparison-contrast writing, and a place to glue their favorite valentine, then tell who it's from & explain why it's their favorite.
Today's FREEBIE is a paper chain craft. It's super simple to make the links look like hearts, and the perfect, "little something different" for pary day.
Younger kiddos can count links and show an AB-AB or ABC-ABC pattern, while older students can write spelling or sight words on the strips, or math equations from the board, then solve the equations on their links.
You can also use the hearts for other things, such as a bouquet for mom.
I've included an owl pencil topper in the packet as well. Just a little something you can whip together and leave on top of your kiddos' desk as an inexpensive party-day surprise. You can get a pack of 20, valentine pencils at The Dollar Store.
Well that's it for today. Thanks for stopping by. Today was short & sweet as I just got out of the hospital.
Sigh... some of my friends are zipping off to Florida or taking a cruise; me, I land in the hospital for a 2-day "staycation" because of breathing problems.
Feeling tons better and raring to design some more stuff!
Nothing like a little set-back to really make you appreciate life. Wishing you a healthy, rest of winter and beyond.
"They invented hugs to let people know you love them without saying anything." -Bill Keane
February is all about sweethearts and sweet treats, and lip-smacking delights! I've got some crazy concoctions for you to whip up with your little ones, that will have their sweet tooth more than satisfied.
Fizzy Sweet Treat: A Science Lesson For Young Students
Toss some "fizzies" in a plastic bag and dip a cherry or strawberry lollipop in it and you have one awesome treat for a little kid to experience. I never really knew what was in my "Sweet Treats" as a child, nor why it sparkled and made my tongue all tingly, but it was great fun. Your students/children can do this too and have a science lesson at the same time!
The basis of the sweet treat is confectioners' sugar. 50g will make enough for about 6 children. For that amount you will also need a scant teaspoon each of bicarbonate of soda and citric acid. You can buy the latter, in the form of white powder, very cheaply, in small quantities, from the pharmacy. Children will also enjoy having a lollipop to dip into the powdery confection. I get the small "dum-dums" at The Dollar Store so that they don't last "forever".
Directions: Mix all the powders together thoroughly.
Why does it fizz? It's a reaction between the citric acid (the same acid as in lemons) and the bicarbonate of soda, which is an alkali. In this case the chemical reaction happens on your tongue, as the two dry ingredients mix with water (saliva) they create a gas in the form of lots of tiny little bubbles. The bubbles provide the tingle in your mouth. You are creating the same chemical reaction when you drop a bath fizzy bomb into your bath water. The active dry ingredients-which again include bicarbonate of soda and citric acid-react when they meet the bath water. Try doing this with vinegar as the liquid and get a real fizzy, bubbling result. The reaction happens immediately because the vinegar is the liquid. Combining vinegar and bicarbonate of soda is actually an old-fashioned cleaning recipe, used to help remove suborn stains in the kitchen, I use this chemical reaction in September during my dinosaur unit and add red food coloring to the vinegar so that it looks like lava. I put all these ingredients in my students' baby food-jar volcanoes and they have fun watching them erupt! Keep your "Fizzy Sweet Treats" dry. Store in little re-sealable plastic bags ready to dip your lollipop in, or in a plastic food container. You could also add some red Kool-Aid for a splash of color for Valentine's Day.
Shake It & Make It - Ice Cream In A Bag
If you've got a few minutes, you can make another Sweet Treat with your students and have more science fun in the classroom.
Cinnamon Heart Ornaments:
A room mommy brought these cupcakes in for her daughter's February birthday treat. She got the recipe from the Internet and shared it with me. Makes 24 cupcakes
I hope you enjoy these sweet treats with your little sweeties!
May you have a love-filled February!