You force yourself to go to bed at a half-decent hour, drink some water between your coffees and other beverages, and add some vegetables to your meals at least once in a while. You take your vitamins and prescriptions more often than not (though you may miss a dose or two) and follow medical advice where it’s applicable. Overall, you have a pretty good grasp of your healthcare needs—you have control of your health more or less.
However, there’s more to health than these habitual practices. No matter how much of a handle you have on your health, you’ll find that you can’t self-treat everything. More specifically, there are three particular types of conditions that you should always treat with a doctor’s guidance and formal medical care.
1. Cardiovascular Conditions
This one especially won’t come as a surprise. You know that your heart and cardiovascular system more broadly are crucial components of your overall health. It’s common knowledge that conditions like myocardial infarction (more commonly known as a heart attack), stroke, heart failure, or arrhythmia can affect your entire life. Because of this, there’s no treatment plan as effective as the one you’ll get through your doctor.
For instance, someone dealing with atrial fibrillation or risk of stroke or blood clot might be prescribed a medication called Eliquis (generic name apixaban). Taken twice a day, this medicine is classified as an anticoagulant, lowering the risk of these conditions upfront or the risk of a repeat incident if you’ve already faced a cardiovascular challenge. If you’re worried you’ll start a tab at the pharmacy to keep up with taking Eliquis or another blood thinner twice a day, look into an Eliquis coupon that can make your medicine more affordable, even without insurance. As with any prescription drug, be sure to consult your physician or pharmacist with any questions or concerns.
2. Mental Health Conditions
As mental health slowly loses some of the stigmas that have been attached to it for centuries, it’s becoming more acceptable for patients to pursue treatment for psychological, emotional, or behavioral conditions. Some of the most common diagnoses under the umbrella of mental health are anxiety, depression, bipolar disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder, post-traumatic stress disorder, schizophrenia, and social anxiety disorder.
While self-help methods can make a difference in your mental health and wellness, they can’t single-handedly cure a serious condition. Medical experts like those at Anxiety and Depression Center, Newport Beach can treat mental health issues like major depressive disorder with the right combination of therapy, prescription medication, lifestyle changes, and whatever other medical help your clinicians think may ease your symptoms and help you to reclaim a better quality of life.
3. Neurological Conditions
If you’ve listened to Michael Scott in The Office’s season two episode “The Injury,” you’ll know the answer to his question: “Doctor, what is more serious, a head injury or a foot injury?” Unsurprisingly, the doctor informs him that Dwight’s concussion—a common head injury—is more severe than Michael burning his foot on a Foreman grill. In most cases, conditions affecting the brain and the nervous system need medical attention from a qualified healthcare provider, not just home remedies or over-the-counter medicines.
If you have a diagnosis such as a spinal cord injury, Alzheimer’s disease, epilepsy, migraine, or headache, ensure you visit a doctor to receive the treatment you need. Depending on your particular neurological condition, your treatment plan may include medication, physical or psychological therapy, or surgery.
You can work towards health and wellness and self-treat common concerns such as the common cold. With cardiovascular, neurological, or mental health conditions, though, professional medical attention is crucial. With your doctor’s recommendations of medication and other treatment options, you’ll be feeling better in no time.