Fevers speed up the identification and neutralisation of infections, new research has shown, raising new questions over whether it is always wise to combat fevers with drugs and cold compresses.
Doctors already know that bacteria and viruses thrive best at body temperature, so fevers disrupt their ability to multiply. Now it has been found that fevers help the body’s immune system identify an infection and raise an army of white blood cells (lymphocytes) against it.
“We’re not advising against cooling fevers, but our results raise questions about the advantages of lowering temperature,” says Sharon Evans, who carried out the research with colleagues at the Roswell Park Cancer Institute in Buffalo, New York, US. “We have found a physiological mechanism for improved immune surveillance,” she adds.
Evans’s team artificially created a fever-like state in a group of mice by confining them at 39.5°C – 2.6°C higher than normal. This had the effect of doubling the number of lymphocytes visiting lymph nodes, they found.
The lymph nodes are the body’s screening tool. Lymphocytes arriving at the nodes are screened for “killer efficiency” using fragments of potentially infectious material. Lymphocytes that respond to the fragments are found, are then selectively multiplied, and then swarm into the bloodstream to seek out and destroy the invader.
The sooner an infectious agent is identified and an “army” of lymphocytes raised to kill it, the sooner an infection can be brought under control. Evans concludes that fever helps by accelerating the surveillance process.
She found that heat activates “gatekeeper” cells in lymph nodes so that they attract and summon more lymphocytes into the nodes than usual. “It’s an attempt to accelerate identification and eradication of infection,” she says.
The gatekeepers – also called high endothelial venule cells – become more “sticky” by producing extra surface proteins which capture passing lymphocytes and draw them into the lymph nodes.
“This study shows the effects fever has at a molecular level, letting more lymphocytes stick to and enter the lymph nodes,” comments Andrew Luster at the Massachusetts General Hospital in Charlestown, US, who was not involved in the research.
The team is now investigating how to fine-tune fever and deploy it in treatment. Fevers usually begin with local inflammation, which makes infected tissue hotter. Signalling chemicals called cytokines are released from the site of inflammation into the bloodstream and reach the hypothalamus in the brain, which acts as the body’s temperature gauge.
If the infection escalates, the hypothalamus can raise the temperature of the entire body, which then activates the accelerated surveillance and response system in the lymph nodes identified by the research team.
Evans says that although it fell out of fashion with the development of modern medicine, the idea of treating disease with heat has a long history: “Hippocrates used to heat patients with cancer,” she says. And a century ago the physician William Coley discovered a cocktail of bacteria, dubbed “Coley’s toxins”, which appeared to combat cancer by producing a fever.
Evans cautions against letting fevers run riot, however, as they can cause fits or even kill by overheating organs such as the liver and brain. But she is hopeful that fever-based therapies might be refined to improve existing treatments for infections, auto-immune diseases and cancer.
Journal reference: Nature Immunology (DOI: 10.1038/ni1406)