Watch any commercial for health-related products and you may believe heart problems only occur in the elderly. However, millions of people in younger generations are likely to face cardiovascular problems, such as diabetes, heart attacks, or strokes. And, contrary to what you see on social media, these diseases do not happen to only old men! The remote cardiac monitor team at ReactDx wants you to be aware of the signs of heart disease you may experience regardless of your age.
Women and Heart Attacks
A recently published a study of patients who suffered heart attacks, with an emphasis on percentages of men versus women and elderly versus younger patients, found the percentage of younger women — ages 35 to 54 — who experienced cardiovascular disease climbed from 21 percent to 31 percent, while the percentage of older men with cardiovascular disease dropped. More importantly, women were less likely to be prescribed heart medication or offered heart surgery because medical professionals believed they did not meet the criteria for patients with heart problems.
Men and Heart Attacks
The same study found that, overall, the percentage of young people experiencing heart attacks rose from 27 percent of the population to 32 percent. Young men were not exempt; their numbers increased as well. And, contrary to popular belief, a younger body’s high metabolism does not wash out poor food and drink choices. In fact, the choices of a young adult — smoking (even e-cigarettes), drinking alcoholic beverages, and eating high-fat and high-cholesterol foods — negatively affect their bodies for the remainder of their lives.
What can you do as a young adult? Eat healthier, exercise more frequently, and have yearly cardiovascular exams. Even pre-teens should be screened for cardiovascular risk factors if a family history of heart disease is known. Also, be aware of risk factors that can lead to heart problems: poor sleep habits (going to bed at different times or not sleeping soundly), smoking, a family history of heart disease, and stress, among others. Talk to your doctor, and if you experience any heart issues, have your cardiologist recommend a ReactDx remote cardiac monitor to determine if your heart is experiencing any difficulties. You can contact ReactDx online or at 800-23-HEART to talk to one of our trained staff.