The South Asian country of the Kingdom of Bhutan is bordered by the People’s Republic of China to the north and India to the south. The population of Bhutan is approximately 0.79 million people.
In 2022, Bhutan’s economy was ranked 164th in gross domestic product (GDP) in the world. The country’s economy is based on tourism and the export of ferroalloys, semi-finished iron, cement, dolomite, and carbides.
In 2016, Bhutan signed the Paris Climate Agreement, committing to remain a carbon neutral nation, so greenhouse gas emissions do not exceed carbon sequestration by forests.
Power Generation Capabilities
In 2020, 100 % of the people in Bhutan had access to electricity. In 2021, the state owned Bhutan Power Corporation used renewable energy (100 %) to generate electricity in this country. Hydropower is the dominant type of renewable energy used to generate electricity in Bhutan.
Recent renewable energy projects in Bhutan include:
- 600 MW Power Purchase Agreement – In December 2022, Bhutan’s Druk Green Power Corp signed a power purchase agreement with PTC India Ltd. for electricity from India during the dry winter season in Bhutan.
- 38 MW Solar Project – In October 2022, the Asian Development Bank (ADB) approved a U.S. $18.26 million financing for the construction of Bhutan’s first photovoltaic solar project. The project will be located in Sephy in the central region of the country.
Bhutan imports all the nation’s refined petroleum for transportation, heating, and cooking. In 2020, the nation spent U.S. $81.3 Million just for imported refined petroleum and U.S. $28 Million for charcoal.
Bhutan has significant undeveloped renewable energy resources, including wind, solar, hydropower, and biomass. Although Bhutan is carbon neutral, the nation is actively seeking to further reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
Carbon neutral Bhutan is continuing to increase renewable energy capacity to further reduce the nation’s greenhouse gas emissions.
Website – “Our Energy Conundrum”
Jack Kerfoot is a scientist, energy expert, and author of the book FUELING AMERICA, An Insider’s Journey and articles for The Hill, one of the largest independent political news sites in the United States. He has been interviewed on over 100 radio and television stations from New York City to Los Angeles on numerous energy related topics.
 Bhutan’s Population (2023) – March 11, 2023, www.worldometers.info
 Gross Domestic Product By Country 2022 – Worldometer
 The Observatory of Economic Complexity (OEC) – Bhutan
 Carbon Brief – “Paris 2015: Tracking Country Pledges” www.carbonbriefing.org
 World Bank, Access To Electricity (% Population) – Bhutan
 Our World In Data, Bhutan: Energy Country Profile by Hanna Ritchie and Max Roser
 The Observatory of Economic Complexity (OEC) – Bhutan Imports