Alternative Names: Fluorspar
Origin: Worldwide; notable mines are in the USA, Canada, Mexico, Peru, China, Mongolia, Spain, England, Germany, Hungary, Poland, Czech Republic, Norway, and South Africa
Mineral Species: Fluorite
Mineral Group: Halides
Chemical Formula: CaF2
Crystal System: Cubic
Colour: Fluorite occurs in colourless, white, blue, green, purple, yellow, and rarely pink or red. Several colours can occur within one specimen, due to a varity of trace elements that may be present when it is forming.
Typical Appearance: Crystals form as cubes or octahedra, and well-formed cubic crystals will also cleave into octahedra.
Birthstone: Pisces and Capricorn
Chakra Alignment: All
Origin of Name & Mythology: From the Latin 'fluere', meaning flow, due to the ease of melting when used as a flux in smelting and refining of metals. The phenomenon of fluorescence was first observed in fluorite, giving the phenomenon its name, rather than the other way around.
Fluorite is extremely good for balancing, clearing energy blocks, organising thoughts and ideas, and for keeping the aura clear. Therefore, fluorite alleviates chaos, and can be extremely helpful for people learning new subjects, taking exams, or embarking on large projects or creative endeavours, especially projects which involve a great deal of forward planning or grow as the project unfolds, making it difficult to see or remember the structure within. It acts as “Psychic Teflon” for healers and other practitioners, as it allows us to empathise and feel with others without holding on to their problems or illness. It calms and centres, and creates inner expansion, bringing inner stillness and an ability to work through difficulties without stress. On a physical level, fluorite can be used to strengthen and promote healing in bones and teeth.
In Sacred Geometry, the octahedron is aligned with the element Air, and the Heart Chakra. It is symbolic of humanity, compassion, heaven/earth connection, the natural world, and the purified state of matter, and is used to alleviate stress, and bring clarity in confusion – the last two attributes are also associated with fluorite the mineral.
Use fluorite octahedra to calm anxiety, bring clarity and understanding to difficult or chaotic situations, and strengthen compassion and respect for others, thereby helping groups to work together more effectively and coherently. It enhances spiritual connection as well as understanding of nature and the natural world. In meditation, a fluorite octahedron can represent a vehicle (one half of the MerKaBah) to aid journeys into other realms or dimensions.
There are many other different varieties of fluorite, each with their own mineral structure, esoteric attributes and associations. To find out more about some special varieties of fluorite please click below.