In writing this, an assumption is being made that the concept of evolution does not need a great deal of explanation. The basic premise that must be understood for the purpose of this post is the idea that human beings descended from apes (or ape-like creatures).
There are a number of issues with this type of thing, though we see it taught in our school system as if it were an indisputable, proven fact. For now, one of the things that I want to focus on is the idea of some life form reproducing something that is different from itself.
It does not take a rocket scientist to know that if you plant a watermelon seed, you’ll get a watermelon. Two sea turtles will have sea turtles as offspring. Dogs give birth to dogs, horses to horses, etc.
Obviously, if evolution were a true fact, one must conclude nothing other than the fact that at some point, some animal gave birth to something of a different species. The simple question would be…at what point did an ape give birth to something that was not an ape?
Naturally, one would expect the offspring of an ape to be an ape. Generation after generation. We won’t even get into the fact that…well…we still have apes and they are still giving birth to…you guessed it…apes!
So, I suppose it goes back to that question from above…when did an ape give birth to a non-ape? At what point did that happen? And, if human beings are held in higher esteem amongst the animal kingdom based primarily on their ability to reason, how would that have worked with the first “man” born from an ape?
In other words, if an ape (who does not have the power of reason) gave birth to a human (who does have the ability to reason), how could the human have a parent-child relationship? There are so very many problems with the theory (yes, it’s still a theory) of macro-evolution I just had to pick one point to start with and go from there.
My guess is, it won’t be the last area that gets addressed here.
Grace, love and peace.
Daniel is an Elite Trainer at (ISSA) International Sports Sciences Association. He has been working in IT since 1995 primarily in Windows environments with TCP/IP networking through 2012, shifted to Red Hat Enterprise Linux in 2012 and AWS in 2017.