Hey guys, Welcome to FactsMinister. Today we are going to show you some of the Amazing Facts About Jammu and Kashmir.
You might think you know most of the facts about Jammu and Kashmir, but there are some interesting facts about the state that you’ve probably never heard before. Did you know, for example, that it was the first place in India to have electricity or that it experiences nearly twice as much rainfall as the Amazon rainforest during the monsoon? Here are some of the five amazing facts about Jammu and Kashmir!
1) An astounding 14% of the world’s mountains are in J&K
There are nearly 140 peaks higher than 20,000 feet (6,096 m), including five peaks higher than 26,246 feet (8,012 m). An estimated 14% of all mountain peaks in the world are found in J&K. The highest point is K2 which stands at 28,250 ft. It is also known as Mount Godwin-Austen and is located in the Baltistan region of Gilgit–Baltistan.
2) The world’s highest motorable road, Zoji La, connects Ladakh with Srinagar
Zoji La (4,350 m) is a mountain pass in India. It is situated at 4,350 meters (14,300 ft) above sea level. It connects Ladakh with Srinagar by National Highway 1D. Before 1982, it was not motorable due to heavy snowfall at Zoji La during the winter months.
3) World famous Dal Lake
Note that there are three lakes in the Kashmir Valley, and only one of them is called Dal Lake. The other two are Nagin Lake and Wullar Lake. The Dal Lake (also known as the Nageen Lake) is located in Srinagar, the summer capital of Jammu and Kashmir state, at an altitude of above sea level. It measures in area and has an average depth of . It acts as a repository for flood waters during the rainy season and serves as a tourist attraction.
4) India’s longest railway tunnel, the Chenani-Nashri Tunnel, will reduce the distance between Udhampur and Srinagar by 53 kilometers
India inaugurated a 9.2 km long railway tunnel, the country’s longest under the mountain. The tunnel, popularly known as Chenani-Nashri Tunnel, was constructed at over Rs 10,000 crore. This tunnel is also part of the Udhampur-Srinagar-Baramulla Rail Link project in Jammu and Kashmir.
5) Local produce from Leh attracts tourists from all over India
In Leh, tourists have a wide range of choices for dining. Hotels in Leh serve both Indian and Chinese cuisine, while hotels in Khardung La mainly offer traditional Tibetan food. Interestingly, even India’s national dishes such as dal makhani (mah lentils), butter chicken (Murg makhani), and rogan josh are served here at some of Leh’s hotel restaurants.
Cricket & Tech Enthusiast. A Graduate in Statistics. Currently Managing this Website while working on the concepts of Stocks/Crypto Markets.