Resources for Students
PBS Kids (Pre-K-6)
Educational games and videos from Curious George, Wild Kratts and other PBS KIDS shows!
Math Games (Pre-K-8)
Math games online that practice math skills using fun interactive content. Over 1000 free skill testing apps and games - tablet and chromebook friendly.
National Geographic Kids (Pre-K-8)
National Geographic Kids features educational games, videos, and other activities, centered mostly on animals and the natural world.
Providing educators and students access to the highest quality practices and resources in reading and language arts instruction.
Scratch (K-12) (Free) Coding in any subject area.
Scratch is a project of the Lifelong Kindergarten Group at the MIT Media Lab. It is provided free of charge.
Amazon Future Engineer (Gr. 2-12)
Amazon Future Engineer is offering a virtual robotics program through partners CoderZ. The fully sequenced course accommodates age levels from second grade with block based coding to high school with text based coding.
American Chemistry Society (Gr. 9-12)
The American Chemical Society offers its ChemMatters magazine articles for high schoolers online. Biographies of chemists and historical articles are also available.
Storybird (K-12) Artful storytelling
Storybird is a unique language arts tool. They use illustrations to inspire students to write stories , and our standards-based writing curriculum engages students with age-appropriate video tutorials, writing challenges, quizzes, and more. Free trial available, monthly subscription options are available.
The Metropolitan Museaum of Art #metkids is made for, with and by kids.
For crafty kids, DIY.org offers thousands of courses and projects with how-to videos for ages 4-13-plus. Project and course topics include drawing, photography, science, music, Lego-building and Minecraft-video making. Kids can make their own videos on the platform to share with others, which are closely monitored by the site (and parents get a notification any time their child posts something, too).
Chrome Music Lab
Chrome Music Lab is a website that makes learning music more accessible through fun, hands-on experiments.
Fiveable is a free social learning platform for high school students and teachers focused on Advanced Placement test preparation. It offers live streams, trivia battles and Q&A forums for students to connect with teachers across 15 AP subjects within English, STEM, history and social science.
Amid the school closures, Mystery Science has opened its most popular science lessons for grade K-5 for students and parents to access free. Lessons range from short mini lessons that are completely digital, to full lessons that include a hands-on activity. All are designed to use simple supplies that families likely already have at home.
Duolingo - Language Learning
Duolingo is a free language learning app that helps kids (and adults) learn a language through short, game-like exercises and motivates you to continue learning with a "streak" feature that tracks the number of days you've reached your point goal. You can also subscribe to Premium for $10 a month for an ad-free experience and downloadable lessons.
Read more: The Best Language Learning Apps of 2020