Cadle History, Family Crest & Coats of Arms
In Scottish history, few names go farther back than Cadle, whose ancestors lived among the clans of the Pictish tribe. They lived at or near the wooded stream derived from the Gaelic word coillie, a wood and dur which means stream.
Early Origins of the Cadle family
The surname Cadle was first found in Banffshire (Gaelic: Siorrachd Bhanbh), former Scottish county located in the northeasterly Grampian region of Scotland, now of divided between the Council Areas of Moray and Aberdeenshire.
One source notes, "the northern Cawdors were disguised as Cadells and de Cadella even in old Scots chroniclers, and they have kept that variety permanently in the South. " 
Further to the south in England, the Hundredorum Rolls of 1273 listed: Cristina Caudel, Cambridgeshire; William Caudel, Cambridgeshire; and (Prior) de Caudewelle, Bedfordshire. 
"Cadel was a surname in Oxfordshire and Sussex at the close of the 13th century." 
Cadell (d. 909), was "King of Ceredigion and afterwards of Powys, one of the six warlike sons of Rhodri Mawr, the most powerful of the early Welsh kings. He was Rhodri's eldest son, and received as his patrimony Ceredigion, with the palace at Dinevwr, and an overlordship over his other brothers. " 
Cadell (d. 943), was a Welsh prince, the son of Arthvael, who was the son of Hywel. Cadell (d. 1175), was a South Welsh prince, the son of Gruffudd, the son of Rhys, the son of Tewdwr. 
Early History of the Cadle family
This web page shows only a small excerpt of our Cadle research. Another 179 words (13 lines of text) covering the years 1600, 1536, 1558, 1530 and 1600 are included under the topic Early Cadle History in all our PDF Extended History products and printed products wherever possible.
Cadle Spelling Variations
The arts of spelling and translation were yet in their infancies when surnames began, so there are an enormous number of spelling variations of the names in early Scottish records. This is a particular problem with Scottish names because of the numerous times a name might have been loosely translated to English from Gaelic and back. Cadle has been spelled Cadell, Caddell, Cadel, Cadwell and others.
Early Notables of the Cadle family (pre 1700)
More information is included under the topic Early Cadle Notables in all our PDF Extended History products and printed products wherever possible.
In the United States, the name Cadle is the 15,562nd most popular surname with an estimated 2,487 people with that name. 
Migration of the Cadle family to Ireland
Some of the Cadle family moved to Ireland, but this topic is not covered in this excerpt. More information about their life in Ireland is included in all our PDF Extended History products and printed products wherever possible.
This oppression forced many Scots to leave their homelands. Most of these chose North America as their destination. Although the journey left many sick and poor, these immigrants were welcomed the hardy with great opportunity. Many of these settlers stood up for their newfound freedom in the American War of Independence. More recently, Scots abroad have recovered much of their collective heritage through highland games and other patriotic functions and groups. An examination of passenger and immigration lists has located various settlers bearing the name Cadle:
Cadle Settlers in United States in the 17th Century
Cadle Settlers in United States in the 18th Century
The motto was originally a war cry or slogan. Mottoes first began to be shown with arms in the 14th and 15th centuries, but were not in general use until the 17th century. Thus the oldest coats of arms generally do not include a motto. Mottoes seldom form part of the grant of arms: Under most heraldic authorities, a motto is an optional component of the coat of arms, and can be added to or changed at will; many families have chosen not to display a motto.
Motto: Vigilantia non cadet
Motto Translation: Vigilance will not miscarry.