How to smile when you are angry!
We all know what anger is, and we have all felt it: whether as a fleeting annoyance or as full-fledged rage. Here is how to smile while you feel the anger.
The Nature of Anger:
Anger is a normal and even healthy emotion but it is important to deal with it in a positive way. Uncontrolled anger can take a toll on both your health and your relationships. Like other emotions, it is accompanied by physiological and biological changes; when you get angry, your heart rate and blood pressure go up, as do the levels of your energy hormones, adrenaline, and nor adrenaline.
What are the emotions behind anger?
Anger is a reaction to an unexpected condition that is against a person desire or expectation, but how much this expectation is correct or valid it depends on his/her emotional and mental health - anger as a protector of raw feelings. According to Paul Ekman's research, anger is one of the six "basic emotions" identified in the Atlas of Emotions along with disgust, fear, happiness, sadness, surprise. Everyone feels anger at one point or another, and it is entirely valid as to its own emotion.
There are three main approaches that people try to control their anger:
These are expressing, suppressing, and calming. Expressing your angry feelings in an assertive, not aggressive manner is the healthiest way to express anger. To do this, you have to learn how to make precise what your needs are, and how to get them met, without hurting others. Being assertive does not mean being pushy or demanding; it means being respectful of yourself and others. Finally, you can calm down inside. This means not just controlling your outward behavior, but also controlling your internal responses, taking steps to lower your heart rate, calm yourself down, and let the feelings subside.
As Dr. Spielberger notes, "when none of these three techniques work, that is when someone or something is going to get hurt."
Anger from the point of the human energy system:
All of us know, Human energy body is providing vital energy or "Chi" for to physical body. In the human energy body, we have chakras that correspond to various organs and glands of the body based on their positions and controlling some emotional and spiritual functions.
The chakra which controls and regulate lower emotions is Solar Plexus Chakra, that is located on the soft hollow area between two ribs. We have front and back solar plexus chakras. This chakra can hold all negative emotions that we experienced but did not release from childhood till now.
When a person has a traumatic experience, the traumatic psychic energies are logged in several chakras, which may result in the long run, manifest as stress, phobia, fear, anger. This energy contamination can cause energy imbalances in the chakra that can appear as anger, lack of self-interest, resentment, which affects our action and reaction to life circumstances.
Heart chakra center for love:
You can not control your negative emotions without love. This chakra is the center that by its help, you can transmute anger to harmony, and when it is balanced, you have more control over your emotion.
Ajna Chakra, center for goodwill and will to do good:
This chakra that is a master chakra control other chakras through harmonizing and energizing them. It is controlling endocrine glands too, in a critical moment that anger can change to rage this chakra through controlling glands can reduce hormones of anger. When your Ajna chakra is active and balance, you can manage your lower emotions better.
The principle of attraction and repulsion states that “like qualities attracts like qualities. Unlike qualities repel, unlike qualities. So when people are holding negative emotions like anger, they attract the same qualities like aggressive occasions or events or short temper people.
Anger Management according to the human energy body system:
The first step to manage anger is to know what type of emotions or behavioral pattern you are holding in your solar chakras. Have a look at your life, how do you react in different situations?
1- Source of News:
Most of the time, the source of anger can be a piece of false or exaggerated news or can be from our high expectations of ourselves, others, or a situation. Pride can be another source of our anger. Sometimes we only react based on an aggressive pattern that we learned during our growth it can be from society or family.
2- Be realistic:
We need to be realistic toward life. We have to consider that nobody is perfect as we are not perfect. Everything can change as we are changing and going to be better. According to Grand Master Choa Kok Sui,” life is governed by cycles, by change. Sometimes you are up, and sometimes you are down. Everything is subject of change; nothing lasts forever.” life problems are always there when you are in a tough situation.
”you have to ask what is the problem? It is from me or from outside? Is the information validated? Is it exaggerated or distorted information? Study the options. Ask yourself what can be done. What is within your control. And what is beyond your control.” (GMCKS)
3- Inside, outside:
What you are holding inside it appears outside. Your outer world is a reflection of your inner world, it is based on the principle of attraction. If you are holding anger inside, you send it out and vice versa you will attract them also. You have tried your old method it doesn’t work it is the time to choose a new strategy in your life. One of the by-products of anger is fear, but you have to understand fear based on reality and imagination.
“Unregulated fear tends to make people violent or nasty. Fear tends to make people react excessively.” (GMCKS)
When a person is angry with you, the best strategy is, you project love to neutralize the hatred. When you are angry do some deep abdomen breathing for 5 minutes, touch your heart activate the center of love, then say something. Daily abdomen breathing exercise helps you clean your solar and regulate your emotion.
“Balance aggressiveness and severity by practicing mercy and compassion. Touch your heart before saying something forceful." (GMCKS)
4- Unregulated emotions:
Unregulated emotions can cause anger disorder. Do not be overwhelmed by your emotions. A person under the control of his unregulated emotions is a slave to them (GMCKS). When you get angry with someone and you are about to say or do something nasty, touch your heart, Bless the person.
Silently say: “ God’s blessing and peace be with me and be with you” repeat seven times.
5- Do meditate on the prayer of Saint Francis Assisi for few minutes every day. It has a cleansing and calming effect:
"Lord make me an instrument of your peace, Where there is hatred let me sow love, Where there is an injury, pardon, Where there is doubt, faith, Where there is despair, hope, Where there is darkness, light, And where there is sadness, joy, divine master grant that I may not so much seek to be consoled as to console to be understood as to understand. To be loved as to love. For it is in giving that we receive, it is in pardoning that we are pardoned, And it is in dying that we are born to eternal life. Amen" (GMCKS)
6- Pranic psychotherapy:
Anger is an effect. It is like an iceberg what been seen in people behavior is the only tip of iceberg, many pent up emotions like fear, lack of confidence, disappointment, unfulfilled expectation, repressed emotion, attachment, pride, that are stored in chakras and energy body for a long time all can cause pain, negative thoughts toward oneself and others that make people react unusually or out of control. Pranic Psychotherapy is a revolution in treating psychological ailments as it introduces practical explanations and techniques to remove the negative thoughts and emotions from our system, thereby improving our health. Psychological ailments are the result of an accumulation of negative thoughts, emotions, and traumatic experiences, which are lodged in the Auras and Chakras. Releasing such energies requires months or years of traditional psychotherapy consultation sessions, while with Pranic Psychotherapy techniques, you can safely and quickly remove them from your system as well as others. The result will be peaceful emotions, harmonizing relationships, positive thinking patterns, and good self-esteem. Pranic Psychotherapy offers you the ability to quickly and safely release negative thoughts and feelings like fear, anger, and resentment that may be limiting you from your higher potential.