Colors and the Meaning of the Turkmenistan Flag
The flag of Turkmenistan was accepted as a national flag in 1991 (when it declared its independence). On the left side of the flag is the Turkmen carpet motif extending as a thick strip. The Turkmen carpet and the green floor symbolize the history of Turkmen.
The half-crescent is designed as a cross, and the five stars symbolize the Turkmen provinces. Carpet motifs symbolize Turkmen tribes. Moon and star motifs are frequently encountered in flags used by Turkish peoples.
History of the Turkmenistan Flag
The flag of the Russian Empire was the official flag of Turkmenistan until the Russian Revolution. Before the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, Turkmenistan used a flag similar to all other Soviet republics. On the Turkmen flag, like the flag of the Soviet Union, there was a large golden hammer and sickle in the upper left corner on the red ground.
From 1937, the flag had a red sans-serif font with the Cyrillic alphabet in the upper left corner with TSSR characters. Since the 1940s, the flag was the same, but it was rearranged with the characters in the Latin letters. On 26 September 1973, the Presidency of the Supreme Soviet of the Turkmen SSR changed the arrangement of the Turkmen SSR flag. The position of the star and the hammer and the sickle moved to a place closer to the flagpole. Between independence in 1991 and the adoption of the new flag in February 1992, this flag remained the national flag of independent Turkmenistan.
After his independence in 1991, Turkmenistan adopted a banner that was very similar to the current design on 19 February 1992. However, the designs of the motif on the left were different. In 1997, an olive branch was added to symbolize the peaceful nature of the Turkmen people. The position of the crescent and the stars have also changed, the crescent has been placed in its current position and in a much more unequal position with the stars. In 2001, the flag changed from 1: 2 to 2: 3 and the green area was made brighter.
Neighboring Countries of Turkmenistan
It is located in Central Asia, between Iran and Kazakhstan, on the shores of the Caspian Sea. Also, it is surrounded by Iran to the south, the Caspian Sea to the west, Kazakhstan to the north, Uzbekistan to the northeast and Afghanistan to the southeast.
Main Characteristics of Turkmenistan
Turkmenistan is one of the seven independent Turkish states. Ashgabat is the largest city and capital of the country. In Persian, it means the city of love. The official language is Turkmen. Turkmenistan manat is used as currency.
The majority of the country is Turkmen, Uzbeks and Russians are also in the country as a minority. The country’s population doubled between 1989 and 2001. The capital Ashgabat is the largest city in the country with 727 thousand inhabitants. Turkmenistan’s official language is Turkmen, Russian and Uzbek are among the languages spoken in the country. 93.1 percent of Turkmenistan is Muslim.
It has a rough continental climate. Temperatures vary throughout the year. In summer, the temperature can be as low as 35 degrees Celsius in some regions. There is little rainfall in the country. The basis of Turkmen cuisine is meat, vegetables, and rice. Many varieties of bread are made. Kitchen habits vary according to regions. For instance, while meat and fruit are consumed in the Çerçer region, fish is more preferred than meat in the Caspian Sea coast.
|Currency||turkmenistani manat (TMM)|
|Highest Point||Gora Ayribaba (3,139 m)|
|Total Area||488,100 km2|