Despite efforts aimed at achieving health equity Latino youth continue to experience significant health and PRKD2 mental health disparities. high school youth. Findings from this research reinforce that there continues to be a great have to grasp the range and impact of intrapersonal and ecodevelopmental elements among Latino alternate high school youngsters to inform the introduction of culturally-responsive sociable work preventive treatment programs. indicate that whenever in comparison to their non-Latino white and BLACK counterparts Latino 8th and 10th quality adolescents will record licit and illicit element use (apart from amphetamines) (Johnston et al. 2012 Latino alternate high school youngsters could be at sustained risk of participating in wellness risk behaviors (Cordova et al. 2011 Cordova et al. 2012 Marsiglia et al. 2002 For instance Latino alternative senior high school youngsters will report substance make use of when compared with their counterparts (Blum et al. 2000 Myers et al. 2009 Intrapersonal and ecodevelopmental risk and protecting elements SP-420 have been proven to play an important part in adolescent advancement (Bronfenbrenner & Morris 1998 Smetana et al. 2006 Sadly many Latino youngsters experience ecological conditions that negatively effect their advancement (Eamon & Mulder 2005 Marsiglia et al. 2002 Although SP-420 study demonstrates intrapersonal and ecodevelopmental risk and protecting elements impact Latino youngsters advancement qualitative sociable work study with Latino alternate high school youngsters remains limited. Which means reason for this research was to recognize and explore the part of intrapersonal and ecodevelopmental risk and protecting elements including family members peer college and community in Latino youngsters attending an alternative solution high school. Avoidance scientists and sociable workers alike possess demonstrated the fundamental part that intrapersonal and ecodevelopmental risk and protecting elements possess on Latino youngsters. For the reasons of this research intrapersonal SP-420 risk and protective elements refer to psychological cognitive and emotional beliefs and processes. For example an internal desire for positive change motivation to overcome barriers and challenges and to achieve meaningful bonds and connections with others can serve as a protective factors for Latino youth (Parra-Cardona et al. 2008 2009 Equally important research has shown how ecodevelopmental factors play an important role on the influence of problem behaviors and the development of youth. Indeed studies have highlighted that many Latino youth reside in disadvantaged environments including parental substance use and absence (Lu et al. 2001 Marsiglia et al. 2002 peer substance use (Chartier et al. 2010 educational institutions lacking cultural responsiveness (Lu et al. 2001 Springer et al. 2005 experiences of discrimination (Cervantes & Cordova 2011 Cervantes et al. 2011 Cordova & Cervantes 2010 and high accessibility to alcohol and drugs (Guerrero 2011 all of which pose great challenges to their development (Williams & Collins 2001 Given that ecodevelopmenal factors influence problem behaviors it should not be surprising then that Latino adolescents disproportionately engage in health risk behaviors (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 2012 Johnston et al. 2012 that perpetuate health disparities (Jenson & Fraser 2006 Marsiglia et al. 2009 Latino alternative high school youth may be at even greater risk of engaging in problem behaviors (Cordova et al. 2011 Pantin et al. 2009 Prado et al. 2012 Therefore it is important to examine both intrapersonal and ecodevelopmental factors concurrently to work toward a fuller understanding of how both may have an impact SP-420 on this overlooked and vulnerable population. Ecological theories provide a framework to work toward fully understanding the impact of systemic risk and protective processes on adolescent development (Bronfenbrenner 1986 Franke et al. 2000 An ecological theory that has gained attention recently especially in research with Latino populations is the ecodevelopmental framework (Szapocznik & Coatsworth 1999 Building on the work of Bronfenbrenner (1986) ecodevelopmental theory postulates that adolescent development takes place in multiple integrated ecological systems that both impact and are inspired with the adolescent as time passes (Szapocznik & Coatsworth 1999 These systems consist of micro- meso- exo- and macrosystems. Even though some.