Pudding is a popular dessert, and many people like to have a variety. However, many people do not realize that a small box of pudding equals a large box. This is because pudding is measured in ounces, not cups. Therefore, a small box of pudding is equivalent to a large box of pudding.
How Many Small Boxes Fit Inside The Large Box (Functional Maths Problems)
How many small boxes of pudding are in a large box?
There are approximately 3 cups of pudding in a large box.
How to measure small boxes of pudding to equal a large box
When measuring small boxes of pudding to equal a large box, it is important to take into account the size, shape, and weight of the individual boxes.
In general, one small box of pudding will equal one large box. However, depending on the size, shape, and weight of the individual boxes, it may be necessary to divide the small box of pudding into multiple smaller boxes in order to equal the size and weight of the large box.
For example, if a small box of pudding is rectangular in shape and weighs 1.25 pounds, then it would be necessary to break the box into three smaller boxes in order to equal the weight and size of a large box that is also rectangular in shape and weighs 2.5 pounds.
large box of pudding equals how many small boxes?
There is a lot of debate on how many small boxes of pudding equal a large box. Some say that there are 3 small boxes in a large box and some say that there are 5 small boxes in a large box. There is no definite answer, but generally speaking, a large box of pudding equals about 4-5 small boxes.
Small boxes of pudding vs. large box of pudding
There is no definitive answer to this question as it depends on the size and shape of the small boxes of pudding and the large box of pudding. Generally speaking, however, a large box of pudding will usually contain around twice as many small boxes of pudding as a small box of pudding does.
How to make a large box of pudding from small boxes
It takes 8 small boxes of pudding to make a large box.
A large box of pudding contains more pudding than a small box.