Online Learning with “The Vibrant Variety”
We've created an e-learning module to accompany the My Little Ag Me book "The Vibrant Variety." Read along and learn more!
Ag Education Classroom Ag
White-Reinhardt Resource Grant Recipients Chosen
We are excited to announce that the first round of White-Reinhardt Resource Grant winners have been chosen!
Free At Home Educational Activities About Agriculture: Week 1
Kids are at home and need fun activities that are also educational. We're making it easy for parents to keep your kids learning during this difficult time.
Ag Education Ag Opportunities Ag Projects Classroom Ag
At Home Ag-tivities
Staying in? Need some fun and educational activities? Here are some fun ways to learn about food and farming from home!
Barn Banners for Your Next Fair or Event
Learn how these banners can transform your space into a learning area!
8 Super Easy Ways to Educate About Ag
There are many ways you can educate about agriculture in your area! Here are 8 great ideas.
Two New Ag Card Games!
We have two new card games to make learning about agriculture FUN!
Ag Education Classroom Ag
The Art & Science of Beekeeping
In the spirit of National Honey Month, we bring you a history of beekeeping as an ancient art and an overview of apiology as an important science for modern life.
Food Science Fun Camp
This new children's food science day camp guide contains 10 hands on activities for one full day of fun!
Summer Family Fun
Help students discover where their food comes from with these fun educational resources for families, teachers and volunteers!
Gardening Life Lessons
Connecting with the earth allowed the students to transport themselves and each other across cultural and language barriers, behavior issues, and stressful home environments.
School Gardens: The Why and How
Resources on getting support from your administration for a school garden, how to start a garden, and getting students excited to plant!
Pillars in Practice an Ag Literacy Tool
In Minnesota, the 4-H Science of Agriculture Challenge is using the Pillars of Ag Literacy to help steer students in the right direction. We interviewed Joshua Rice, assistant Extension professor, about this project.
Free Lesson Plans! Peanut Activity Cards Promote Math, Social Science Skills
Free downloadable lesson plans for grades 3-5 address math and social science skills while learning about peanuts and agriculture.
Farm a Month Resource Lets Students “Meet” a Farmer
Where does our food come from? Who grows it? Farm a Month is 12 hands on lesson plans, 12 letters from real farmers, and 1 whole year of learning about agriculture!
Easily Educate about Livestock
New! Learn about livestock banners!
What does it mean to be agriculturally literate?
The American Farm Bureau Foundation for Agriculture sought to answer the question: What does it look like to be agriculturally literate? The result was "Pillars of Agricultural Literacy."