California is one of only five agricultural regions in the world that has a Mediterranean growing climate, producing over 400 commodities, more than any other state in the nation.1 California agricultural production was valued at $46.7 billion in 2013,2 accounting for 17.3% of total U.S. agricultural output.3 California Agriculture
California Agriculture is a quarterly peer-reviewed, scientific journal reporting news and research on agricultural, natural, and human resources that is published by the University of California Division of Agriculture and Natural Resources. The journal was established in December 1946.
How much food do California farms produce?
California agricultural exports totaled $21.7 billion in 2019, an increase of 3.4 percent from 2018. Top commodities for export included almonds, pistachios, dairy and dairy products, wine and walnuts. California’s agricultural export statistics are produced by the University of California, Davis, Agricultural Issues Center.
How much of California’s agriculture is exported?
· California produces a dramatic majority of many fruits, vegetables, and nuts in the United States. Dramatic as in: 99 percent of artichokes and walnuts, 97 percent of kiwis and plums, and 95 percent of celery and garlic. The list doesn’t stop there, either.
Do Americans buy crops produced in California?
California is the world’s 5th largest supplier of food, cotton fiber, and other agricultural commodities. In the U.S., California is the largest producer of food despite having less than 4% …
Which county produces the most agriculture in California?
· While California produces 13 percent of the total cash agricultural receipts for the U.S., it is the sole producer (99 percent or more) for the following crops. Top five states
How many acres of organic produce are there in California?
Organic production encompasses over 2.5 million acres in the state and California is the only state in the U.S. with a USDA National Organic Program.
How much cash did California farms receive in 2019?
In 2019 California’s farms and ranches received more than $50 billion in cash receipts for their output. This represents a slight increase over reported cash receipts compared to the previous year 1.
What are the top commodities that California exports?
Top commodities for export included almonds, pistachios, dairy and dairy products, wine and walnuts. California’s agricultural export statistics are produced by the University of California, Davis, Agricultural Issues Center. California organic product sales totaled more than $10.4 billion in 2019, an increase of 3.5 percent from the prior year.
When is the 2019 crop year report coming out?
The 2019 Crop Year Report is assembled in late 2020. For most recent agricultural statistics, please use the links on the right side of this page to query the USDA Economic Research Service data as well as the USDA National Agricultural Statistics Service.
Which state produces the most wine?
In the U.S., California is the number one dairy state and is the 4th largest wine producer in the world. The state produces over 90% of the wine in the U.S. It is also the nation’s leading producer of strawberries, averaging 1.4 billion pounds of strawberries (that’s 83% of the country’s total fresh and frozen strawberry production).
Which state is the 5th largest supplier of food?
California is the world’s 5th largest supplier of food, cotton fiber, and other agricultural commodities. In the U.S., California is the largest producer of food despite having less than 4% of the farms in the country.
What percentage of agricultural income is produced in California?
While California produces 13 percent of the total cash agricultural receipts for the U.S., it is the sole producer (99 percent or more) for the following crops.
What was the agricultural production in California in 2015?
That said, the yearly production in 2015 was $59 billion. Here is a county by county look at gross value of production. Tulare, Fresno and Kern counties each had gross value …
How many commodities does California produce?
California’s 77,500 farms produce more than 400 commodities, and two-thirds of the nation’s fruits and nuts. About one-quarter of what California produces is exported around the world. Here are some more facts and figures about California agriculture.
How much did Tulare County cost in 2015?
Tulare County decreased 13.7 percent from $8 billion in 2014 to $6.98 billion in 2015 but was still the No. 1 ranked county both years.
How many states produce agricultural products?
U.S. agricultural production occurs in each of the 50 States. The United States produces and sells a wide variety of agricultural products across the Nation. In terms of sales value, California leads the country as the largest producer of agricultural products (crops and livestock), accounting for almost 11 percent of the national total, …
Which state has the most agricultural production?
Iowa, Texas, Nebraska, and Minnesota round out the top five agricultural-producing States, with those five representing more than a third of U.S. agricultural-output value.
What is the effect of increased crop production on inflation?
Increased productivity in crop production underlies a general decrease in inflation-adjusted prices for corn, wheat, and soybeans over the past century. This downward price trend was reversed during the past decade by global growth in population and income, increasing biofuel production, and a depreciation of the U.S. dollar, but is likely to resume from these recent higher levels as population and income growth slow, biofuel production levels off, and as the U.S. dollar strengthens.
How many acres of corn and soybeans were planted in the United States in 1990?
Since 1990, combined acreage planted to corn, wheat, soybeans, and upland cotton in the United States has ranged from 219 million to 242 million acres. Starting in the 1990s, policy changes increased planting flexibility provided to farmers.
What percentage of corn is used to make ethanol?
Corn is the major agricultural input used in the United States to produce ethanol, which has accounted for over 40 percent of U.S. corn use in recent years.
What are the leading fruits and vegetables?
fruit and tree nut value of production has increased steadily over the past decade, while the value of vegetable production has been more stable. Grapes, apples, strawberries, and oranges top the list of fruits; tomatoes and potatoes are the leading vegetables.
How much milk is produced in 2019?
Milk output has risen 70 percent since 1980 and in 2019 exceeded 218 billion pounds per year. Genetic developments and technological improvements underlie a pronounced upward trend in milk output per cow. Consolidation in the dairy sector also has facilitated efficiency gains in milk production.
How much is dairy export in California?
California dairy and dairy products recorded an export value . of $1.8 billion in 2019, representing 12 percent growth over the prior year. The principal 57 export commodities accounted for . $18.5 billion in export value in 2019, or 85 percent of the total value of California’s agricultural exports, while the remaining 15 percent …
What countries does California export to?
California’s top 10 export destinations – the European Union, Canada, China/Hong Kong, Japan, South Korea, Mexico, India, United Arab . Emirates, Taiwan, and Turkey – accounted for 68 percent of the 2019 export value. United Arab Emirates showed the largest growth in total export value with a 47 percent increase compared to the previous year.
What is the top commodity in California?
California’s top valued agricultural export commodity continues to be almonds, with a value of more than $4.9 billion in foreign sales in 2019.
When was the dairy export value updated?
Dairy and product export values were updated for 2017 and 2018 using improved estimation methods.
Where do export quantities and values come from?
sources and unpublished information from the government and the industry. Export quantities and values of the whole U.S. and California port districts are from the Department of Commerce (DOC) trade data posted on the United States International Trade Commission (USITC) online database (
California farms produce 90% of all U.S.-grown avocados, with the great majority being Hass variety. In 2018, the state grew 300 million pounds. Drought and heat can significantly reduce the harvest in some years.
Relative to traditional farming, aquacultureis a small part of California’s agricultural economy, generating only $175 million in 2014. Oysters, abalone, …
The Central Valley of California is one of the world’s most productive agricultural regions. More than 230 crops are grown there. On less than one percent of the total farmland in the United States, the Central Valley produces eight percent of the nation’s agricultural output by value: US$43.5 billion in 2013. The top four counties in agricultural sales (2007 data) in the U.S. are in California’s Central Valley: Fresno ($3.731 billion), Tulare ($3.335 billion), Kern ($3.204 billion), a…
Environmental and natural resources
The largest overall water users in California are the environment, agriculture and urban/ municipal uses. In an average year, about 40% of California’s water consumption, or approximately 34.1 million acre-foot (4.21×10 cubic metres), is used for agricultural purposes. However, the exact proportion of total water usage for agriculture can vary widely between ‘wet’ and ‘dry’ years, where in wet years, agriculture is responsible for closer to 30% of total water consumption and in dry y…
Prior to the arrival of Europeans, the Indigenous peoples of California, with diverse societies mainly reliant on hunter-gatherer methods, practiced seed collection and forest gardening. Some California hunter-gatherer tribes, including the Owens Valley Paiute, developed irrigation.
In the late 1700s, Franciscan missionaries established Spanish missions in California. Like earlier Spanish missions established in Baja California, these missions were surrounded by agricultural …
California nut crimes have involved the theft of millions of dollars of nuts (almonds, pistachios, cashews and pecans) in multiple incidents since 2013.
Water theft for agriculture has been an issue in times of drought, with the State assessing fines up to $1.5 Million.