Foods that have particularly high levels of purine are:
* Dark fish, such as mackerel, anchovies, sardines and herring.
* Organ meats, such as heart, liver, brains, kidneys, mussels, red/dark meat and fish roes.
These particular “Gout foods” should be limited as much as possible or avoided altogether if you are already suffering from Gout.
There are many foods that have a moderate level of purine and such foods also need limiting if you happen to be suffering from Gout. Foods like: Pheasant, veal, mutton, bacon, grouse, partridge, turkey, trout, salmon, shellfish and haddock.
There are also a few vegetables that are worth avoiding for the person who suffers from Gout, foods such as kidney beans, cauliflower, spinach, mushrooms, radishes and celery.
There have been recent studies that suggest the particular diets known to cause Gout also have a hand in cardiovascular disease, so it makes more sense than ever to look after your diet, particularly if you are already suffering from Gout or have a family history of it.
Alcohol is a particular culprit in the onset of Gout as it has the tendency to raise uric acid levels in the body, which over time can trigger an attack of Gout. Foods that have a tendency to increase the acidity of the body are also to blame in many instances of Gout. A high acidity or low PH level of the body has the effect of precipitating uric acid crystals, the cause of Gout.
Foods that have the effect of raising the body’s PH level are those foods high in minerals, such as fruits, certain vegetables and dairy products.
Certain types of drinks need to be limited or avoided all together as they can have a very negative affect on the body’s PH level. These drinks include carbonated drinks, coffee and other soft drinks.
There are many herbal remedies for Gout and these can be very effective at controlling the problem, as can certain fruits – one particular fruit of note being the humble cherry. Research in the 1950’s showed the cherry to be very effective in controlling Gout attacks. This has been shown to work as a whole cherry or in juice form. Most types of cherry are effective you can use red, black, sweet yellow or red sour to great effect in controlling the onset of a Gout attack.
Gout Cures – Tip #1
Gout Cures – Tip #2
Gout Cures – Tip #3