Take advantage of the smart phone or tablet you purchased for your teenager over the holidays. Instead of just wasting that technology on another thrilling level of Candy Crush, spend some time using the tablet or phone for some valuable study time. There are so many amazing apps available to help your high school student prepare for any subject or exam. Most of these apps are also less than five dollars, but the information and organization they provide is far more valuable. Here are a few of the best must-have apps for your high schooler.
The Princeton Review SAT
For: SAT Practice
For: Organizing schoolwork
For: Math class
Remember the days of spending lots of money on expensive graphic calculators, only to accidentally drop it, and then be forced to buy a new one? Well those days are gone, as graphic calculators are all available in app form. This app comes complete with all of the same tools from your old graphic calculator including the ability to take screen shots so you can email your graphs to yourself. It can even be displayed on a projector or television with a VGA adapter, making study sessions a lot easier since you can all see the calculator at the same time.
Forget spending hours creating flash cards to study from. Instead pick up Evernote Peek, which will work with your iPad’s Smart Cover to help create e-versions of flash cards. If you don’t have a Smart Cover, it can also work with a virtual cover just as easily. You can add study materials in just about any subject, since you create your own clues and answers, so it truly is just like making flash cards. Then you can use the iPad cover or virtual cover to study for all those big exams coming up.
The Chemical Touch
For: Science class
For less than one dollar you can get an app that provides the full periodic table of elements, along with lots of additional built-in information. This app is very helpful for that upcoming science class. The table is touch sensitive, and a simple tap opens additional information on each item, or if you need more information it will connect to the Wikipedia page for any element, nucleobase or amino acid. Forget carrying around a paper version of this table, this app is far more useful and it won’t rip in your pocket.
Deborah Flomberg is a theater professional, freelance writer and Denver native. Her work can be found at Examiner.com.