Keeping Allergens Out of Your Home
Although we think of allergens as occurring outdoors, there are many allergens inside our Vilonia area homes. Dust, animal dander, dust mites, insect parts, pollen, and spores are a few common household allergens. There are ways to keep allergens out of your home and improve indoor air quality. Some may surprise you.
Remove Sources of Allergens
Removing allergens is the first step in improving the air you breathe in your home.
- Airborne particulates such as dust and animal dander settle on surfaces, including carpets, furniture and draperies. Frequent vacuuming with a high-quality filter removes allergens. Be sure to empty the dust bag after use.
- Remove wall-to-wall carpeting, and go for easy-to-clean flooring, such as tile, stone and wood.
- Many common household products, such as craft supplies, hair spray and paint, can trigger asthma attacks and allergies and affect indoor air quality. Use these products in well-ventilated areas or outside.
- Insect and rodent droppings often trigger asthma and allergy attacks. Keep pet food bowls covered to discourage pests. If you have a pest problem, call a professional pest control service to rid your home of these unwanted critters.
Maintain Proper Humidity
The Environmental Protection Agency recommends keeping household humidity levels below 60 percent. Ideally, humidity should be between 30 and 50 percent. Dust mites require humidity levels above 70 percent to survive. Lower humidity also discourages spore growth. In addition, proper humidity contributes to indoor comfort.
Air circulation is important in maintaining good indoor air quality. Increase ventilation by opening windows when possible and using ventilation fans in areas of high humidity.
Talk to Your Trusted HVAC Contractor
Freyaldenhoven Heating and Cooling of Conway, Arkansas, can help. We offer products that improve indoor air quality and ventilation. Whole-house ventilators increase air exchange even during seasons that may be too hot or cold to open windows. UV lamps kill spores and other organisms. Sealing ducts keeps airborne pollutants from entering your living space. Fine-tuning your HVAC system to control both temperature and humidity improves comfort.
For more information about controlling allergens and improving the air you breathe inside your home, call to talk to one of our certified technicians.
You May Also Like
How to Prepare Your Commercial HVAC System for Spring in Maumelle, AR
A commercial HVAC system in well-kept condition will help you save on energy bills and keep you comfortable without breaking down often.… Continue Reading How to Prepare Your Commercial HVAC System for Spring in Maumelle, AR…
4 Reasons to Control Humidity in Maumelle, AR
High humidity levels can harm your health and damage items inside your property. Controlling the humidity level in Maumelle, AR helps you… Continue Reading 4 Reasons to Control Humidity in Maumelle, AR…
Indications That You Need Heat Pump Repair Now in Little Rock, AR
If the heat pump at your Little Rock, AR, home isn’t running well, don’t put off calling for heat pump repair. Waiting… Continue Reading Indications That You Need Heat Pump Repair Now in Little Rock, AR…