Many female friends around often use safe period, external ejaculation and other methods as contraceptives. The contraceptive results of these two methods are not very satisfactory. Because of the uncertainty of each woman's menstrual cycle and ovulation period, it is even more difficult to judge the true "safe period".
How to calculate the safety period scientifically
The method of calculating ovulation period according to menstrual cycle is also called calendar method. Both menstruation and ovulation are affected by the endocrine hormones of the pituitary and ovary and present periodic changes. The cycle length of both is the same, which is one cycle per month, and ovulation occurs in the middle of the two periods. Women's menstrual cycle is long and short, but the interval between the ovulation date and the beginning of the next menstrual cycle is relatively fixed, generally around 14 days. According to the relationship between ovulation and menstruation, we can calculate the ovulation period according to the menstrual cycle. The calculation method is to start from the first day of the next menstrual cycle. The last 14 days or minus 14 days is the ovulation day. The ovulation day and the first 5 days and the last 4 days are called the ovulation day. This is the theoretical basis of safe period contraception. For example, a woman's menstrual cycle is 28 days, the first day of this menstrual cycle is December 2, the next menstrual cycle is December 30 (December 2+28), and then subtract 14 days from December 30, and December 16 is the ovulation day. The ovulation day and the first 5 days and the last 4 days, that is, December 11-20, are the ovulation days. In addition to the menstrual period and ovulation period, the rest of the time is the safe period, that is, the so-called seven up and eight down. There is no need to use contraceptives and contraceptives during safe sex.
To calculate the ovulation period in this way, first of all, we need to know the length of the menstrual cycle, and then we can calculate the start date and ovulation period of the next menstrual cycle. Therefore, it can only be applied to women with normal menstrual cycle. For women with irregular menstrual cycles, it is impossible to calculate the date of the next menstrual cycle. Therefore, it is impossible to calculate the ovulation date and ovulation period.
The calendar method of contraception is easy to fail. Because some women can sometimes delay or advance ovulation due to health conditions, environmental changes and mood fluctuations, so the ovulation period calculated according to the menstrual cycle is not correct. According to foreign statistics, the failure rate of calendar contraception reached 14.4%~47%. Therefore, this method is only applicable to people who have normal menstrual cycle, live together for a long time, and correctly grasp and calculate the safety period. It is not reliable to use this method for people with irregular menstrual periods, couples during family visits, and women whose living environment has changed.