The theory behind the experiment is a categorical theory of perception. It reflects that gradual change occurs along the continuum. The perceptions of individual changes in the way they see or hear things. Perceptions actually act to mask the differences between perceived image and reality. This reflects that people are trying to make sense of what they feel or see.
The hypothesis states that emotions are perceived categorically. The hypothesis is constructed to assess the relationship between perceptions and facial expressions.
The methods included direct experimentation in which expressions of the students are assessed. Students are treated as subjects and pictures are provided for identifying expressions. The students are asked to observe the pictures for the duration of 250 mini-seconds. In total 24 pairs of pictures are presented to the subjects and then they are asked to identify the emotions.
An instance of association is apparent due to the correlations between perceptions and reality. What individual sees is the result of his perceptions. This reflects that the emotions are interpreted under the influence of one’s perception. This proves the relationship between the two variables.
The presentation is expression because the facial features are observed for making any judgment of on the images. After seeing the images the continuous information is transformed into the categorical information.
The concept of process is implied because the results of the experiment depict that all emotions are perceived categorically. The expressions of anger, sadness, neutrality and happiness are all perceived in the same manner. Only the emotion of surprise is not perceived categorically. Even after experiencing a variety of emotions and observing them the role of perceptions remains dominants. This reflects that they are unable to overcome their preconceived ideas.
Useful LinksFree Essays About Blog
If you have any queries please write to us
Join our mailing list
@ All Rights Reserved 2023 email@example.com