Mar 23 2017 Tags: Hayagriva, mantra, mythology
Lord Hayagriva is an avatar of Lord Vishnu. Lord Hayagriva is depicted with human body, horse face wearing white garments and seated on white lotus. Hayagriva is praised as the lord of wisdom and deep knowledge. Haya implies “Horse” and Greeva means neck. He is believed to be the one who won ignorance and foolishness with his pure knowledge. People worship this Lord to be blessed with pure wisdom, intelligence and knowledge. His consort is Lakshmi.
Brahma is said to be the master of vedic knowledge and he had the Vedas with him. Once, when he was feeling sleepy, a demon called Ajnana stole the Vedas from Brahma. Then, Lord Vishnu took the form of Hayagriva and demolished the demon. He then returned the Vedas to Brahma, when he begged for them. Brahma is a trustworthy Lord and hence he offered the vedic knowledge to Hayagriva , when he asked them. Thus, Hayagriva remained as a protector of the Vedic knowledge.
There is also another legend that the demons Madhu and Kaitabha stole the Vedas from Brahma. Then, Vishnu took up the Hayagriva form, fought with them and won. During the fight, the disintegration of the two bodies of Madhu and Kaitabha into twelve pieces took place which are believed to represent the twelve seismic plates of Earth in course of time.
Also,Some believed that during the creation of the world, Vishnu compiled the Vedas in the form of Hayagriva.
Hayagriva is depicted with 4 armed, carrying a Conch & Wheel known as Shanka and chakra in His two hands, a rosary (aksha-mala) in the third and his fourth is in the vyakhya mudra. He is also found holding the vedas in some occasions. Hayagreeva is associated with the purity of knowledge and is represented in the same way as Saraswati. White is a symbolism of purity that is depicted in the "white horse" face he adorns.
Jnananandamayam devam nirmala sphatikakrutim
Adharam sarva vidyanam hayagrivam upasmahe.
ज्ञानानन्द मयं देवं निर्मल स्फटिकाकृतिं
आधारं सर्वविद्यानं हयग्रीवं उपास्महे
Lord hayagriva, you are the supreme form of nature, pure and clear as a crystal and the support and base of eternal knowledge. I worship you , the form of wisdom.
Hayagriva Gayatri Mantra
Benefit (s) : The gayatri mantra of Lord Hayagriva is a highly beneficial mantra for students to improve their studies. Best to be chanted before sitting for exams. Chanting of the Hayagriva Gayatri mantra leads one to the divine path of life. It also sharpens one’s intellect and makes the person extremely alert.Those who are suffering from emotional distress, stress, tensions, depression, etc can benefit from praying to Lord Hayagriva by chanting the Hayagriva Gayatri Mantra.Pregnant ladies can also benefit from chanting this mantra as it is believed that Lord Hayagriva will bless the child with good intellect, strong body, valour, and beauty. It is also said that the baby will be born free from defects and diseases if there are blessings of Lord Hayagriva.Those who wants to excel in sports and athletes can also chant the gayatri mantra of Lord Hayagriva and gain benefits from it. As Lord Hayagriva will bless the devotees with speed, strength, and intelligence.
- Best Time to Chant : Brahma muhurta, Ekadasi thithi, Navami thithi Wednesdays, Thursdays, and Saturdays
- Direction :Chant This Mantra Facing East
- Japa Mala : One can use clear quartz crystal rosary beads (also known as sphatik mala) or rosary beads made from basil’s bark (also known as tulasi mala / tulsi mala)
- Number of Times to Chant : 9, 11, 108, or 1008 times
The following are the Hayagriva Gayatri Mantras :
Aum Vaakeeshvaraaya Vidmahe
Thanno Hamsa Prachodayath
Aum Vanishwaraaya Vidmahe
Haya Grivaaya Dhimahee
Thanno Hayagriva Prachodayath
Aum Akshareshwaraaya Vidmahe
Mantra Rajaaya Dhimahi
Thanno Hayagriva Prachodayath
Festivals associated with Lord Hayagriva
- Swarna Pournami on the full moon day of August.
- Mahanavami on the ninth day of Navarathri.
Famous Temples of Lord Hayagriva
- Tiruvahindapuram Hayagriva Temple, near Cuddalore, Tamil nadu
- Chettypunyam Hayagriva temple, near Chengalpattu,Tamil Nadu
- Sri Lakshmi Hayagriva temple, Nanganallur, Chennai
- Sri Lakshmi Hayagriva temple, Mohnur, Karnataka
- Sri Hayagriva Madhava Temple, Hajo, Assam
- Sri Lakshmi Hayagriva temple, Muthialpet, Pondicherry
Yantras For Money and Prosperity
Every human being in world wants to enjoy prosperous and fulfilling lives. We all need economically, socially prosper...
108 Names of Maa Durga with meaning in Hindi
Maa Durga is the divine form of Shakti, the Supreme Goddess. Shakti is represented as the ultimate power and is worsh...
Various mantras related to Maa Kali
Maa Kali is the Hindu Goddess who removes the ego and liberates the soul from the cycle of birth and death. The Kali ...
Shri Kalabhairava Ashtakam in Kannada ( ಕಾಲ ಭೈರವ ಅಷ್ಟಕಂ ಕನ್ನಡದಲ್ಲಿ )
Shri Kalabhairava Ashtakam in Kannada || ಶ್ರೀ ಕಾಲಭೈರವಾಷ್ಟಕಮ್ || ಕಾಲ ಭೈರವ ಅಷ್ಟಕಂದೇವ ರಾಜ ಸೇವ್ಯ ಮಾನ ಪಾವನಂಗರಿ ಪಂಕಜಂವ್ಯಾಲ...
Share on Whatsapp