Scientists have offered documentary proof of continuing cosmic cannibalism: our Milky Way galaxy is gobbling up its galactic neighbor, Sagittarius. Astronomers have mapped the Sagittarius galaxy to show in detail how its debris wraps around and passes through the Milky Way, which contains Earth.
On its way to oblivion, the dwarf Sagittarius -- which is about 10,000 times smaller in mass than Milky Way -- is getting stretched, torn apart and ultimately eaten, University of Virginia and the University of Massachusetts scientists reported. The study will be published in the Dec. 20 issue of the Astrophysical Journal.
The act of cannibalism had been obscured by stars and cosmic dust, but was revealed when astronomers looked for infrared radiation coming from stars known as M giants, which are common in Sagittarius but rare in the outer reaches of the Milky Way. By focusing on these stars, the scientists said they were able to capture the totality of the Milky Way's meal, in a vision that makes it appear that our galaxy is slurping Sagittarius' stars as if they composed a stellar strand of spaghetti.
- - -
EU softens environmental rules: The European Commission has softened plans for new environmental rules on chemicals. Industry and big EU governments have slammed the rules as costly and unworkable, a leaked draft document showed.
Green groups said the Commission, the European Union's executive arm, had weakened a preliminary proposal it published in May, making it less effective against what they say is the most crucial environmental issue facing EU lawmakers. "The new text would allow industry to continue using chemicals that accumulate in breast milk, reduce fertility and cause allergies," said a Greenpeace representative.
The environmentalist groups, which included WWF, Friends of the Earth and European consumers' association BEUC, said the bill to control hazardous chemicals now had "loopholes" that would allow firms to skirt around some of the main requirements.
- - -
Medical researchers calculate heat deaths: In a report commissioned by the government, the Inserm national medical research institute said France's August heat wave claimed around 15,000 lives, more than previously thought.
The report said a total of 56,000 deaths occurred in France in this year's blisteringly hot August -- around 15,000 more than in a normal year. A previous estimate, made by a group of undertakers, had put the heat wave death toll at 13,600.
France was stunned by the initial death toll estimates. President Jacques Chirac admitted shortcomings in the country's prized health system and pledged more cash for emergency services.
- - -
Compiled by Kari L. Dean. Reuters and AP contributed to this report.