For persons with glaucoma, there are some constraints on what you can do. With glaucoma, regular, moderate-intensity exercise is both healthy and safe. On the other hand, extreme exercise might increase eye pressure by pushing and straining your body too hard (this pressure is known as IOP, or intraocular pressure). High intraocular pressure can cause vision loss and optic nerve damage.
The Glaucoma Research Foundation advises yoga practitioners to avoid extended head-down positions such as:
● Downward-facing dog
● Bend forward while standing.
If you like to lift weights and undertake core (abdominal) activities, keep an eye on your breathing:
● Holding your breath can create high blood pressure and other health issues.
● Unless a certified trainer instructs you to hold your breath while lifting weights, do not attempt to do so.
Getting back into shape after glaucoma surgery
The restrictions differ depending on the type of glaucoma procedure:
● There are usually no restrictions with laser surgery, but always check first with your surgeon.
● No swimming or getting water directly in your eyes after a trabeculectomy and glaucoma drainage device (tube implant surgery). Lifting, bending, or straining should be avoided until your doctor gives you the go signal. Walking or using a treadmill for light exercise may be permitted.
Exercise With LASIK surgery
Following refractive surgery, there are several safe activities rules to follow:
● Until your eye heals, avoid swimming and exposing your eye to water for at least two weeks.
● For up to one month, no strenuous activity or contact sports are permitted.
● Wear sunglasses when you are outside, especially on cloudy days, to protect your healing eyes from UV rays and debris.
Exercise and Retinal Conditions
The retina is the light-sensitive tissue that lines the back of the eye. There is an increased chance of retinal detachment in people who have retinal diseases such as lattice degeneration, extreme myopia, or posterior vitreous separation. Sports that include head contact and the possibility of whiplash damage or ocular injuries increase the risk even more.
While most exercise is safe, it is best to avoid the following when the retina’s strength is unknown:
● Combat sports such as boxing, kickboxing, and others
● Bungee jumping
● Rides in bumper cars
Wear protective eyewear if you are cleared to play sports like basketball or racquetball to avoid eye harm. In addition, exercise is often recommended for people who have retinal disorders. It is suitable for your general health and may even help your eyes.
Lowering these crucial health indicators with regular exercise may help slow the course of age-related macular degeneration and diabetic retinopathy, which are linked to high blood pressure and cholesterol.
Getting back into shape after retinal surgery
For a safe return to activity, retina specialists follow standard principles. These recommendations, however, will not apply to everyone. Inquire with your surgeon when you can resume your normal activities.
● After most retinal surgeries, do not engage in intense (difficult or challenging) exercise for 1 to 2 weeks. Walking, for example, is a low-impact exercise that may be safe.
● Swimming (or direct contact with water) is prohibited for 1 to 2 weeks following most retinal surgeries. Swimming is also prohibited following eye injections such as Avastin or Eylea, which are used to treat AMD.
● After retinal surgery with a gas bubble, no flying, high heights (mountains), or scuba diving are permitted. Until the gas bubble dissipates, these and all other physical activities are prohibited. Your doctor will tell you when this is likely to happen.