What Is Target Market?
A target market is a marketer-defined set of demographic and psychographic descriptors that apply to a consumer group designated as current or prospective users of the marketer’s product or service. You may use as few or as many different descriptors of the consumer group as you deem useful and necessary to seek out customers who will purchase your product or service. The more descriptors used, the smaller the size of the resulting target market.
Gender is the most basic descriptor used to define a consumer market. Knowing to whom a product appeals and who actually purchases from a gender perspective -- and to what extent -- is an important first step in defining a target market. Items specifically made for women, such as feminine hygiene products, naturally define their target market; however, condoms, although used primarily by males, often are purchased by females.
Age is another important target market descriptor. People in different age groups behave differently and have different perceptions, needs, desires and purchase behavior. When age classification is important, groups of adults usually are broken down this way: 18 to 24 years, 25 to 35 years, 35 to 45 years, 45 to 55 years and 55-plus. If age is unimportant, the marketer uses the designation 18 to 49 years to include all potential adult users. Historically in marketing, people past 55 have been ignored except for products especially targeted to them, such as arthritis medicine.
Income often is used to describe a target market. It is sometimes the most important factor for luxury products such as foreign sports cars, diamonds or fur coats. As with age, income breaks into several strata. Most of the population viewed as desirable by marketers have incomes of more than $35,000 annually.
Marketers want to know where their target market resides. This is important when purchasing local media advertising, such as on radio and in newspapers, to reach prospective buyers. Designated marketing area, or DMA, is a term used to categorize how far from a major city a target market lives. Are they urban, suburban or rural dwellers? New York City’s DMA includes parts of New Jersey and Connecticut.
Knowing the education level attained by a target group is important in deciding how the marketer addresses the group in advertising. Speaking down to a group of people that includes doctors, lawyers and successful CEOs can be a turnoff. Similarly, speaking above the heads of high school dropouts misses the mark. Generally, marketers craft messages to appeal to someone with a seventh-grade education.
Marla Currie has written professionally since 1995. She is editor and publisher of The Urban Shopper, an online magazine whose consumerist content is targeted to Black and Latino females. In addition to short fiction, Currie is author of "The Humours of Black Life," a nonfiction work. She has a master's degree in advertising.