Ascorbic acid from fermented tapioca
Vitamin C is a crucial water-soluble vitamin for immunity, collagen production, and energy production. It must be obtained in the diet as humans cannot produce it endogenously. Since it is water-soluble, the body does not store it the way it stores vitamins like A, D, K, and E. This means we must regularly take it in on a daily basis to keep levels up, and high intakes have few if any side effects as the body will flush excess out. Vitamin C is the main producer of collagen, which is recently gaining greater attention. Collagen is essential for connective tissue which is found all throughout the body.
Connective tissue produced and maintained by collagen includes blood vessels, cartilage, bones, tendons, joints, ligaments, cornea, skin, and small amounts of muscle tissue. Vitamin C deficiency can result in many serious health complications like scurvy, manifesting via loose teeth, bleeding gums, fatigue, anemia, and swelling of joints. It is powerful as an antioxidant and relieving inflammation, and known for preventing acute respiratory infections especially for those who are malnourished and under extreme stress. Some tend to load up on Vitamin C during flu season or only when sick, which can be more damaging than beneficial. It is much more effective, like anything else, to have a regular dedicated intake.
Ascorbic acid is the reduced, or active, form of Vitamin C. Tapioca (also known as Cassava) is naturally abundant in Ascorbic acid via its flavonoid and high phenolic content. These compounds increase when tapioca is fermented, and because this root is easily sourced and produced it is a natural eco-friendly choice for extraction. Fermentation also removes most of the phytic acid that would otherwise bind nutrients in the body. The starch content helps make it palatable and emulsify other ingredients while delivering a high amount of Vitamin C.
Ascorbic acid is found in Cymbiotika's Synergy C formula for ultimate collagen production and immune support. Vitamin C is crucial in many bodily processes including blood, bones, immunity, skin, and cellular function. Sourcing from tapioca is gentle on the Earth and natural for our bodies, with a fermentation process to remove nutrient binders and increase Vitamin C content. Ascorbic acid from fermented tapioca is combined with Bamboo Silica, lemon peel, and orange peel in an easy-to-use form added to food or beverage.