Article | 2021-06-04 07:58:52
Wisdom Teeth "The Troublemaker"
There are normally three molars on each side of the jaw, namely the first, second and third molars. The third molars are the most recently grown (erupted) molars, also known as wisdom teeth. This tooth erupts when a person is 17 to 25 years old, however there are some people who can develop gum inflammation due to eruption of these teeth even when they are over 25 years of age. Wisdom teeth often cause problems in the mouth during their eruption, either because the bones are denser, or because there is not enough space for wisdom teeth to erupt. This condition causes wisdom teeth to erupt incompletely (impacted) or even not come out at all.
Impacted wisdom teeth increase the risk of cavities and other dental and oral problems. Impacted wisdom teeth will cause several symptoms such as; tooth and gum pain, sometimes accompanied by swollen gums, bad breath, limited opening of the mouth, swollen cheeks, pain when chewing food. If you experience these symptoms, consult a dentist immediately to get the right treatment. The dentist will directly examine the complained tooth and the patient is advised to carry out routine controls. Symptoms that arise due to wisdom teeth can appear repeatedly, if it disturbs you, the dentist will suggest a minor surgery to remove wisdom teeth this procedure is called odontectomy. An odontectomy can be performed by a dentist or a dental surgeon once the diagnosis is confirmed.
The diagnosis of impacted wisdom teeth is carried out by supporting examinations in the form of dental x-rays. Usually the dentist will provide a referral letter to the patient to perform a dental x-ray examination in the laboratory because not all dental clinics are equipped with an x-ray unit. BIA (Bali Implant Aesthetic) Dental Center is equipped with a complete x-ray unit. Usually, a panoramic dental x-ray is performed to determine problems with several teeth, two-dimensional position of the teeth, and disorders of the jaw joint. In certain cases, to determine the position of a tooth in three dimensions (3D) requires a more sophisticated x-ray examination, for example, 3D Dental Cone Beam Computed Tomography (CBCT).
As one of the most trusted dental clinics in Bali, BIA (Bali Implant Aesthetic) Dental Center is equipped with 3D CBCT Dental which is able to produce better, more detailed, clearer images, and is able to display images of soft tissue and even nerves, and lower radiation compared to the conventional x-rays. Besides being supported by facilities with sophisticated technology, BIA (Bali Implant Aesthetic) Dental Center has a trusted oral surgeon, so you don't need to hesitate if dental surgery is needed. So, don't wait until your oral health gets worse. Always consult your dental and oral problems to the best dental clinic in your trust. BIA (Bali Implant Aesthetic) Dental Center is here and ready to provide the best service to you.
BIA (Bali Implant Aesthetic) Dental Center
Jl. Sunset Road No.86A, Seminyak, Badung, Bali Indonesia 80361.
Friedman, M. WebMD (2017). Dental Health and Wisdom Teeth
https://www.radiologyinfo.org/en/info/dentalconect CBCT Dental 3D
(diakses 19 Mei 2021)
Mayo Clinic (2019). Diseases and Conditions. Impacted Wisdom Teeth.
Marks, J. Healthline (2017). What You Should Know About an Impacted Wisdom Tooth.