A PREPARED COMMUNITY IS A MORE RESILIENT COMMUNITY
Disasters can occur in just a few seconds. Personal preparedness lessens the impact on families, on workplaces and on communities. Local officials and relief workers will be on the scene after a disaster, but they cannot reach everyone immediately.
Make a plan today. Your family may not be together if a disaster strikes, so it is important to know which types of disasters could affect your area. Know how you’ll contact one another and reconnect if separated. Establish a family meeting place that’s familiar and easy to find.
CDC PREPAREDNESS & SAFETY MESSAGING
The purpose of the Preparedness and Safety Messaging for Hurricanes, Flooding, and Similar Disasters is to provide a preparedness and response resource for all jurisdictions. Jurisdictions can add the preparedness and safety messaging document as a resource to their communication plans that address hazards expected from extreme weather involving strong wind and high water, like hurricanes and floods.
BUILD A KIT
Make sure your emergency kit is stocked with the items on the checklist below. Most of the items are inexpensive and easy to find, and any one of them could save your life. Headed to the store? Download a printable version to take with you. Once you take a look at the basic items, consider what unique needs your family might have, such as supplies for pets, or seniors.
READY RESPONDER TOOL KIT
This toolkit provides resources on how to develop an organizational preparedness plan; examples of how to promote individual, family, and organizational preparedness; and engage other agencies and departments in these efforts. There are also sample newsletter articles, media pitch templates, and other press materials that can be used to develop and distribute internal and external preparedness messaging
RIDMAT/MRC VOLUNTEER HANDBOOK
This manual is intended to provide RIDMAT/MRC volunteers with a description of the DMAT/MRC program, to define the major policies and procedures and offer information that may be useful to newly oriented members of the program. The information in this handbook is extensive but not complete with sections being revised and updated as new information becomes available