Willy Wonka (played by Gene Wilder): An eccentric, mysterious owner and chocolatier responsible for the chocolate factory. Out of five children, he seeks the one to be his predecessor. 

The Oompa Loompas: The race of green-haired, orange-faced dwarves that Willy Wonka rescued and now they work to help in the chocolate factory. Their morals come through in songs about naughty children and lessons learned. 

Charlie Bucket (played by Peter Ostrum): Impoverished and kind, Charlie and his family have been dealt a bad hand in life, but finding the golden ticket is their chance to live better. The protagonist of the story, Charlie is the little boy that Wonka ultimately decides to reward with possession of his chocolate factory. 

Grandpa Joe (played by Jack Albertson): Disabled and bedridden, Grandpa Joe is imaginative and excitable with child-like energy. While he remains in bed to rest for most of his days, his energy is restored when Charlie finds the golden ticket. He accompanies Charlie to the chocolate factory as a chaperone to meet Willy Wonka. 

Arthur Slugworth (played by Gunter Meisner): The alleged enemy and spy of Willy Wonka. He wants to know all of Wonka’s secrets so he can drive his chocolate factory out of business. He attempts to bribe all of the children that found the golden ticket, promising them riches if they deliver Wonka’s secret to “everlasting gobstoppers.” 

Violet Beauregarde (played by Denise Nickerson): Overconfident and persistent, Violet chews gum competitively. She’s also obnoxious and doesn’t listen, leading her to blow up like a giant blueberry when she snatches a piece of gum from Wonka’s hand against his warnings. 

Veruca Salt (played by Julie Dawn Cole): Spoiled and entitled, Veruca throws tantrums when she doesn’t get her way. She expects her daddy to buy her everything that she wants, including a golden goose from Wonka’s factory. When Wonka refuses to sell, she throws a fit, eventually falling into the "bad egg” side of the golden egg chute. 

Augustus Gloop (played by Michael Bollner): Overweight and gluttonous, Augustus never knows when to quit eating. His mother indulges him, spoiling him with sweets. So, it’s no surprise when his chocolate-thieving antics get him nearly drowned and sucked up into pipes from the chocolate river. 

Mike Teevee (played by Paris Themmen): Obsessed with television, Mike fancies himself a futuristic boy with the intelligence to match. However, his attempt to become the first boy to be transmitted across TV waves leads him to be shrunken down in size, small enough to fit in his mother’s purse. 

Released in 1971, Willy Wonka and the Chocolate Factory was a comedic musical based on Roald Dahl’s popular children’s book, “Charlie and the Chocolate Factory.” Roald Dahl, however, despised the adaptation. He thought Gene Wilder’s interpretation of Willy Wonka was “pretentious and too bouncy (happy).”
