A new study states Pennsylvania leads the nation in the number of people who have been sentenced to life in prison without parole.
And according to the report released today by the Abolitionist Law Center, the most sentences of life without parole are imposed on young people with what the authors call "alarming racial disparities."
In the report, "A Way Out: Abolishing Death by Incarceration in Pennsylvania," the center notes that Philadelphia County has 2,694 people who are serving life sentences without parole, which is more than any other county in the U.S. and more than any other country in the world.
The data analysis also shows that Pennsylvania has 5,346 people serving sentences of life without parole, making it a national leader in the use of this punishment, beat only by Florida, the report indicates.
"This report presents a definitive portrait of a punishment that is archaic, cruel, unjustified, and indefensible," said Bret Grote, legal director of the Abolitionist Law Center and co-author of the report. "Death by incarceration sentences do not keep the public safer. The human and economic costs are staggering and growing by the year, as thousands of aging, rehabilitated men and women are locked away needlessly. Fortunately, there is also a rapidly growing movement determined to make parole eligibility for all lifers a reality."
The report states:
- Most of those serving life without parole were convicted and sentenced when they were 25 or younger, a period of life when brain development and maturation remains ongoing.
- More than 70 percent of those inmates are 40 years old and nearly half are over 50, a time in life when the tendency towards criminal activity drops.
- Black Pennsylvanians are serving life without parole at a rate of 18 times higher than that of their white counterparts. Out of Philadelphia's 2,694 people serving life without parole, 84 percent are black. In Allegheny County, 13 percent of the county's residents are black, but constitute 76 percent of those serving life witout parole.
The report calls "death by incarceration" a "failed policy predicated upon the fallacy that the trajectory of a person's life - including their capacity for rehabilitation, transformation, and redemption - can be accurately predicted at the time of sentencing."
Pennsylvania state Rep. Jason Dawkins and Sen. Sharif Street have introduced legislation to allow parole eligibility for all lifers after 15 years, according to the organization.
The center also said the Philadelphia District Attorney's Office is considering reviewing certain cases to pursue lesser sentences when legally viable.
The Abolitionist Law Center said it is a public interest law firm organized to abolish class and race-based mass incarceration in the United States.