In most cases, a lot of emphasis is put on courses such as engineering and medicine. Thus, from a young age, kids are forced to love subjects such as mathematics and sciences. In some cases, social sciences are completely ignored and neglected.
The majority of kids today prefer to solve numerical problems as opposed to anything to do with theory. In fact, most, if not all, students want nothing to do with history. However, this shouldn’t be the case. Remember history is all about stories from the distant past. And who doesn’t like stories? We all do, right?
Even so, some children from this generation claim not to like stories. Most of them end up not choosing the subject in school. In fact, they give little or no thought to the subject before deciding whether to study it or not.
To stop this end, we’ve compiled some tips that will help the students not just to like history but succeed in it as well.
Let’s get started:
We’ve all heard about history, right? But have you ever taken the time to learn what it involves? Well, it includes memorization of dates, events, names, and other centrifuges.
Preparing flashcards will go a long way in helping look at the key terms, dates, as well as people, more than you normally do. Among other things, this will help you retain the concepts better.
The good news is that nowadays you can use programs such as Quizlet to prepare your flashcard digitally.
In case you experience difficulty while identifying the keywords, consult your tutor to assist you with the key dates, actual figures, and any other information that might be tested.
Apart from the notes provided by your college, you should make your notes. The importance of making notes include:
Assignments are another way to ensure that you go through your notes. They can also go a long way in helping clear ambiguities concerning any concept. Students should, therefore, understand that they too have a role when it comes to their success.
Assignments will not just improve your learning skills but prepare your brain for the exams as well.
Always ensure to finish your assignment on time. If you have any challenges and need instant online history homework help then be sure to visit reputable online apps where you can connect with tutors 24/7.
Reading aloud activates multiple senses on your body to help you understand concepts better. The senses help your brain make more reliable connections, help memorize information quickly, and increase retention ability.
Try reading your book aloud as you study, and say what you are writing while creating your flashcards.
You can also increase the memorizing ability by recording your voice while reading books and flashcards. You can then listen to your recorded voice while going through your notes or flashcards.
Memorizing can be annoying at times, but have you tried quick, silly methods to recall facts. It sounds fun, right! Using mnemonic is an effective way to keep your facts straight and clear.
For instance, you can be asked to name the British royal family's incorrect chronology. It can be tough for you, but when you have a mnemonic, you can name it easily without any difficulty.
What are your expectations regarding that paper? To get a glimpse of what to expect, go through the last 4 to 5 years' exam papers. This way, you will not waste a lot of time in the exam room trying to answer the questions.
Try answering past papers to build your confidence. This way, you can deal with yours with apparent ease.
History contains lots of facts and figures, and sometimes you might get confused. This can be avoided by connecting all the details learned in a given topic to a timeline or map.
This will help when going through your notes, as all related information is compiled together for easy retrieval.
Most students complain that the time allocated for the exams is too short for the 'lengthy' exam. The reason most students can’t finish their exams on time is due to poor time management skills. Taking practice tests will help improve these skills.
This will ensure that you will not leave a question whose answer you already know, unanswered.