About MMIWG (Missing and Murdered Indigenous Women and Girls) in Canada
By Iman A., Milton Youth Action Team, HYI Communications Crew
September 16, 2020
* This is a written transcript of the video*
For years, First Nations, Inuit, and Métis women, girls, and 2SLGBTQ+ people in Canada have been the targets of violence. Indigenous homicides account for 33 per cent of the total in Canada; 10 times the rate of non-Indigenous homicides.
When families of victims are to seek help in finding their loved ones, it requires reaching out to institutions such as the police and the criminal justice system. those which have historically ignored and continue to ignore their concerns. So we asked ourselves; How do the police handle these cases?
It has been found through CBC news reports that police coordination has been lacking with these cases after last year’s inquiry on the Missing and murdered Indigenous Women and Girls. There’s a lack of transparency with the cases and inconsistent progress being made nationwide. According to the national inquiry’s Forensic Document Review Project, even the way police files on Indigenous women are treated is wrong. Families of victims have long criticized police handling of their loved ones' cases, raising concerns about racism and bias.
So how can they do better?
The MMIWG inquiry said a special investigative task force is needed to create some independence from the existing forces because of the level of distrust, dissatisfaction and disharmony that exist between families and those police forces.
In response to these recommendations, the federal government announced that it would provide $9.6 million over five years to support the RCMP's new national investigative standards and practices unit; that which does not fulfill the national inquiry’s recommendations.
There is a need for transparency, independence and accountability now. We call upon the federal government to do better, and take the recommendations made in the inquiry. We continue to ask those of you watching to educate yourself and take action against these injustices that occur in the communities. Help bring justice to these families and support Indigenous wherever you can.