Eyes are truly our windows to the world. The shades of colours that you enjoy in your surroundings can only be enjoyed because of your eyes. Taking them for granted can cost you the power to see each thing that you cherish.
Eyes already suffer a lot due to our current lifestyle. With increasing pollution each day, they are exposed to dust, allergens, pollutants, toxins and pathogens that are ready to damage your eyes. It becomes all the more necessary for you to help your eyes remain healthy in such drastic conditions.
Among the senses bestowed to us through which we interact with our environment, i.e. vision, hearing, smell, taste and touch, the sense of vision is used to perceive about 80% of all impressions. Neglecting your eye care can not only dig a hole in your pocket but has the potential to negatively affect the quality of your life. So, a little care now can save you from eye infections like conjunctivitis and serious diseases of eyes like cataract, low vision, macular degeneration, glaucoma and diabetic retinopathy.
Here are a few tips for your eyes only:
Your diet defines your sight:
Yes, it’s quite simple. You are what you eat. This holds true for your eye sight as well. More you consume food rich in nutrients like vitamin A, C and E, zinc, lutein and omega-3 fatty acids, more strength your eyes get to fight age-related problems of eyes like cataract and macular degeneration.
Carrot is high in beta-carotene which is a precursor of vitamin A. The other vegetables that help in improving vision include green leafy vegetables like spinach, collards, kale. Fruits that improve eye health include lemons, grape fruits and oranges. Nuts, beans, fatty fish and eggs also improve eye health.
Smoking may make your vision smoky:
If you are postponing your plan of even trying to quit smoking, watch out for ending up having a blurry vision or loss of vision. Smoking increases the risk of macular degeneration which causes loss in the centre of the field of vision.
Take a step now in the direction of quitting smoking. Take help if necessary.
Be a sleeping beauty at night:
Unless and until your job demands you to be awake at night, don’t give space to any other reason to interfere with your sleep. Losing sleep can decrease the lubrication of eyes by the tear glands and cause spasms of eyes. Once dry eye sets in, you may experience pain, itching, redness, and blurred vision.
Persistent loss of sleep can cause inflammation of blood vessels supplying to eyes and decrease in blood supply to optic nerve can cause damage to optic nerve and vision loss.
And that is why; ‘early to bed, early to rise’ make your vision bright!
Get moving so that your vision stays shining:
Including exercises in your daily routine is also good for your eyes. Exercise improves the circulation of blood to your eyes, which improves the oxygen level that reaches the eyes and enhances removal of toxins which have accumulated there. Apart from losing weight, exercise may save you from those spectacles.
Wash your hands and welcome good sight:
This becomes all the more important if you wear contact lenses. Before you touch your eyes or before you remove your contact lens, you should wash your hands with a mild soap and dry with a lint-free towel. Germs and bacteria that come from your hands can cause eye infections, like conjunctivitis or pink eye. People also catch cold when they rub their hands which are contaminated with cold virus germs.
Distance from devices and blue light:
Keep your computer screen 20 inches away from your eyes. After every 20 minutes, look away from your screen at least for 20 seconds. Exposing the eye nutrients lutein and zeaxanthin for hours of exposure to digital light puts additional load on them to filter the blue light. Blink your eyes frequently and adjust lighting to minimize glare on screen. Also, the top of the computer screen should be below your eye level.
Use Visiongold Juice to improve your vision:
Curcumin forms the base ingredient of Visiongold Juice as it supports eye health with its antioxidant properties which help to mitigate oxidative stress associated with eyes. Curcumin helps to deal with dry eye and age-related eye health issues and protects your eyes from harmful effects of germs, toxins and pollutants. Aloe vera soothes the eyes and reduces inflammation in them. Carrot in Visiongold Juice elevates vitamin A level in your body. Triphala is rich in vitamin C and protects your eyes from damage due to diabetes such as diabetic retinopathy.