We love our little one’s grins. As parents, we look for little glimpses of ourselves in our children. Who’s smile does your child have, Mom’s, Dad’s, or a mix of both? Because we want your children to have healthy smiles, we have a special gift to help make brushing and flossing fun for them!
Prevention is worth more than the cure
When it comes to the overall systemic health of a child, you may rarely think much of their smile being of concern. But gum disease and other serious health risks can develop from a very tender age. Often times, these are overlooked until the child reaches young adulthood with a baffling array of allergies, digestive problems, and a decaying smile that causes their self-esteem to plummet.
In its strictest sense, the old adage is as true today as it was back when Franklin said it:
“An ounce of prevention is worth a pound of the cure” –Benjamin Franklin
As your pediatric dentists in Maple Valley and Kent, we want to help you safeguard your child’s smile so that they can focus on developing their individuality without being hindered by chronic health issues or low self-esteem due to an opaque smile.
By means of education and proactive dental visits, we seek to prevent cavities from forming and thus give parents less things to be anxious about.
However, preventative measures must be instilled from infancy. But, how do you get your overly-energetic bundle of joy to brush their teeth and floss regularly?!
Make brushing and flossing fun with our free chart
Good hygiene habits go a long way in preventing cavities and other dental problems. To start, you may want to brush your teeth and floss with your child every morning before school and work. Not only does this daily activity create a bond, it helps them to start viewing brushing and flossing as a regular routine, not as a chore.
Something that really helps to create these good oral hygiene habits is a reward system. Download and print our free teeth care chart to help track their success!
In addition to the time you get to spend with your mini-me before work or school, having a chart where they can visualize their end goal of a day at the Zoo or their favorite ice-cream shop will instill in them the desire to brush and floss on their own. Such habits are an invaluable inheritance they will treasure in adulthood!
Post the chart on the fridge or on their bathroom door for them to track their progress. And remember to save the link so you can download more as you soon start seeing that chart fill up with checkmarks every week!
Remember, although brushing and flossing may help to prevent cavities, you still need to schedule your children’s regular checkups so we can keep plaque buildup and cavities at bay.
Together, we can help you raise brave and healthy children while lightening the load on you.