LIBRARIES IN THE ANCIENT WORLD
Asylum Editor E. Tomlinson Fort pointed out a book that
may be of interest to our subscribers.
"Libraries in the
Ancient World" by Lionel Casson "is the only one to cover
the vast range of the history of libraries in the Western
world from the time of the first civilizations in the near east
to the late Roman empire" (from a review by Thomas
From the Publisher:
"This delightful book tells the story of
ancient libraries from their very beginnings, when "books"
were clay tablets and writing was a new phenomenon.
Renowned classicist Lionel Casson takes us on a lively tour,
from the royal libraries of the most ancient Near East, through
the private and public libraries of Greece and Rome, down
to the first Christian monastic libraries. To the founders of the
first public libraries of the Greek world goes the credit for
creating the prototype of today's library buildings and the
science of organizing books in them.
Casson recounts the development of ancient library buildings,
systems, holdings, and patrons, addressing questions on a
wide variety of topics, such as:
- • What was the connection between the rise in education and literacy and the growth of libraries?
- • Who contributed to the early development of public libraries, especially the great library at Alexandria?
- • What did ancient libraries include in their holdings?
- • How did ancient libraries acquire books?
- • What was the nature of publishing in the Greek and Roman world?
- • How did different types of users (royalty, scholars, religious figures) and different kinds of "books" (tablets, scrolls, codices) affect library arrangements?
- • How did Christianity transform the nature of library holdings?
Just as a library yields unexpected treasures to a meandering
browser, this entertaining book offers to its perusers the
surprising history of the rise and development of ancient libraries
— a fascinating story never told before."
The book is scheduled to be published on April 1, 2001 by Yale University Press;
Hardcover - 192 pages (April 1, 2001)
Wayne Homren, Editor
Content presented in The E-Sylum is not necessarily researched or independently fact-checked, and views expressed do not necessarily represent those of the Numismatic Bibliomania Society.
This is a static archive page documenting the originally published content. Links were active at the time of publication but may no longer work. Check subsequent issues for corrections and commentary.
The Numismatic Bibliomania Society is a non-profit organization promoting numismatic literature. For more information please see
our web site at http://www.coinbooks.org/ There is a membership application available on the web site. To join, print the application and return it with your check to the address printed on the application. Visit the Membership page.
Those wishing to become new E-Sylum subscribers (or wishing to Unsubscribe) can go to the following web page
To submit items for publication in The E-Sylum, write to the Editor
at this address: E-Sylum Editor
Copyright © 1998 - 2020 The Numismatic Bibliomania Society (NBS)
All Rights Reserved.
NBS Home Page
Contact the NBS Webmaster