There comes that time when you need to get a new computer just because the old one can’t keep up with the computing demands of new apps. This is usually a certainty, and everyone is bound to getting a new computer. What most people do not realize is that the old machines can still be of use, it just takes a little creativity and the right information source to make your old computer usable. Below we look at some of the things you can do with your old computer.
Make your old computers usable
External hard drive
Before you box your old computer and throw it in the attic, it is important to know that you can still use its hard disk to store more information. Particularly suitable for old laptops, you can buy a USB based controller that can be used to turn a hard drive into and external USB hard disk. For less that five dollars, you can acquire the controller that comes accompanied with housing. By just mounting the hard drive to the controller’s motherboard and screwing a few screws, you will have a robust extra storage device.
For those that have no idea what cluster computing is, take this opportunity to familiarize yourself with the technology. Via cluster computing, we have been able to create supercomputers that can handle more computations compared to ones operating solo. Clustering is whereby you use two or more different computers to complete computational tasks faster. By making use of cluster software, you can make your new and old computer function as one, increasing the resources at your disposal. It only takes the software, which is readily available for free, and a LAN cable.
Digital photo album
Ever heard of a digital album? Probably not. Instead of discarding your old computer, you can quickly turn it into a digital photo album to showcase your lovely photos to visiting guests of friends. By saving all your important photos on the computer, you can easily create a looping slideshow that will keep on playing until you stop it. This can be a very entertaining way to showcase your photos in the living room or other private rooms of your house.
Let’s face it, getting one of those new fancy internet TV’s is expensive. The good news is that if you have the modern television, you can quickly turn it into a smart or internet TV by leveraging the functionalities of your old computer. Computers are always years ahead in advancement compared to TVs. The chances are that a 90’s computer is way cooler compare to a modern smart TV. By making use of VGA or HDMI cable, you can use your computer as your primary source of entertainment and use the TV as the display.