Click Here For United States Colleges
USA as a Country
The United States of America is the world's third largest country in size. Located in North America, the country is bordered on the west by the Pacific Ocean and to the east by the Atlantic Ocean. On the northern side is Canada and the southern side is Mexico.
The United States of America consists of 50 states, 5 territories and 1 district (Washington D.C.). The United States is a federal republic and it is set up by the Constitution. The White House is the official residence of the President in the capital city of Washington, D.C. America has been a nation of immigrants. The population is diverse and from ethnic backgrounds. Majority of the population in the United States come from European countries and a small group of people are African-American.
The US has no official national language, but English has acquired official status in 28 of the 50 states; Hawaiian is an official language in the state of Hawaii. English is spoken by 82.1% people , Spanish 10.7%, other Indo-European 3.8%, Asian and Pacific island 2.7%, other 0.7%.
The varied topography can be seen from vast beaches in Florida to peaks in the Rocky Mountains, from rolling prairie lands and barren deserts in the West to dense wilderness areas in the Northeast and Northwest. Interspersed throughout are the Great Lakes, the Grand Canyon, the majestic Yosemite Valley, and the mighty Mississippi.
You will find varied weather conditions across USA. Plains and southern states get hot and sultry summers while the southwest is hot and quite dry. Summers in southern California and Florida are common and unending, whereas in Pacific Northwest and New England states, summers have cool and pleasant.
Winters in the southern states are mild, whereas in the northern states and in the western mountains, it is cold with sub-zero temperatures accompanied by snow fall. Thunderstorms and tornadoes are common in the spring and summer months, especially in the central part of the US. Hurricanes occasionally strike the eastern coastline and Gulf of Mexico states.
The USA is the no.1 study destination for international students than any other country in the world. Here are a few reasons why you should choose to study in the USA.
Top Ranked Universities
Sixteen universities in the USA are ranked in the world’s top 20 universities. Fifty-two US universities are ranked in the top 100 universities worldwide. Seventy-seven American universities are ranked among the best 200 universities in the world.
Exploring Various Culture
Studying in the USA means exploring different cultures as it is a country of immigrants. Many people from distant land had come over and made it their home.
Living in multicultural society improves your confidence, communication and social skills. You get to know the culture and see world famous places and mingle with the American culture and language.
You will come across different regional cultures, history and local traditions. For instance, the West Coast region has many beaches, outdoor activities, the people have a relaxed attitude and you will also find many local international communities.
Ideal Place for Research
If you want to become a research scholar then the US is your perfect choice for higher education. You can get the opportunity to work while you learn. Your research grant will get your tuition fee waived off and provide a stipend, while the intellectual challenges will help you grow professionally.
Ample Job Opportunities
If you have completed a degree from the US then you are entitled to work there for about a year. For working there you have to apply for Optional Practical Training (OPT). Many students get absorbed by the company where they did the OPT. The companies sponsor them for H1-B which is a work visa. Once you are given H1-B, you are allowed to work in the US. These are mostly given in the field of software, engineering, accountancy, teaching or marketing.
Getting financial aid is another major reason for international students to opt for higher education in the US. Many universities offer its grants, loans and stipends for students to meet their daily expenses as well as tuitions in some cases. If you can prove your excellence in academics, then your US education may even turn out to be free. Otherwise, obtaining grants and loans from banks is also easy if you can provide proof of your admission.
On-campus work programs are also available for students who qualify for a specific kind of job. For instance, if you have a humanities major, you can seek employment at the library.
The education system in the US is quite different from your own country. The education system in the US is quite flexible, like it gives you the choice to opt for any subject from any stream. You are then allowed to specialize in that subject without any classes. It is your prerogative to choose class any time of the academic year. Now you can specialize in the area of your choice without having to take any unnecessary classes.
You also have the flexibility to choose a class at any time during the academic year. For instance, if you can complete the total number of courses required for you to graduate, you can finish up your master's degree within a year. You can also spread out your course completion schedule in such a manner as to devote more time for research and complete your course in a couple of years.
American education is known for its excellence. Getting admission in top US Colleges is not easy. Only the best students can reach the top schools. The US degrees are not just recognized worldwide and accepted, but also widely respected around the world.