Relieve Your Pain Naturally with Homeopathy for Migraine
A migraine is often a debilitating form of the head that makes you suffer from severe throbbing pain in the head or discomforting pulsing sensation on either side of your head. In some individuals, it affects both sides of the head. Often, these intense headaches are accompanied by sensitivity to sound or light, nausea, and vomiting. At times, migraine is preceded by warning symptoms. Frequent migraines can affect your quality of life adversely. Pain-relieving medications can help manage migraine headaches. But, having painkillers often can make you suffer from its side effects or make you dependent on them. Health Total’s homeopathy for migraine promotes self-healing and helps you obtain relief naturally and safely without any side effects. Our migraine treatment in homeopathy helps reduce the frequency of migraine attacks, offers you long-lasting relief, and promotes recovery without any drug dependency. Here’s everything about migraine and homeopathy treatment for it.
Causes of Migraine
Even though the exact cause of migraine is yet not known, certain factors are believed to contribute to the occurrence of migraine. Here are some risk factors that can cause migraine.
If either of your parents is suffering from migraine, you are at risk of getting it.
Although both men and women can get migraine attacks; it is observed that women have migraine three times more often than men.
Most individuals suffering from migraine develop it between the ages of 10 and 40.
Health issues, such as epilepsy, depression, sleep disorders, bipolar disorder, and anxiety, increases your risk of developing migraine.
Certain things, factors, and conditions can trigger migraine attacks. Some common migraine triggers include:
When in stressful situations, the brain releases chemicals that result in changes in the blood vessel, thereby leading to migraine.
The intake of certain foods and drinks can trigger this headache. Food additives like nitrates, MSG, aged cheese, and alcohol are some of the food triggers of migraine. Caffeine can also trigger migraine attacks when you have it in excess or fail to get it as much as you are used to it.
Skipping the meals
Some women get migraine headaches during pregnancy, around their period, during menopause, while using birth control pills containing hormones, and during other circumstances when hormonal change occurs.
Changes in altitude, barometric pressure, strong winds, and storm fronts may trigger a headache.
Bright lights, strong smells, and loud noises can trigger the throbbing headache.
such as exercises in some individuals can set off a migraine.
Vasodilators that widen the blood vessels can trigger the migraine.
Changes in the Sleep
When you fail to get enough sleep or you sleep for long hours, it can set off the headache.
Types of Migraine
There are two main types of migraine, namely:
Migraine with aura
This type of migraine is characterized by recurring headaches after or at the time when you experience sensory disturbances called an aura. Aura is the warning sign of migraine. Blind spots, flashes of light, tingling in your face or hand, and vision changes are some disturbances that you may experience before or during the migraine attack. It’s also famous as classic migraine.
Migraine without Aura
If you get a migraine headache without any warning sign, it’s a migraine without aura. This type is a common migraine.
Other Types of Migraine Includes
This type of migraine causes stomach pain, vomiting, and nausea. It often affects children and it might change into a migraine with an aura over time. It also affects some adults. Our customised homeopathy for abdominal migraines can help you obtain relief.
This type of migraine is linked to the menstrual cycle of the women.
When you experience aura disturbances without a headache, it’s silent migraine. It’s also called acephalgic migraine.
In this type, you experience vertigo complaints, balance issues, vomiting, and nausea with or without a headache.
This type of migraine makes you experience short-term paralysis or weakness on either side of the body. You might also experience vision changes, numbness, and dizziness.
It is characterized by a short-lived, complete, or partial loss of vision and a dull ache behind the eye that may radiate to your head. You need to seek medication attention immediately.
This type of migraine causes pain around the eye and paralysis of the muscles around it.
It’s a severe type of migraine that lasts over 72 hours. The headache and nausea are so severe that you may need to rush to the hospital.
Migraine with Brainstem Aura
When you experience confusion, loss of balance, and dizziness before the migraine attack and the headache happens to affect the back of your head, it’s a migraine with a brainstem aura. You might also experience ringing in the ears and trouble speaking. You need to see a doctor immediately.
Symptoms of Migraine Attack
The common symptoms of migraine include:
- The throbbing pain is usually on either side of the head. It might affect both sides too.
- Intense pain that pulses and throbs
- Sensitivity to lights, touch, smell, and sound
A migraine headache may last from four hours to three days if untreated. It might occur rarely or many times a month.
How to Diagnose a Migraine?
Your healthcare provider may enquire about the type of pain you are experiencing during the episode, your family history of migraines, your medical history, and other symptoms. The physician may perform a physical and neurological examination.
The health expert may also recommend imaging tests, such as MRI and CT scans if your condition is complex or suddenly turns severe. These tests can help the doctor to rule out other causes of your headache and confirm the exact diagnosis.
How Homeopathy Treatment for Migraine Works?
Health Total specializes in treating a variety of health conditions naturally with homeopathy, and migraine is no exception to it. We excel in offering homeopathic treatment for migraine headaches that reduces the frequency, intensity, and duration of your migraine attacks, and you may even experience complete relief over time. Whether you are suffering from a common kind of migraine or abdominal migraine, our expert homeopaths offer you the best treatment based on the type of your migraine. For instance, if you are suffering from abdominal migraine, we offer you customised homeopathy for abdominal migraine tailored to your specific needs.
Our homeopathic experts specialize in following a holistic approach by considering your migraine symptoms along with your physical and psychological generals, medical history, family’s medical history, underlying health conditions if any, current medications if any, and other factors and create an individualized best treatment for your migraine headaches. So, you enjoy incredible, long-lasting relief from the throbbing head pain.
We also work to identify your migraine triggers and help you avoid them to prevent episodes of migraine headaches. Our talented homeopaths focus on identifying and treating the root cause of your migraine. So, you heal naturally from within and enjoy lasting relief from the pain and discomfort.
Moreover, Health Total’s migraine pain treatment in homeopathy is completely safe and reliable; it does not cause any side effects. All our homeopathic medicines are prepared from natural sources, such as minerals, parts of the plants, herbs, salt, and others, and provided to you in small doses. So, you receive the best natural treatment with our homeopathy for severe headaches and experience smooth, side-effect-free recovery. Besides this, our homeopathy for migraine does not cause drug dependency.
What are the Benefits of Health Total’s Homeopathy for Migraine?
Health Total’s customised homeopathy for migraine comes with several benefits such as:
- Our homeopathic treatment for migraine headaches alleviates your pain, reduces the frequency, duration, and intensity of the migraine episode, improves your pain relief, and helps you enjoy complete relief over time naturally.
- Our migraine pain treatment in homeopathy addresses and treats the root cause and underlying health conditions, such as stress factors or sleep disorders, and helps promote self-healing at a deep level from within.
- You enjoy long-lasting relief from migraine attacks and reduced frequency, intensity, and duration of the episode. Over time, you may experience complete relief.
- Our homeopathy for migraine is completely safe and does not make you suffer from any side effects.
- Individuals of various age groups can go for homeopathy treatment without any concerns.
- It does not cause any drug dependency.
On top of that, Health Total has expertise in following an integrated treatment approach involving a unique, effective combination of homeopathy, diet, and Ayurvedic solutions that not just treats your migraine headaches but also boosts your immunity, manages your weight, meets your nutritional deficiencies, and improve your overall health. Our health experts also follow a scientific four-step process involving detoxification, rejuvenation, nourishing your body, and offering you sustainable relief from migraine pain. So, make no delay, get in touch with us, and start with our integrated treatment to obtain relief from your migraine headaches and enjoy an improved quality of life and health naturally, incredibly, and safely. Set off to enjoy a pain-free life with our customised homeopathy for migraine.
Sign up for a FREE consultation with Health Total experts to get more tips on treating migraine with homeopathy and natural solutions or for managing any other health condition. Call toll-free at 1-800-843-0206 and book an appointment!