(By Janice T. Forbes, Bataan National High School-Senior High School, Balanga City, Bataan, Philippines)
Upon entering the threshold of the 21st century, the persistent demand for technology integration in education has become evident in our society. In line with the abovementioned statement, the implementation of the K-12 curriculum is considered as an avenue to deliver instructions that are technology-based and learner-centered at the same time. Last November 17, 2017, Undersecretary for Curriculum and Instruction, Dr. Lorna Dig Dino had released a memorandum on National Seminar-Workshop on Implementing Alternative Instructional Delivery Practices for Senior High School in Luzon and echoed to different regions. Having stated the arising demand of the 21st-century world, the undying zeal of the Department of Education urges the curriculum developers and other officials to conduct trainings and seminars which will serve as platforms in enhancing the teaching-learning process. One of those trainings is a seminar workshop on Alternative Instructional Delivery Practices. The said workshop is comprehensive and sensible training that helps teachers transform their traditional teaching into a more innovative one. In addition, the Alternative Instructional Delivery Practices is a learning delivery program for Senior High schools that aims to present different instructional media as an educational alternative to enhance teachers’ strategies or approaches. It also has an objective to improve learning, aid teachers in creating lesson plans and learning situations using any instructional media such as print, visual and audio, ICT-related materials, and other forms, and establish a school-based, technology-assisted learning program, and sustainable professional development system. With the dynamic needs of the 21st-century learners, the said training can offer the utmost opportunity for the teachers to improve their instructions. In adherence with the advocacy to perpetuate and promote quality education, the strong desire to utilize technology in teaching could create a remarkable impact on our learners, making them more globally competitive.