Oliver the mouse was a tiny little guy who had his first morsel of cheese when his mom brought it to him one night a few months ago. Oliver remembered the taste of that cheese and wanted more of that salty, sweet goodness. But he didn't know where to get it.

Oliver went outside his nest and looked around. He sniffed the air hoping to catch a whiff of tasty dairy product but only smelled the fresh air and surrounding flowers in the meadow. So he wandered through the meadow, looking under rocks and in bushes; he scampered out of the meadow for a bit, then a bit longer, and longer still until he was at the top of a mountain looking down at the vast land below him. And what he found among that vast land was a cluster of lights gathered in the middle of a valley. Oliver had never seen such a beautiful sight, so he decided to investigate further.

As he got closer to the lights, Oliver could see the outlines of tall, majestic buildings coming into full view. He marveled at the cars that zoomed on the highways at high speeds, and the humans who walked around with smiles on their faces. He also began to wonder what the big neon sign was that adorned the facade of the nearest building, which if he could read, he would know said "Groceries". Oliver was drawn to this building, and so he quickly ran toward it and through the double doors.

The sights and sounds within the grocery store blew his tiny little mind. Oliver saw so many different foods that he normally found in small quantities in his garden, but there were bunches of them: carrots, oranges, lettuce and radishes. 

As he continued deftly down the aisles he found the most beautiful sight: the dairy section. In the dairy section, there were mounds and mounds of yellow, white, blue, and orange cheeses. He could smell the tasty treats through their plastic packaging. Oliver, standing there with his mouth agape, began dancing with joy at the thought of getting as much of the delicious cheesy snacks as he could carry. He jumped up onto one of the blocks that were just a little bigger than him labeled "Babybel" and carried the round cheesy trophy with him out the front door of the store.
