There’s a long list of health conditions, medications, and irritants capable of causing a skin rash. You can’t know if your rash signals a skin allergy unless you meet with Chad W. Mayer, DO, FAAAAI, FAAP, and Ronda Barak-Norris, MD, FACAAI, at Allergy & Asthma Institute of Southeast Michigan. They perform allergy testing, identify the specific allergen causing the problem, and provide tailored treatment to ease your skin symptoms. Call the office in Farmington Hills, Michigan, today, or use online booking to schedule a skin allergy consultation.
All allergies begin when your immune system overreacts to a harmless substance and creates antibodies labeling the substance as a danger to your health. When you have a skin allergy, your immune system reacts to something that touches your skin.
The first time you come into contact with an allergen, you don’t develop inflammation. The first exposure sensitizes your immune system. Then the next time the same substance touches your skin, your immune system releases chemicals that cause a rash.
Allergic contact dermatitis is any type of allergic skin reaction that occurs when an allergen touches your skin. The rash always appears wherever the allergen makes contact.
You can have a non-allergic type of dermatitis, a skin condition called irritant contact dermatitis. Some substances simply irritate your skin without affecting your immune system.
Many different substances can cause allergic contact dermatitis, including:
Some products, like shaving lotions and sunscreens, only cause a skin allergy when exposed to sunlight.
Signs of a skin allergy include a skin rash that has any of the following:
Though the appearance of your rash may vary depending on the allergen, nearly everyone has itching that can be severe.
The team at Allergy & Asthma Institute of Southeast Michigan tests for contact allergens using a skin patch test. After identifying the cause of your skin allergy, they recommend treatment.
The primary treatment involves avoiding the allergen. Your provider may also prescribe medications to ease itching and inflammation, including topical medications that regulate the immune response in your skin.
If you need help with a skin rash, call Allergy & Asthma Institute of Southeast Michigan or book an appointment online today.