Computing & ICT Intent
In ICT/ Computer Science, students will have developed skills to use computational thinking and creativity to understand and change the world. Computing has deep links with mathematics, science, and design and technology, and provides insights into both natural and artificial systems. The core of computing is computer science, in which pupils are taught the principles of information and computation, how digital systems work, and how to put this knowledge to use through programming. Building on this knowledge and understanding, pupils are equipped to use information technology to create programs, systems and a range of content. Computing also ensures that pupils become digitally literate able to use, and express themselves and develop their ideas through, information and communication technology, at a level suitable for the future workplace and as active participants in a digital world.
Students will be able to demonstrate the ability to communicate effectively, both orally and in writing especially when explaining a highly-technical subject to an unfamiliar audience. They will have developed problem-solving skills by being able to see the bigger picture and understanding how a process can be carried out more efficiently and details of how to make it actually happen. These skills will also be needed in the workplace for team management issues, such as covering absences, budget planning and allocating resources to meet deadlines. Students will have established collaborative skills needed to maintain a solid working relationship with their peers. Development processes, like pair programming where one programmer writes code while another simultaneously reviews it, places a lot of importance on their ability to work constructively alongside others. Students will have demonstrated effective research skills due the curiosity of finding solutions leading to continuous improvement. They will also be able to showcase their creativity when producing digital publications and when looking for creative ways to solve issues.
The skills they have learnt will enable them to enter the world beyond the Academy as good citizens and valued employees.
If you require any further information, please contact the Head of Subject via the link on our Contact Us page.