Our researchers are working to understand what causes so many people to die from preventable conditions such as heart attack, stroke, diabetes and non-alcoholic fatty liver disease.
Cardiometabolic diseases are a group of common but often preventable conditions including heart attack, stroke, diabetes, insulin resistance and non-alcoholic fatty liver disease.
There is a global increase in the number of people who experience one or more of these conditions during their lifetime. Smoking, lack of exercise, drinking a lot of alcohol and eating an unhealthy diet are recognised as the four main drivers of this rise.
The high socioeconomic cost of cardiometabolic conditions to low, middle-income and wealthy countries make tackling these conditions critical to the health of our whole communities in the future.
What we do
Our researchers are working to understand what causes so many people to die from preventable conditions. We are studying prevention, diagnosis and treatment of common conditions like heart and other circulatory diseases.
Where we do it
The Centre for Cardiovascular Science works to transform the diagnosis, treatment and management of people with heart and circulatory diseases.
The Centre for Inflammation Research studies the prevention, diagnosis and treatment of inflammatory conditions such as liver disease and cancer. Inflammation is an important process used by the body to fight infection and heal injuries. However, if inflammation is not controlled correctly by the body it can contribute to a wide range of common and serious diseases.
The Centre for Regenerative Medicine (CRM) studies stem cells, disease and tissue repair to advance human health. Researchers at CRM are working on developing new treatments for major diseases including cancer, heart disease, liver failure, diabetes, and degenerative diseases such as multiple sclerosis and Parkinson's.
We also study the frequency of cardiometabolic diseases in the population and explore patterns to help us identify risk factors and potential causes. This work is carrid out in our Centre for Population Health Sciences and Centre for Medical Informatics.
PhDs and Masters at the Centre for Inflammation Research
PhD and Masters by Research in Cardiovascular Science
Centre for Cardiovascular Science
Centre for Inflammation Research
Centre for Regenerative Medicine
Centre for Population Health Sciences