Hemenway is a Multiple Intelligences School where student instruction is based upon the belief that all students can learn and achieve at high levels. Hemenway teachers work collaboratively to design lessons that incorporate the array of human intelligences to ensure that all students, who possess a wide variety of learning styles and challenges, can access and master Common Core curriculum standards. We are committed to the belief that all students can learn with high levels of achievement. We provide clearly defined, high expectations for student learning across all curriculum areas.
This year as a staff, we will continue to focus and to work together to develop teaching moves, routines and strategies that promote “making student thinking visible,” which will ensure that all students are engaged in meaningful learning across the curriculum. In addition to high academic standards, we have high standards for student behavior.
At Hemenway, we use the Open Circle program, which focuses on social-emotional learning [SEL] in grades kindergarten through grade five. Social and emotional learning is the process of developing essential social emotional skills, knowledge, and attitudes related to five key areas: self-awareness, self-management, social awareness, relationship skills, and responsible decision-making.
Hemenway School’s PBIS team, in collaboration with staff and administration, has developed the HemenWAY Positive Behavior Matrix and implemented the Hemenway PAWsitive Behavioral Intervention Program. The PAWSitive Behavior Program is based upon a systemic approach to proactive, explicitly taught and practiced behavioral expectations for school-wide behavior and the Response to Intervention model. As a school we are continuing to focus on further developing our positive behavioral interventions and supports. Our goal is for all students to increase their academic performance, to improve school safety and to continue to build upon our positive school culture.
We strive to create a learning environment where students learn through real-life experiences. Students learn by integrating and connecting math concepts into their daily lives, experiencing hands-on science, and viewing themselves as life-long readers and writers. Our goal is to provide students with the necessary skills to be true world citizens, as well as to acquire twenty-first century skills to succeed in college and the workplace.