Middle schools require English/Language Arts, Mathematics, Science, and Social Studies
for all students in grades six, seven and eight in time blocks which would equate to
approximately four (4) hours or the majority of the school day. English/Language Arts is
taught in an integrated manner during one continuous block of time. In addition, Health/
Physical Education is required for all middle school students.
Beginning with the 2015-2016 year, the state of North Carolina will be using a ten-point
grading scale for all students as shown on the table below.
Grade Numerical Value
Students will cover the following learning standards within this unit
Key Ideas and Details:
Cite several pieces of textual evidence to support analysis of what the text says explicitly as well as inferences drawn from the text.
Determine a theme or central idea of a text and analyze its development over the course of the text; provide an objective summary of the text.
Analyze how particular elements of a story or drama interact (e.g., how setting shapes the characters or plot).
Craft and Structure:
Determine the meaning of words and phrases as they are used in a text, including figurative and connotative meanings; analyze the impact of rhymes and other repetitions of sounds (e.g., alliteration) on a specific verse or stanza of a poem or section of a story or drama.
Analyze how a drama's or poem's form or structure (e.g., soliloquy, sonnet) contributes to its meaning
Analyze how an author develops and contrasts the points of view of different characters or narrators in a text.
Integration of Knowledge and Ideas:
Compare and contrast a written story, drama, or poem to its audio, filmed, staged, or multimedia version, analyzing the effects of techniques unique to each medium (e.g., lighting, sound, color, or camera focus and angles in a film).
Compare and contrast a fictional portrayal of a time, place, or character and a historical account of the same period as a means of understanding how authors of fiction use or alter history.
The syllabus page shows a table-oriented view of the course schedule, and the basics of course grading. You can add any other comments, notes, or thoughts you have about the course structure, course policies or anything else.
To add some comments, click the "Edit" link at the top.