Efficient action at all levels to save lives
Reduce sufferings &
Minimize damage to property
Public Education on all types of disasters
through awareness campaigns
Provision for issuing early warnings
Organization of People
Disaster Management Training &
Emergency food stock
Affects the lives of many people each year
Within minutes a natural disaster can shatter
Their lives could be changed for ever.
c) Technological Needs
d) Self Reliance
e) Communication Infrastructure
f) Emergency Preparedness
On various resources, skills, & services required
for relief at short notice.
It will have information on safety equipments,
oxygen cylinders & various other equipments,
skills and other information required to deal with
One of the most difficult problems to be
handled is the organization of supply chain for
This system could not be integrated with the GIS
system so that supplies could be tracked right
upto the village.
This needs to be done. Likewise, other elements
of logistics need to be put in place.
The community self-reliance, lot of aid led to
excessive inventory at the household level
leading to reduced incentives for work and
Likewise, there were areas where communities
came together to help each other.
The lessons of community self-help need to
be put together.
A database of volunteers who can move at
short notice will need to be developed.
Whole range of technical questions regarding
buildings, cutting concrete slabs, rescue and
relief emerged which needed to be solved on the
The best practices have to be put in use.
This is a serious problem and has to be
resolved once for all.
It will require network of ham radios, use of All
India Radio, Television Channels & setting up
help lines, etc.
We will also have to create information
dissemination system and develop mechanism
for capacity building.
Drills will have to be organized to keep society
prepared for dealing with such emergencies.
One will have to learn from the experience of
other similar drills.
Wherever possible, disasters which can be
anticipated over time or space need to be looked
For instance, buildings erected on land fill areas
which were wetlands or low lying areas were
more likely to get damaged, as was borne out by
the recent evidence.
“Knowledge and Preparation”
are the keys to survival in the event of a
Do you want to be prepared?
Do you want to be surprised?
Make disaster preparations at home.
Survivalism is a state of mind.
Disasters happen anytime and anywhere.
And when disaster strikes, you may not have
much time to respond.
A highway spill or hazardous material could
A winter storm could confine your family at
home. An earthquake, flood, tornado, or any
other disaster could cut water, electricity, and
After a disaster, local officials and relief workers
will be on the scene, but they cannot reach
You could get help in hours, or it may
Would your family be prepared to cope
with the emergency until help arrives?
Your family will cope best by
preparing for disaster before it
One way to prepare is by assembling a Disaster
Once disaster hits, you won't have time to shop
or search for supplies.
But if you've gathered supplies in advance, your
family can endure an evacuation or home
the checklist below.
Gather the supplies that are listed. You may
need them if your family is confined at home.
the supplies you'd most likely need for an
evacuation in an easy-to-carry container.
supplies are listed with an asterisk (*).
6 basic items to be stocked for your home
clothing and bedding
tools and emergency supplies &
the items that you would most likely
need during an evacuation in an easy-to
Store water in plastic containers such as soft
drink bottles, etc.
Avoid using containers that will decompose or
break, such as milk cartons or glass bottles.
A normally active person needs to drink at least 5
Ls of water each day.
Hot environments and intense physical
activity can double that amount.
Children, nursing mothers, and ill people
will need more. Store 10 Ls of water per
person per day.
Keep at least a three-day supply of water
per person (30 Ls for drinking, 30 Ls for
each person in your household for food
Store at least a three-day supply of nonperishable food.
Select foods that require no refrigeration,
preparation or cooking, and little or no water.
If you must heat food, pack a can of sterno.
Select food items that are compact and
Ready-to-eat canned meats, fruits, and vegetables
Staples (salt, sugar, pepper, spices, etc.)
High energy foods
Food for infants
Assemble a first aid kit for your home & one for each
A first aid kit should include:
Sterile adhesive bandages in assorted sizes
Assorted sizes of safety pins
Latex gloves (2 pairs)
2-inch sterile gauze pads (4-6)
4-inch sterile gauze pads (4-6)
Triangular bandages (3)
2-inch sterile roller bandages (3 rolls)
3-inch sterile roller bandages (3 rolls)
Tongue blades (2)
Tube of petroleum jelly or other lubricant
Aspirin or nonaspirin pain reliever
Antacid (for stomach upset)
Syrup of Ipecac (use to induce vomiting if
advised by the Poison Control Center)
Activated charcoal (use if advised by the
Poison Control Center)
Mess kits, or paper cups, plates, and plastic
Emergency preparedness manual*
Battery-operated radio and extra batteries*
Flashlight and extra batteries*
Cash or traveler's checks, change*
Non-electric can opener, utility knife*
Fire extinguisher: small canister ABC type
Matches in a waterproof container
Plastic storage containers
Shut-off wrench, to turn off household gas
Map of the area (for locating shelters)
*Include at least one complete change of
clothing & footwear per person
Sturdys shoes or work boots*
Blankets or sleeping bags*
Hat and gloves
Remember family members with special requirements,
such as infants and elderly or disabled persons
Heart and high blood pressure medication
Contact lenses and supplies
Extra eye glasses
Keep these records in a waterproof, portable
insurance policies, contracts deeds,
stocks and bonds
social security cards, immunization
card account numbers and companies
Inventory of valuable household goods,
important telephone numbers
Family records (birth, marriage, death
Store your kit in a convenient place known to all
Keep a smaller version of the Disaster Supplies
Kit in the trunk of your car.
items in airtight plastic bags.
your stored water supply every six
months so it stays fresh.
your stored food every six months.
your kit and family needs at least
once a year.
batteries, update clothes, etc.
your physician or pharmacist about
storing prescription medications.
In a fire or other similar emergency, evacuate
on a moments notice.
Develop an escape plan by drawing a floor
plan of your residence’
Show the location of doors,
large furniture & emergency supplies;