Astronomy is a branch of science that is used to study the stars, the planets, and the universe. Astronomers are the ones who study the heavens, and they often use physics and math combined to understand the parts of the universe. These scientists are vastly important for understanding weather patterns and other phenomena. In this article, potential astronomers will find more information about the salary of astronomers, what goes into their determined salary, and what can affect an astronomer salary from time to time.
Astronomer Salary Influencers
Just like with any other career out there, astronomers’ salary can be influenced by several factors. The industry, geographical area, and even the experience of the astronomer are all things that can influence how much the scientist can make in a year’s time. Below is a deeper look into these factors.
The industry will greatly influence how much an astronomer is paid during the year. If the industry for astronomy is higher during certain parts of the year, an astronomer might get a certain bonus during that time for added work. Astronomers might also have to work more during these times which would affect pay.
The industry can also influence the job outlook for astronomy. Since astronomy is not a career in high demand, the industry can affect the need for more astronomers. The job outlook will be discussed later in this article.
2. Geographical Area
In the graph and information below, readers can see how much astronomers typically make on average in their respective countries. These numbers will vary from job to job, however.
|Astronomer Salary||Hourly Wage||Annual Wage|
Astronomer Salary in the US
In the United States, astronomers can expect to make a median of $55.23 an hour. That seems like quite a bit, and rightly so. Astronomers do a great deal of difficult research that requires a great knowledge of the universe, physics, and math. On average, astronomers make around $114,870 a year.
Astronomer Salary in Canada
The cost of living in Canada is higher than in the United States. Astronomers in this area typically make a bit more than those living in the US due to this cost of living. The average hourly wage for astronomers in Canada is around $61 an hour. Their annual wage is around $126,093 each year.
Astronomer Salary in the UK
When deciding to become an astronomer in the United Kingdom, professionals should consider the cost of living as well as the hourly pay. Their hourly pay averages to $32 an hour with an annual salary of $66,732 each year. This can vary depending on the company.
Astronomer Salary in Australia
Australia pays their astronomers an average of $173,855 each year, which figures up to an average of $84 an hour. Since their cost of living is higher than the United States, their salary is often higher, especially for their astronomers.
Astronomer Salary in Switzerland
When it comes to the annual salary for an astronomer in Switzerland, they tend to make an average of $123,495 each year. This number equals around $59 an hour, which is a great sum. Their cost of living is much higher than the cost in the US, which makes a difference in the salary.
Astronomer Salary in Norway
When converting the Norwegian currency to US currency, astronomers in Norway make an average of $914,168 each year in salary. This high number equals $440 an hour! The number seems huge, but it is close to the US number when considering the currency change and their cost of living.
Experience has a great effect on how much an astronomer makes in a year’s time. In fact, the experience might surprise readers in this situation. According to Payscale, an astronomer with five to ten years experience can be expected to make almost $20,000 less than an astronomer with less than five years experience when coming onto a new job.
However, those who are in a late career as an astronomer will make quite a bit more money, almost $20,000 more than someone who is just starting out with less than five years experience in the career. All-in-all, having experience can harm an astronomer who is seeking a new job. However, this all depends on where the scientist works and what their company has to offer.
Typically, astronomers work normal full-time jobs in the normal hours of other careers. They might work a general forty hours a week, or a typical 9-5 job schedule. Some astronomers might be required to work at night depending on their job requirements.
Then again, astronomers who work for certain companies might be required to visit observatories during the year for research. However, all of the working hours will vary from company to company depending on what they research and study.
Bonuses & Benefits Packages
Astronomers are often given the same sorts of bonuses and benefits as other professionals in a scientific career. They have the ability to receive bonuses at Christmastime, bonuses for hard work, and even pay raises. This depends entirely on the company that the scientist works for and their policies about bonuses.
As for benefits, astronomers have the chance to have medical, dental, and vision insurance benefits at their job. Again, this will depend entirely on the company and what benefits they offer to employees, including those who are working in astronomy.
Astronomy is not a job in high demand. In fact, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the job outlook for astronomy from 2014 to 2024 is only 7%. The career is not growing quite as quickly as other jobs out there, but there are still available positions in many areas.
Working with aircraft, especially space craft can use astronomers greatly. Meteorologists might use astronomy as well. The job outlook for astronomy is pretty average for jobs of this kind in the science or mathematical fields.
Those seeking a job in astronomy should consider first their education. It takes certain levels of education to start a career. Another thing to consider is the amount of experience the potential astronomer has, whether the benefits of the company are worthwhile, and the potential job outlook. The things mentioned above can help anyone who might be considering the possibility of a career in astronomy.
Leave a Reply