Carbon emissions are the highest they’ve ever been in human history.
In a nutshell
The amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere has been increasing for decades due to human-induced climate change. In May, it broke a record: Carbon dioxide levels in our atmosphere are now 50 per cent higher than what they were in pre-industrial times (before humans began widespread burning of fossil fuels).
We are currently living in a time where there is more carbon dioxide in our atmosphere than at any point in human history.
According to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) in the United States, the last time there was this much carbon dioxide in the atmosphere was at least four million years ago.
The news comes as the Environmental Protection Agency warned that Ireland is way off tracking in meeting its emission-reduction targets.
A warming world
The world is heating rapidly, we’re already between 1.1C and 1.2C warmer than pre-industrial levels. Anything above 1.5C will have catastrophic and irreversible consequences for life on the planet.
Ireland is a high-emitting country and therefore carries a disproportionate share of the responsibility to reduce emissions. If every country on Earth emitted the same amount of greenhouse gases as Ireland on a per-capita basis, the world would already be more than 3C warmer than pre-industrial levels.
The Climate and Low Carbon Development Act requires that Ireland’s carbon budgets align with the 2015 Paris Agreement, a pact which asked all nations to limit global warming to 2C and ideally strive for 1.5C. We now know that it has to be 1.5C.
The latest IPCC report gave the world just 30 months (until 2025) to kick the fossil fuel habit. If we don't, we will not avoid the worst impacts of climate change, the UN panel of climate scientists has warned.
Every tonne counts
For each tonne of carbon dioxide emitted, the average global temperature will increase. So everything we don’t use, don’t burn or don’t emit counts.
In order to have just a 50 per cent chance of limiting global warming to 1.5C, planet Earth can only emit another 500 billion tonnes of carbon from 2020. That works out to be 60 tonnes per person.
So for Ireland, we should only use about 300 million tonnes of carbon dioxide. This is less that the proposed emission budgets that were just approved in the Dáil. And that assumes that no one goes over budget.
The first carbon budget will last until 2025. It allows for a total of 295 million tonnes of emissions to be produced in the country.
Between 2026 and 2030, the next carbon budget will allow 200 million tonnes of emissions and the following five year period will allow 151 million tonnes.
This means that Ireland is budgeting to almost double what would be considered its fair share of carbon emissions.
Maintaining current emissions, Ireland would use up its global carbon budget by 2027. After that, remaining carbon emissions would have to be taken out of the atmosphere. The natural way to do that is to plant trees, rewet bogs and generally give space over to nature. However the biodiversity crisis that was declared by the Irish government at the same time as the climate one, has received a lot less air time.
The technological solution of removing carbon dioxide is costly and difficult.
The International Energy Agency (IEA) found that in 2020, 31.5 billion tonnes of carbon dioxide were emitted. To put that in context, the world’s largest carbon capture plant can extract 4,000 tonnes of carbon dioxide per year - and it only opened last September.