Hurricane season is nearly here and, according to the experts at AccuWeather, this year promises to be “above normal”. This season follows on the heels of four consecutive years with above-average hurricane activity, as noted by AccuWeather experts.
Predictions made by this team has hit the mark year after year, indicating that we can trust their predictions for this year too.
This is video footage from Hurricane Earl in 1998 provided by Videvo.
This year, AccuWeather predicts that the Atlantic coast will see between 14 and 18 tropical storms, with between seven and nine of these developing into full-blown hurricanes. To make things worse, two to four of these will probably develop into major hurricanes.
Compare this to a typical year, and you’ll understand the concern. On average, a yearly total of 12 storms develop on the Atlantic coast. Of these, six strengthen into hurricanes, while only three are rated major hurricanes.
Of these storms, AccuWeather’s team predicts that two to four could impact the coast in 2020, potentially causing significant damage.
Prepare Your Home with Hurricane Protection Now and Enjoy Peace of Mind throughout the 2021 Hurricane Season
Click the button below to request your free estimate.
To aid in this prediction, the meteorologists at AccuWeather used data from analog years. These are years with comparable weather conditions, such as 1980 and 2005.
1980 saw Hurricane Allen, a Category 5 storm, devastate Haiti before moving on to Texas, killing more than 200 people. 2005 was baffling with a total of 28 storms in one year.
To put this into perspective: the World Meteorological Organization ran out of predetermined names for these storms, so the last few storms were assigned Greek letters instead of names. The World Meteorological Organization update their list of predetermined names yearly, before the start of hurricane season.
To illustrate the upward trend in storm activity over the past decade, we’ve compiled the numbers in the following chart.
Data was sourced from Stromfax.com, NOAA and Scientific American. Note: The data for the year 2020 is based on predictions by AccuWeather.
It is clear that, since 2014, storm activity has increased sharply yearly. AccuWeather’s 2020 predictions are in line with this trend. In short, brace yourself for a potentially threatening hurricane season.
It is a well-known fact that hurricanes cause an incredible amount of damage. The 18 Atlantic storms of 2019 caused $11 billion in damage.
Hurricane Katrina which made landfall in 2005 generated $215 billion in damage and 1200 deaths. This is the costliest storm on record, tied with 2017’s Hurricane Harvey.
You can mitigate the potential hurricane damage by taking the proper precautions before the storm hits. These include installing high-quality hurricane shutters, such as those from Hurricane Shutter Pros.
Hurricane season stretches from June through November, but hurricanes sometimes arrive early or dissipate later in the year. In 2019, Andrea formed southwest of Bermuda on 20-21 May, while Tropical Storm Zeta raged from late December 2005 to early January 2006.
Don’t let hurricane season catch you off guard. Call Hurricane Shutter Pros at 305-834-4311 today for a free quote.
With high-quality hurricane shutters in place, your property can weather the worst of the storm, minimizing the damage resulting from a major hurricane that made landfall in your area. If 2020 has taught us anything, we need to prepare for the worst conditions.
Click the button below to request a FREE estimate from us!
We’ll visit your home, take all necessary measurements and give you a quote on the spot.