Light Solid Paraffin less than 1%
Light Solid Paraffin 1% – 2%
Heavy Solid Paraffin 1% – 3%
Heavy Solid Paraffin 3% – 5%
Heavy Solid Paraffin 5% – 7%
In chemistry there are substances called alkanes known as the chemical formula CnH2n + 2. In fact, paraffin is a generic name for this group of substances, the alkanes. Admittedly, what is a paraffin question is not limited to the science of chemistry, and the answer to that question and the general nature of paraffin can be found elsewhere.
Normally, simply put, paraffin can be described as a petroleum substance that is found in the market in either liquid or solid form. Solid paraffin has a jelly state and is sometimes known as paraffin wax. In fact, whenever it comes to paraffin wax, the main purpose is solid paraffin.
Jelly and solid paraffin have long been used to make candle varieties more than ever. Of course, as we have progressed over time, other applications of paraffin have been added. Applications We will outline some of these in the following. Paraffin is also used more than any other activity for industrial use. Of course, in addition to solid and liquid types, paraffin can also be classified into other formats.
Types and applications of solid paraffin
The discovery of paraffin gave a new boom to candle manufacturing, meat packaging, and the oil industry in the early 20th century. Solid paraffin can generally be classified into three categories: oral paraffin, health paraffin and industrial paraffin. In the meantime, many of us have been exposed to many of the three species mentioned throughout our lives. Things we sometimes do not even know about are known as a type of paraffin.
You may also have a particular illness that you or a loved one may have, and you should be instructed by your physician to take a medication to ease the X-ray of your internal organs. In fact, the drug is one of the oral forms of paraffin. A wide variety of edible paraffin species are generally used in the pharmaceutical industry.
Health paraffins are also widely used in cosmetics. Accessories like ointments or different creams are widely used by people. For example, some emollient creams are used to make paraffin.
Lubrication in the industry
In the industry too, the use of paraffin is mostly defined in the form of substances called lubricants. Lubricants are materials that are used to reduce friction between moving surfaces and make their movement on one another easier and smoother than usual.
Granular solid paraffin
There is also another type of solid paraffin known as granular solid paraffin. This particular type of paraffin is widely used in many industries. Perhaps the most common and familiar use of solid granule paraffin can be found in the rubber industry.
If you would like to place an order or receive advice about this product, please contact our experts.