Springtime in the South is glorious. The weather is warm, the sun is shining and… the insects are swarming. The warmth and humidity of spring in the South entices many species of insects to leave their winter habitats to feed and reproduce. Many of these insects are just a nuisance but some of them can be hazards to people and property. Learn which insects to watch for and what you can do to protect yourself and your home. And if those precautions fail, learn how Bug Out can help.
Insects That Swarm in Spring
Many bugs are known to swarm in spring but these are some of the most common or problematic swarming bugs:
Termites: Termites begin swarming in the early spring months to establish new colonies. When termites are mating, you’ll typically find wings on the ground because termites shed their wings when they mate. If mating is happening on your property, then you are at risk of a termite infestation if you don’t already have one.
Wasps: In the warmer months, the queen will come out of hibernation and begin looking for food. If you see wasps flying low to the ground in your yard, they are likely looking for grubs, larvae, or insects for the queen or her brood.
Bees: If bees are swarming on your property, they’re likely seeking food and shelter. Watch for the construction of bees’ nests in trees or on the eaves of your home. Carpenter bees can be especially concerning. They’re large, solitary bees often seen hovering near wooden structures in spring. They are important pollinators but can cause damage to wooden structures. They drill holes in wood to make their nests, which is how they get their name.
Ladybugs: Ladybugs are a type of beetle that is often seen in large numbers in spring. They are beneficial insects that help control aphids and other garden pests.
Lovebugs: Lovebugs are a type of fly known for their distinctive mating swarms. They are typically found in the southeastern United States.
Moths: Several species of moths, including the white-lined sphinx moth and the eastern tent caterpillar, are known to swarm in spring
Stinkbugs: Stinkbugs are a common insect in [city] and can be seen swarming in spring. While they are not harmful to humans, they can be a nuisance in large numbers.
How to Keep Insect Swarms Away
Keep your yard clear
To keep insects away, you’ll want to keep your yard clear of any kind of debris that could be a habitat for insects, including leaves, sticks and any fruit that may fall from fruit trees. Keeping your lawn mowed short can also help. Stack firewood, ideally off the ground, away from buildings, and covered by a tarp.
Be careful with food and drinks outdoors
Spring is a great time for barbecues and picnics but Bees and especially wasps are attracted to protein-rich foods like the meat you or your neighbors will be cooking. They’re also attracted to sugary drinks. To keep bees and wasps from making an uninvited appearance at your picnic or BBQ, be sure to seal up leftovers promptly and keep sugary drinks sealed or covered as much as possible.
Prevent water from collecting
Many different types of pests are attracted to water, either for breeding or for drinking. There are many items in our yards that can easily fill with water given how stormy spring in the South can be. Whether it’s a birdbath, an empty bucket, a flower pot or a trash can lid, or even a puddle in the yard, try to prevent water from accumulating on your property.
Expert Termite & Pest Control
At [company] we provide comprehensive pest control services to help keep insects away from your home in the spring and all year round. Don’t go through another season of not being able to enjoy your outdoor space. Contact us today and get a free quote.