variations of physical properties, like density, electric resistivity, and seismic velocity. Such properties are remotely sensed and aimed to describe a site while analyzing diverse factors. These factors include contamination, groundwater, geology, and more. A lot of geophysics tools and techniques are used for the exploration of economic materials like groundwater, metals, or hydrocarbons. Paul Favret has magna cum laude in Geology and Geophysics from the University of South Carolina and has worked in the oil and gas industry for years.
Paul Favret shares light on the applications of geophysical data
Broadly speaking, geophysical data is used to provide information on the physical properties of the surface and subsurface of the Earth. With the assistance of geophysical data, people may locate minerals, hydrocarbons, and diverse other types of natural resources. Geophysical data can also be quite helpful in the process of slope stability assessment, environmental monitoring, and geologic mapping. The use of this data is pretty widespread in the domains of hydrology, studying permafrost, as well as infrastructure planning and monitoring.
In many cases, mineral explorers and other professionals make use of geographical data for the purpose of geologic mapping. They also leverage the data to determine the mineral potential of a region and identify the location of mineral deposits. Magnetic data can help in differentiating and mapping geological units, indicate faults, show areas of alteration, and locate geologic units. Radiometric data is typically useful for differentiating surficial material and intrusive rocks. Gravity data can be used for targeting particular deposits, improving the geologic understanding of an area, and determining the depth of fill.
Very often, seismic data can be used for geologic mapping structures acting as potential hydrocarbon traps, and help in defining subsurface sequence stratigraphy. Seismic attribute values and patterns might also be used as direct hydrocarbon indicators. Typically, gravity data and magnetic data are also important in determining basin geometry and generating other subsurface models. They help in locating large-scale geologic structures that provide potential hydrocarbon traps and pathways. The knowledge of geophysics helps professionals like Paul Favret to capably handle tasks in the oil and gas industry.
Electromagnetic data is commonly used to map permafrost. Non-saline frozen sediments that contain low amounts of free water are resistive. On the other hand, thawed sediments with high water content are conductive. Seismic, magnetic, gravity, and ground penetrating radar data may even be used for several engineering geology applications. These applications range from geo-hazard mitigation and hydrology to infrastructure support. Discrete global grid system collection of airborne magnetic and electromagnetic data is helpful in identifying permafrost, faults, depth of fill, and even changes in rock type when a resistivity or magnetic susceptibility contrast is present. While on the other hand, electromagnetic data aid in identifying subsurface freshwater resources. Detailed gravity surveys can be carried out to acquire depth-of-fill information needed for proper infrastructure planning and understanding of hydrology. Various types of seismic methods can be used to determine fill depth and to gain a better understanding of the mechanical properties of the subsurface materials.