For the past nine years, Michael Sherwin visited and photographed ancient earthworks, sacred landforms, documented archeological sites, and contested battlegrounds of Native American people.
A Landscape Photography Contest Rewards Unique Approaches to the Genre
The photographs that win competitions and go viral, NLPA organizer Matt Payne observed, “have mostly been manipulated in Photoshop to grab your attention and blow you out of the water.”
Mary Mattingly Confronts Climate Change With Utopic Resourcefulness
Mattingly’s landscape photographs evoke each site’s geologic timeline.
Edward Burtynsky Depicts Our Alien Domain
The photographer’s large-scale images depict landscapes altered and scarred by human industry and development.
Changes on the Land: 19th-Century American Photography East of the Mississippi
East of the Mississippi highlights how early photographic efforts homed in on Americans’ leisure pursuits, particularly travel to popular getaway spots such as Niagara Falls and New England’s White Mountains.
Photographs of North America’s East Coast Capture Its Fragile Ecosystems
Photographer David Freese journeyed along the continent’s eastern shoreline, documenting it in the face of climate change.
Overlooked 19th-Century Landscape Photos from East of the Mississippi
An exhibition at the National Gallery of Art highlights the environmental and artistic influence of 19th-century landscape photography in the eastern United States.
The Beauty and Devastation of Mankind’s Impact on Earth
In his book Overview: A New Perspective of Earth, photographer Benjamin Grant uses satellite imagery to convey the enormity of mankind’s effects on the planet.
Aerial Views of Where America’s Grid Bends to the Curvature of the Earth
As any traveler who’s gazed out the window of an airplane while flying over the United States knows, the grid reigns.
Hyperreal Landscapes, Digitally Transformed
Presenting vitas of sweeping landscapes paired with serene color gradients, Mark Dorf’s photographs of the Rocky Mountains of Colorado ferry nature into fantasy.
Where Primordial Lava Flows into Ice
Iceland, more than most places on the planet, frequently reveals the cataclysmic activity below its crust through volcanoes, fissures, and geothermal pools.
Photographing a 21st-Century Landscape When the Land Itself Is Disappearing
There’s never been much of a unified scene when it comes to capturing landscapes in art, but maybe more even than before artists are very experimental with how to show a stretch of space.