Skills such as taking a first step, smiling for the first time, and waving “bye bye” are called developmental milestones. Children reach milestones in how they play, learn, speak, act, and move (crawling, walking, etc.). To see if your child is on track for their age, visit the CDC Milestones page for videos, images, fact sheets, and more.
123 Magic is a 3-Step discipline plan for calm, effective, and happy parenting. While you can purchase this program and related materials, there are also regular newsletters with helpful tips. Find out more by visiting their website.
The Center for Exceptional Families is an organization whose goal is to assist Arkansans’ with disabilities in attaining an exceptional quality of life! The site offers newsletters, articles, and other resources to help families and children with special needs to improve educational opportunities. They also organize Sensory Saturdays, a local event that allows children with sensory disorders to watch movies in a safe and accepting environment. Visit their website for more information.
Conscious Discipline provides a proven and comprehensive approach that will empower you with the self-awareness, brain information, developmental knowledge and useable skills necessary to create safe, connected, problem-solving home. Their site offers tools, implementation guides, and other tips and resources to help parents with child discipline.
This is guide offers an introduction to new KULA parents as well as serves as a reference for existing parents to KULA guidelines and procedures. The handbook includes information on Staff, Departures & Arrivals, policies for severe weather, and much more.
This is guide created for teachers and caregivers is a helpful resource for parents as well. It offers information on Kindergarten readiness to help your child stay on track and prepare for Kindergarten. Content includes information about milestones your child should reach prior to entering Kindergarten as well as information about other resources.
The CDC Learn the Signs. Act Early site offers milestone information on ages birth through age 5, Autism Case Training, resources for parents and education providers. There are multimedia tools and training resources as well. Visit their site for more information.
Arkansas School for the Deaf offers Outreach Support Services and is committed to all children who are deaf and hard of hearing, their families, and service providers, by giving unbiased information on child development, language acquisition, and appropriate intervention to prepare children to reach their fullest potential.
All services are provided at no cost. Visit their site for more information.
Today, more than a dozen children will come into foster care in Arkansas because of abuse or neglect. They will join nearly 4,500 other children in state custody. This year, more than 7,000 children will spend time in foster care. Children are placed in emergency shelters, group homes or residential facilities. Siblings are often separated because there is not a home available to take them as a group. Having a pool of available foster and adoptive families in every county in Arkansas would go a long way toward solving the problem.
For information about how you can help, visit their site for more information.
ConnectCare can help you find a doctor/PCP or dentist for you and your family, or change your doctor/PCP, if you are on Arkansas Medicaid or your child is on ArKids First.
View the interactive list of doctors in each county who see Medicaid patients. AFMC makes every effort to provide the most current information. Primary Care Providers change locations and this may not be reflected in the city and county listed.
Need help finding a doctor or PCP? Call the ConnectCare helpline: Toll-free 1-800-275-1131 (TDD: 1-800-285-1131) Monday through Friday 8 a.m. – 4:30 p.m.
You can apply for TEFRA by downloading this entire TEFRA application packet, filling out the required forms, and submitting it to your local DHS County Office. Approval of your child’s application to the program is based on the eligibility requirements that are explained on the TEFRA Eligibility page.
The application process is easy. You can apply for both ARKids A and B at the same time. Apply online at https://access.arkansas.gov. If your computer has Adobe Acrobat Reader you can fill out the application online. If not, the print the application. If you are using a public computer and are not sure, simply ask for assistance. Applications are also available throughout your community at many local health units, hospitals, churches, daycare centers, pharmacies and public schools. You may also request an application to be mailed to you by DHS. Once you complete the application you can either mail it or deliver it to your local DHS office.
All About KULA
Did you know we are now open at our Springdale location? If you are interested in enrolling your child, please call 479-750-1500!
Posted by Kids Unlimited Learning Academy on Wednesday, October 16, 2019
Look Again – DECAL’s Awareness Campaign for Families and Child Care Providers
Safercar.gov Car Seat Safety Video
KULA Services Brochure
A brief overview of the services that Kids Unlimited Learning Academy provides.
Amazing Me. It’s Busy Being Three!
This book from the CDC introduces children to Joey, an amazing 3-year-old kangaroo who is very excited about all he can do now that he is three. Joey doesn’t know it, but these amazing things are called developmental milestones, and they’re a very important part of each child’s growth.
This is Miracle Kids Success Academy and Kids Unlimited Learning Academy’s COVID-19 Procedures.
MKSA/KULA Transportation Safety Video
MKSA/KULA Transportation Playground Count Video
MKSA/KULA Hand Washing Video
MKSA/KULA Food Service Video
Is Your Child On Track?
How your child plays, learns, speaks and acts offer important clues about his development.
Do you have questions about your child’s development? View our milestone checklist to see if your child is where he/she should be at this stage in their development.
Still have concerns? Complete the form below to contact our staff to discuss your concerns, schedule a tour of our facility, or make an appointment to speak with our staff.
Kids Unlimited Learning Academy
Ft. Smith: 479-755-6601
The Speech-Language Pathologist and Homeschooled Clients: An Overview of Practice Strategies
Kristen Crain, M.S. CF-SLP