The students became young authors and worked with their classmates to create an original story. They presented their stories to their schoolmates, who then voted for their favorite.
Let’s take a look at what they came up with!
This story is about a young frog who loves to read. He reads all day long, and even dreams about it at night! The frog learns that there is a reading competition in the sky to determine the best reader. He’s confident he can win, there’s just one problem. He can’t fly.The frog is determined to compete, so he asks a bird, who is also a mail carrier, for a ride. The bird refuses, saying he is busy at work. The frog sneaks himself into a scroll and disguises himself as mail. He eventually arrives to the competition and WINS!
This story is about an ant who has big dreams for her and her family. As the title suggests, the ant spends all her time reading and studying. Her favorite books are ones about how to be a caring ant ,and how to produce food for her and her family. One day, her family doesn't have any food to eat, so she remembers what she read about growing their own food, and starts a garden outside her house.
Their story, titled “The Pigeon and the Ants” is about a pigeon who spends its time bullying the ants that work underneath the the tree that holds her nest. The pigeon constantly destroys the ant’s little houses. One day, the ants organize and climb the tree to ruin the pigeon’s nest. When the pigeon returns, they talk it out, and the pigeon agrees to treat the ants with respect. The story ends with them becoming best friends.
This is a story of the importance of reading and protecting their rights. “Father Rabbit” is set on a quaint farm. Mother Rabbit, Father Rabbit, Brother Rabbit and Sister Rabbit live on and tend to the farm.Their farm is in danger when a more powerful rabbit decides he is the owner of the land and presents a document, which he claimed gave him ownership of the family’s farm. However, Father Rabbit knows how to read, realizes that it is a fake document, and saves the farm.
We’re thrilled to see the students at Patzilin Abaj produce such great work, and we're determined to work alongside the community to foster their creativity through the Pathway to Literacy Project.