“No great achievement is possible without persistent work.”- Bertrand Russell
What does PERSISTENT mean? The definition of PERSISTENT is continuing firmly or obstinately in a course of action despite difficulty or opposition.
Being PERSISTENT is not always automatic because so much can get in the way and as you begin Day 27 of our KINDolutions challenge, being PERSISTENT will play a BIG PART in how you participate.
Persistence is probably one of the most admirable characteristics a person can possess. It’s the ability to be determined to do or achieve something regardless of any setbacks. When you are persistent, giving up is not an option. Of course, when you are in the moment of adversity you maybe feel like there is no other choice but to give up. However, when you are a persistent person, giving up is a thought that lingers in your mind, yet is not an action you take. Someone who is persistent not only keeps focused on their goals, but they also never give up on the relationships and the people that mean so much to them no matter what. Being someone who is persistent will give you the strength you need to push through challenging circumstances and not be stopped by problems. Where there’s a will, there’s a way! One of the ways great friends are always persistent in supporting their friends’ goals and dreams is by encouraging them not to give up when they really want to. Some important things to remember are to always keep your goal in mind, set boundaries for yourself and others, and have patience. When these attributes, along with all the other KINDolution attributes, are set in place you have started your journey of being a persistent person who will always ensure kindness is part of your persistent approach to being a greater person.
At www.idareu2bee.com we believe persistence is the tool that helps you achieve everything and has you become the type of person that will be kind, even if and when others are not exactly kind to you. Two wrongs do not make a right and a persistent kind heart will always win in the end.
Today we challenge you to do a KINDNESS ASSESSMENT. The assessment is simple and at times you may struggle, yet this is where your MIGHTY COURAGE kicks in.
Do not give up, do not give in because building your kindness superpowers will have you win!
Get Ready, Get Set and GROW forward with your GIGANTIC KIND HEART.
KINDNESS ASSESSMENT DAY 27
- Are you willing to practice being persistent and acknowledging when you have thoughts of giving up?
If YOU ANSWERED YES, GREAT! Scroll down to STEP 2.
If YOU ANSWERED NO, stay right here and ask yourself this question.
Why are you NOT willing to practice acknowledging when things get tough and you are not practicing being persistent?
Think about what may be preventing you from practicing being persistent, especially with a goal or situation that seems hard. This is not easy to do, yet we encourage you to write your answers on a piece of paper or in your journal.
- Write on a piece of paper or in your journal 3 situations that are not easy and look to see if you are being persistent in pushing past the difficulty.
- Write out how being persistent can make you a kinder person.
NOW make today the start of practicing being persistent. Pay attention to the thoughts in your head, especially when those thoughts say you should give up. When you become aware that those thoughts are not you, it will give you the strength and persistence you need to keep going and never give up.