A cotton fabric of sturdy construction. Originally developed to make durable pants, jeans, it is also used in upholstery and slipcovers.
It is a strong and heavy warp faced cotton cloth constructed with a 3 and 1 twill weave. The warp is generally dyed in brown or blue colour and the weft is bleached yarn.
True denim is a twill weave cotton-like fabric made with different colored yarns in the warp and the weft. other. In the weaving process, the two layers of woven fabric are held together using binder threads. The woven patterns in each layer of fabric can be similar or completely different. Due to the twill construction, one color predominates on the fabric surface.
Yarn-dyed cotton cloth woven in a warp-faced twill, usually with a dyed warp and a natural weft.
A 3/1 warp-faced twill fabric made from a yarn-dyed warp and an undyed weft yarn. Traditionally, the warp yarn was indigo-dyed.
A firm 2X1 or 3X1 twill weave fabric often having a whitish tinge obtained by using white filling yarns with colored warp yarns. Heavier weight denims, usually blue, are used for dungarees, work clothes, and men's and women's sportswear. Lighter weight denims have a softer finish and come in a variety of colors and patterns for sportswear.
A very serviceable and heavy cotton twill, and easily recognized by the traditional indigo blue.
True denim is a twill-weave, cotton-like fabric made with different colored yarns in the warp and the weft. Due to the twill construction, one color predominates on the fabric surface. Name derived from French 'serge de Nimes'. Long wearing, it resists snags and tears. Comes in heavy and lighter weights.
A firm 2/1 or 3/1 right hand twill usually with a colored warp and white or natural weft. Commonly made of cotton or cotton blends in a variety of weights.
Denim denotes a rugged cotton twill textile.
A well-known basic cotton or blended fabric in a right- or left-hand woven twill. Generally, the warp (down) is dyed blue with a white filling (across). Also called "dungaree."
Denim - Denim's original birthplace was Nimes' France and it was originally called 'Serge de Nimes', Hence the name denim Today' the United States is the largest producer of denim fabric and and Cone Mills is the World Largest denim manufacturer. Denim is made by weaving dyed yarns (which are called warp yarns) with undyed, or filling yarns. Yarns can be made two different ways. They are ring-spun or open-end yarns. Ring-spun denim is the original type of denim fabric using ring-spun yarns. This denim contains unique surface characteristics referred to as slubs, giving jeans a nice authentic, vintage look. open-end denim is faster and less expensive to produce than the original ring-spun denims. Open-end denims create denim with a coarser look and feel. (Not nearly as cool as the original ring spun denim).
Denim, in American usage since the late 18th century, denotes a rugged cotton twill textile, in which the weft passes under two (twi- "double") or more warp fibers, producing the familiar diagonal ribbing identifiable on the reverse of the fabric, which distinguishes denim from cotton duck. Denim was traditionally colored blue with indigo dye to make blue "jeans," though "jean" denoted a different, lighter cotton textile. In 1789 George Washington toured a Massachusetts factory producing machine-woven cotton denim. In the mid-19th century the durability of hemp cloth, of Cannabis sativa fibers, processed as in making linen, temporarily competed with cotton.
A similarly-woven traditional American cotton textile is the diagonal warp-striped hickory cloth that was once associated with railroadmen's overalls, in which blue or black contrasting with undyed white threads form the woven pattern. Hickory cloth was as rugged as hickory timber and was worn by "hicks." Records of a group of New Yorkers headed for the California gold fields in 1849 show that they took along four "Hickory shirts" apiece. Hickory cloth later furnished some "fatigue" pantaloons and shirts in the American Civil War.
A popular etymology of the word denim is a contraction of serge de Nīmes in France. Serge weave, with a distinctly-twilled diagonal rib, is now more usually associated with sturdy woollen textiles.
Denim and modern fashion
Denim jeans have consistently been fashionable in American culture, but have changed style significantly throughout the years.
In the 1980s, tight stone-washed and acid-washed jeans were very fashionable
In the 1990s, very baggy jeans were in fashion, as part of the grunge movement
Denim jackets (or jean jackets) have wafted in and out of fashion since the 1950s. Many pop-culture icons are closely associated with the denim jacket, including:
A rugged, durable twill fabric that is most popular in indigo blue. Denim rules the casual apparel world, but it has also become popular in decorative fabrics for the home.
A strong cotton fabric used for making jeans, usually yarn-dyed blue.
True denim is a twill-weave, cotton-like fabric made with different colored yarns in the warp and the weft. Due to the twill construction, one color predominates on the fabric surface.
Tightly woven twill cotton fabric made with different colored yarns.
A sturdy cotton twill most commonly woven with an indigo blue yarn and gray or mottled white yarn. During the eighteenth century, American textile mills produced the sturdy fabric for clothes worn by manual labourers.
Usually a cotton fabric made with indigo dyed warp yarns woven with natural weft yarns in a regular twill weave.
Traditionally 100% cotton, but can now be used with other fabrics, it is a coarse twilled cloth.
A warp faced twill cloth usually dyed blue.