The course will explore how software tools for dictionary production (so-called dictionary writing systems, or DWS) can be used to streamline and facilitate the structural coherence and quality assurance in a dictionary project by focusing on Lexonomy, a dictionary-writing system developed as part of ELEXIS.
This course will introduce the theories, practices, and methods of digitizing legacy dictionaries for research, preservation and online distribution by focusing on the process of converting paper-based dictionaries to electronic format through image capture, text capture, data modeling and data enrichment.
This course will explore the notion of lexicographic evidence and the limitation of subjective views on language by tracing the changes in lexicographic practice from the extensive use of manually selected citations to the employment of large language corpora.
The goal of this course is to introduce a brief history of dictionaries as tools for the organization of knowledge about words and their meanings, and to analyze different ways of understanding and classifying the dictionary genre.
Prof. Dan O'Donnell (University of Lethbridge) discusses the CARE principles, how they sit alongside the FAIR Principles, and how (digital) humanists can apply them in their research. He presents examples from his own research, particularly around studies of historical artefacts in small rural communities in Scotland.
In this lecture, Victoria Van Hyning explores the possibilities of crowdsourcing as "cultural heritage co-creation" or "commons-based peer production", expanding on the need for further comparative analysis of design and engagement strategies for crowdsourcing projects, their resulting data and possible applications for these data in Machine Learning training sets.
In this webinar recording, Natalie Harrower shares her insights on difficulties, complexities and the need to get started on digital preservation in the cultural heritage domain. This talk explores why we should care, as a society, about digital preservation, and what opportunities the digital offers for the humanities and social sciences. Part of the Digital Humanities webinar series from the Austrian Centre for Digital Humanities and Cultural Heritage (ADCH-CH).
Dr. Mark Hall from Open University UK gives an introduction to Application Programme Interfaces (APIs) and how they can be used in (digital) Humanities projects. This webinar was recorded as part of the DARIAH Friday Frontiers webinar series.
This webinar focuses on participatory projects that aim to train or support community groups in using video to tell personal stories, bring about social change, or archive and preserve activism and advocacy work.