Uttering meanings in Urdu
Uttering meanings in Urdu is بولنا Uttering in Urdu. More meanings of uttering, it's definitions, example sentences, related words, idioms and quotations.
The balance between faith and reason is for the determination of each individual, and of the people as a whole, not of unauthorized government officials uttering impious humbug as they arbitrarily try to define that balance.
More words from Urdu related to Uttering
View an extensive list of words below that are related to the meanings of the word Uttering meanings in Urdu in Urdu.
تھرتھرانابولیمکملصدا دیناگُفتَگُو کرناگپ شپآبلہچھالہپکاراچارن کرناچرچاافواہگٹکری بھرناقیمت لگانازبان پر لانانداذکر کرناچہکنامخاطب کرنا یا ہونانراطلببتانابولنا چالناباتیں کرناچہچہاحکمبیان کرنالب ہلانالہکناخطاب کرناکلیدعوتعرض کرناگفتگواوائیگٹکرینام رکھنااعلان کرنازبان کھولناچہچہاناکہناقطعیملنے جانابول چالخبرریزریز کرنابلاناتلفظ کرنامکالمہ ...
Idioms related to the meaning of Uttering
What are the meanings of Uttering in Urdu?
Meanings of the word Uttering in Urdu is بولنا - bolna. To understand how would you translate the word Uttering in Urdu, you can take help from words closely related to Uttering or it’s Urdu translations. Some of these words can also be considered Uttering synonyms. In case you want even more details, you can also consider checking out all of the definitions of the word Uttering. If there is a match we also include idioms & quotations that either use this word or its translations in them or use any of the related words in English or Urdu translations. These idioms or quotations can also be taken as a literary example of how to use Uttering in a sentence. If you have trouble reading in Urdu we have also provided these meanings in Roman Urdu.
We have tried our level best to provide you as much detail on how to say Uttering in Urdu as possible so you could understand its correct English to Urdu translation. We encourage everyone to contribute in adding more meanings to MeaningIn Dictionary by adding English to Urdu translations, Urdu to Roman Urdu transliterations and Urdu to English Translations. This will improve our English to Urdu Dictionary, Urdu to English dictionary, English to Urdu Idioms translation and Urdu to English Idioms translations. Although we have added all of the meanings of Uttering with utmost care but there could be human errors in the translation. So if you encounter any problem in our translation service please feel free to correct it at the spot. All you have to do is to click here and submit your correction.
Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ)
What do you mean by uttering?
Meaning of uttering is بولنا - bolna
Whats the definition of uttering?
Definition of the uttering are
What is the synonym of uttering?
Synonym of word uttering are bidding, warble, pronking, speking, speak, molt, utters, call, say, saim
What are the idioms related to uttering?
Here are the idioms that are related to the word uttering.
- A promise neglected is an untruth told
- First comes owning and then comes lying
- Lying is weakness truth is health
- Shut up
- Snap off one's nose
What are the quotes with word uttering?
Here are the quotes with the word uttering in them
- The balance between faith and reason is for the determination of each individual, and of the people as a whole, not of unauthorized government officials uttering impious humbug as they arbitrarily try to define that balance. — Conrad Black
- Taking a new step, uttering a new word, is what people fear most. — Benjamin Disraeli