[WEBINAR] Schooling as if Learning Mattered: Overcoming the Impact of COVID-19 to Modernize Teaching & Learning
Thursday, Oct 7 2021 at 5:00 - 6:30 pm EDT
Zoom - Link Sent Directly to Registrants.
Description: Join an esteemed panel of experts in education as they discuss traditional schooling and how to modernize it for the 21st century. In the discussion, moderated by Javier Arguello ‘03 (COGx Founder), panelists will speak to the following questions and reserve time for audience Q&A at the end of the session. More info on the session and panelists is included below. Challenges with Traditional Schooling that Have Been Exacerbated by the Pandemic: ● The current approach to teaching is often disconnected from how students learn most effectively and cause too many students to drop-out, struggle, and/or work too hard to do well. ● Students are not explicitly taught how to learn so that they can be independent and self-regulated learners. Instead, students mostly rely on ineffective strategies. ● Schooling decreases creativity and student engagement. ● Conditions of instruction that make performance improve rapidly often fail to support deep learning and transfer. Whereas conditions of instruction that appear to create difficulties for the learner, slowing the rate of apparent learning, often optimize deeper learning and transfer. This is known as the Schooling Conundrum. ● The pandemic has magnified the challenges that already existed in our school system, creating greater inequality and higher barriers to student success, especially for students of color and those of lower socioeconomic status. Science of Learning to Modernize Schooling – Discussion Points: ● What is the impact of COVID on learning and what are the future challenges that will affect learners? ● How can schools better address the adverse effects of COVID-19 on their students and educators, namely: learning loss/missed learning, engagement, equity, and trauma? ● What are the opportunities for online learning? How can we improve delivery, promote digital inclusion, and embrace its potential without sacrificing social-emotional needs? ● What skills do colleges require for students to succeed that are still lacking and how can we better prepare all students to succeed in college, particularly those at greater risk? ● Returning to the status quo is not possible post-COVID-19. Why and how can we leverage the crisis to modernize teaching and learning? When: Thursday, October 7, 2021 | 5 p.m. ET Where: Zoom - Link Sent Directly to Registrants.