Find Out if You Have a Hardy Succulent
There’s a whole world of succulents that can survive subzero temperature in four seasons and be outdoors year-round. These succulents can thrive under snow and ice and emerge looking just as good the next year. Hardy succulents can add color and charm to any garden year-round in most parts of the world.
Most stores label their plants with zone designation based on the USDA Plant Hardiness Zone Map. The labels will tell you whether your plant will survive the winter in your zone. If you live in a zone that has an annual temperature lower than the recommended zone on the label, there’s a high chance that the plant will not survive the winter in your area.
Bring Them Indoors
Even if your succulent matches your zone, it’s still best to bring it indoors during winter. It’s rare for the temperature to drop excessively, but one cold night can harm your succulent severely. If the temperature in your garage doesn’t go below 50°F, you can store them there.
But make sure your succulents get 3-4 hours of indirect sunlight every day. Before taking them indoors, see to it that there are no mealybugs and aphids in your plants to avoid bringing them inside your home. To get rid of these pests, spray the leaves of your succulents with a solution of ¼ water and ¾ rubbing alcohol.
Many people overlook this but make sure to prepare your pots for the indoors as well. If your succulents have stayed long in your garden, then they’re probably covered with dirt. So, before you take them inside your home, remove dead leaves and debris from the pot to avoid getting them all over your house. Next, wipe off any dirt from the pot, and finally, check for bugs and get rid of any that you can find. The last thing you want is having crawlers inside your home.
Water Them Less in Late Fall
During winter, succulents typically go dormant, so make sure to water them lesser during late fall. Once the temperature starts to drop and the nights become longer, reduce the watering to once a month. But it’s best to check the moisture level of the soil before you water your plants to make sure that it is completely dry.
Before you stop watering your succulents, check their varieties first. Although most succulents sleep in the winter, there are those that thrive in the cold months. The winter growers will need more water than the other varieties. Also, check the things near your succulents when you place them indoors because some of the items like heaters and dryers will dry your plant’s soil quicker.
Make Sure They Get Enough Sunlight
One of the things you should consider when taking your succulents indoors is the amount of sunlight they will get while they’re inside your home during winter. The best thing you can do is to place them near the windows so they get sufficient indirect sunlight. For your succulents to be in their best condition, they must get at least 6 hours of sunlight daily. A succulent that doesn’t get enough sunlight will grow towards the direction of the sunlight. So, if you want to straighten them out, turn them the other way.
Cover Your Succulents
If it’s not possible to take your succulent indoors in winter, cover them up with several kinds of protection. You can use snow covers to protect them against the snow, frost, and harsh winds. There are several snow covers sold online and at your local plant store. If you have bushel baskets, they can also serve as a good cover for your succulents. Just make sure that you uncover them long enough for them to get sufficient sunlight and air.
These simple steps can help your succulents stay alive during the winter and be as radiant as ever during springtime. Pass this information to your succulent-loving friends so they can also learn how to care for their succulents in winter.