Bleeding gums, although common, should never be ignored. It can be a sign of a serious oral health issue that needs to be addressed in order to keep the condition under control. Sometimes the bleeding is not directly related to your oral health, but a side effect of your changing hormones or medication you are taking. Before you write your bleeding off as normal, it is important to understand what to watch for and why you need to come in for an appointment.
Bleeding Gums and Gum Disease
Bleeding gums, even a mild tinge of blood in the sink, can be a sign of gingivitis. This is the earliest sign of gum disease and the most treatable. If you choose to ignore the bleeding, your gum disease could progressively get worse, causing you to experience periodontitis, an advanced form of gum disease. When this occurs, you could be at risk for severe bacterial infections that cause you to lose your teeth. Rather than putting your teeth at risk, it is best to have your bleeding gums examined to rule this condition out.
Your hormones change several times throughout your life, especially if you are a woman. As your hormones change, the blood flow in your mouth increases. As the blood flow gets greater, the reaction your mouth has to certain irritants can change as well. This could cause you to experience bleeding gums. It is important for you to not diagnose your bleeding gums on your own, however, as it could still be a sign of gum disease as even teenagers are susceptible to this oral health disease.
Watch your Medication
Any type of medication that causes your blood to thin can cause issues with your gums. This could cause serious issues with your oral health, requiring it to be addressed by your dentist as well as the prescribing doctor for your medication. Because certain medications also decrease the amount of saliva that you produce, you could wind up with gum disease as a result of the medication that allows debris to reside in your mouth. Understanding exactly what is happening can be determined with your dentist, allowing you to optimize your oral health.
Bleeding gums should never be ignored, even if it is the smallest amount. A quick call to our office or a regular exam can help to determine the reason as well as the appropriate treatment to ensure proper oral health for many years to come.