Pages That Mention Coffin-land
The geographical and historical dictionary of America and the West Indies [volume 1]
C O H
or country of Labrador. It runs s. e, and enters the St. Lawrence.
CODEGO. See Tierra Bomba.
CODEHUE, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Rancagna, in the kingdom of Chile, to the e. of the town of Triana.
CODERA, Cabo de, a cape on the coast of the province and government of Venezuela. Lat. 10° S5'. Long. 66° 10'.
[CODORUS, a township in York county, Pennsylvania.]
CODOSA, a settlement of the province and government of Tucumán in Peru; situate on the shore of the river Quarto, and at the head of the sierra of Campanchin.
COELCHO, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Chachapoyas in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Chiliquia.
COELLO, a settlement of the province and government of Neiva in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada ; situate on the shore of the large river Magdalena.
COEMAL, a settlement of the province and corregimiento of Luya and Chillaos in Peru ; annexed to the curacy of Luya, the capital.
COEURS, Bay of, bay in the island of Martinique, one of the Antilles. It is near the settlement of Carbet.
[COEYMANS, a township in Albany county. New York, 12 miles below Albany. By the state census of 1796, S89 of its inhabitants are electors.]
COFANES, a barbarous nation of Indians of the kingdom of Quito, Avhich began to be converted to the Catholic religion in 1602, through the labour and zeal of the Father Rafael Ferrer, of the extinguished company of the Jesuits, and who was killed by the same Indians. The principal settlement, founded by this martyr, with the dedicatory title of San Pedro, is now almost destroyed, though some few inhabitants still remain. The same is situate between the river of its nasne to the n. and that of Azuela to the s. The above river is large and rapid, anti takes its name from these Indians. It rises in the sierra Nevada, or Snowy, runs from u. to c. and enters the Azuela, in lat. 13° n.
COFFIN-LAND, a small island of the coast of Georgia, and one of those which are called Georgican, at the entrance of the river Ashley.
COFRE, a small river of the province and government of Buenos Aires. It runs s. and enters the sea between the rivers Favor and Del Rosario, opposite the capital.
COGUA, a settlement of the corregimiento of Zipaguira in the Nuevo Reyno de Granada. It is of a very cold temperature, and abounds in the productions peculiar to its climate, particularly in fire-wood, with which it supplies, for the manufacturing of salt, the settlements of Nemocon and Zipaquira. To this last settlement it is very contiguous ; and it lies nine leagues n, of Santa Fe. Its population is reduced to 70 housekeepers, and as many other Indians.
COHANZY, a river of the province and colony of New Jersey, in the county of Cumberland. It runs s. and enters the sea in the bay of Delaware.
[CoHANZY, or Casaria, a small river, which rises in Salem county. New Jersey, and running through Cumberland county, empties into Delaware river, opposite the upper end of Bombay hook. It is about SO miles in length, and is navigable for vessels of 100 tons to Bridgetown, 20 miles from its mouth.]
COHASSER, a settlement of the province and colony of New Hampshire, to the e. of the lake Champlain.
[COHASSET, a township in Norfolk county, Massachusetts, which was incorporated in 1770, and contains 817 inhabitants. It has a Congregational church, and 126 houses, scattered on different farms. Cohasset rocks, which have been so fatal to many vessels, lie oft' this town, about a league from the shore. It lies 25 miles s. e. of Boston, but in a straight line not above half the distance.]
[COHGNAWAGA, a parish in the township of Johnstown, Montgomery county. New York, on the ay. side of Mohawk river, 26 miles w. of Schenectady. This place, which had been settled near SO years, and which was the seat of Sir William Johnson, was mostly destroyed by the British and Indians, under the command of Sir William in the year 1780; in this action Johnson evinced a want of feeling which would have disgraced a savage. The people destroyed in this ex[)cdition were his old neighbours, with whom he had formerly lived in the habits of friendship ; his estate was among them, and the inhabitants had always considered him as their friend and neighbour. These unfortunate people, after seeing their houses and property consumed to ashes, were hurried, such as could walk, into cruel captivity ; those who could not Avalk fell victims to the toraaliawk and scalping knife. See Caghnaw aga.]
[COllOEZ, or the Falls, in Mohawk river, between two and three miles from its mouth, and 10 miles n. of Albany, are a very great natural curiosity. The river above the falls is about 300 yards wide, and approaches them from the n. w. in a