Special Education Parent Information and Resources
Welcome to Conejo Valley Unified School District's Parent Information page. This valuable resource will help guide parents through the special education process by answering frequently asked questions about Special Education, Individualized Education Plans (IEPs), Community Events and Workshops, and many other helpful resources.
A Parent Guide to Special Education
Conejo Valley Unified School District (CVUSD) is a part of Ventura County's Special Education Local Plan Area (SELPA). It is the responsibility of CVUSD and SELPA to see that all children found eligible for Special Education receive the services necessary for them to access their educational program at no cost to their parent(s)/guardian(s).
Useful information can be found in the SELPA's "Parent Guide to Special Education" (linked below). The guide is an important tool for all parents to assist them with learning which disabilities may qualify for special education; the referral and assessment process; special education and related services definitions; the Individualized Education Program (IEP) process; parent and adult student rights; due process complaints; and other useful resources. Parent Guide to Special Education
Other useful resources and booklets can be found on the Ventura County SELPA website: here
10 Basic Steps in Special Education
Are you concerned about your child's academic progress and don't know the steps to follow? Here is a link to 10 Basic Steps to follow in the special education process, from evaluation to reviewing student progress.
Special Education Parent Information (Transition)
Parent Information Night Transition from Be Me Preschool to Elementary for students with IEPs (Resources from the Monday, January 9, 2023 information evening)
Parent Information Night Transition from Elementary to Middle School for students with IEPs (Resource from the Thursday, November 17, 2022 information evening)
Parent Information Night Transition from Middle School to High School for students with IEPs (Resource from the Monday, November 14, 2022 information evening)
Ventura County SELPA Transition to Adult Life Agencies Padlet (Information and Videos from the Fall Transition Fair, November 9, 2022)
Padlets to Support Home Learning
The Conejo Valley Unified School District Special Education team has curated resources to support you in working with your child in your home. Below, you will find links to padlets that contain information, pictures, and visuals regarding different instructional techniques and behavior supports that can be utilized as you work with your child.
A PADLET is a visual collection of resources, like a bulletin board, that allows you to quickly scan resources and find one that works for your student and situation.