Can I crack UPSC without making notes?
One cannot expect to clear the UPSC examination without preparing his notes and revising it regularly. Take any UPSC topper of any year and you will find almost all of them had notes making as part of their strategy to crack the UPSC examination.
How should I make notes for UPSC?
#1 Read The Books. #2 Make Bullet Points. #3 Write Short Sentences. #4 Go Digital Whenever You Can. #5 Use Loose Sheets Against Registers For Preparing UPSC Notes. #6 Make Flow Charts For UPSC Notes. #7 Keep Revising Your UPSC Notes for NCERTs.
Do I need to make notes from Ncert for UPSC?
Making Notes From NCERT Books For UPSC IAS Exam Every IAS aspirant knows how crucial is the NCERT books in the preparation of the IAS Exam and how important note making is during preparation and its use while revision. Candidates should know how to read NCERT books for IAS preparation.
When should I make notes for UPSC?
You are supposed to start making jotting when you start reading the books for UPSC preparation for the second time. Second time reading will help you understand the important points of the chapter and the things you need to remember.
Can a weak student crack UPSC?
If your question is Can an average student crack IAS?, then the answer is YES! We present a few success stories of some aspirants who were average students and yet cleared the exam proving that you need not be a topper to crack the IAS Exam.
Which note is enough UPSC?
So, printed material and Vision IAS classroom notes are sufficient to score. But keep updating your notes through Newspaper so that your notes are not outdated.
Does handwriting matter in UPSC?
Importance of handwriting for UPSC Mains The examiner is, after all, a human being and his mood while correcting is also important. Illegible handwriting may cause you to lose a mark or two in each answer. Good handwriting gives the impression of a person who is very sure of his/her knowledge.
Can I skip Ncert for UPSC?
It is recommended that candidates go through the NCERT books as the information available is not just comprehensive but also reliable. Textbooks from class VI to XII can be of great use for both prelims and mains examination. Read Further: Complete List Of NCERT Books Needed For UPSC Preparation.
Is Toppers notes enough for UPSC?
A single reading of ToppersNotes can prepare you up to 70% for UPSC exam.
Should I make notes or just read NCERT?
Try to make notes of everything while studying from the NCERT books. Whatever points you feel are important, jot them down. If you find any topic or concept difficult to understand while reading, highlight it.