High School Biology
Biology Science Projects and Experiments
Examples, solutions, videos, and experiments that are suitable for Biology.
1.1 Characteristics of Life.
Living organisms share the following basic characteristics:
• they require nutrition
• they respire
• they excrete their waste
• they respond to their surroundings
• they move
• they control their internal conditions
• they reproduce
• they grow and develop.
1.2 Variety of Life
Describe the common features shared by organisms within the following main groups,
plants, animals, fungi, bacteria, protoctists and viruses, and for each group describe
examples and their features as follows (details of life cycle and economic importance are
: These are multicellular organisms; they contain chloroplasts and are able to carry
out photosynthesis; they have cellulose cell walls; they store carbohydrates as starch or
Examples include flowering plants, such as a cereal (for example maize) and a herbaceous
legume (for example peas or beans).
: These are multicellular organisms; they do not contain chloroplasts and are not
able to carry out photosynthesis; they have no cell walls; they usually have nervous
coordination and are able to move from one place to another; they often store
carbohydrate as glycogen.
Examples include mammals (for example humans) and insects (for example housefly and
: These are organisms that are not able to carry out photosynthesis; their body is
usually organised into a mycelium made from thread-like structures called hyphae, which
contain many nuclei; some examples are single-celled; they have cell walls made of
chitin; they feed by extracellular secretion of digestive enzymes onto food material and
absorption of the organic products; this is known as saprotrophic nutrition; they may store
carbohydrate as glycogen.
Examples include Mucor, which has the typical fungal hyphal structure, and yeast which
: These are microscopic single-celled organisms; they have a cell wall, cell
membrane, cytoplasm and plasmids; they lack a nucleus but contain a circular
chromosome of DNA; some bacteria can carry out photosynthesis but most feed off other
living or dead organisms.
Examples include Lactobacillus bulgaricus, a rod-shaped bacterium used in the
production of yoghurt from milk, and Pneumococcus, a spherical bacterium that acts as
the pathogen causing pneumonia.
: These are microscopic single-celled organisms. Some, like Amoeba, that live
in pond water, have features like an animal cell, while others, like Chlorella, have
chloroplasts and are more like plants. A pathogenic example is Plasmodium, responsible
for causing malaria.
These are small particles, smaller than bacteria; they are parasitic and can
reproduce only inside living cells; they infect every type of living organism. They have a
wide variety of shapes and sizes; they have no cellular structure but have a protein coat
and contain one type of nucleic acid, either DNA or RNA.
Examples include the tobacco mosaic virus that causes discolouring of the leaves of
tobacco plants by preventing the formation of chloroplasts, the influenza virus that causes
'flu' and the HIV virus that causes AIDS.
Recall the term 'pathogen' and know that pathogens may be fungi, bacteria, protoctists or
Try the free Mathway calculator and
problem solver below to practice various math topics. Try the given examples, or type in your own
problem and check your answer with the step-by-step explanations.
We welcome your feedback, comments and questions about this site or page. Please submit your feedback or enquiries via our Feedback page.