STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math) has greatly evolved since its abbreviation was first coined in the mid-’90s. It wasn’t until the early 21st century that its popularity started to rise. It’s now more popular than ever! STEM was once reserved as a curriculum in the classroom, but it is now easier than ever before to teach and reinforce at home.
Introducing the Ozobot
Robotics is one of the best ways to teach STEM yet it is often taught at costly summer camps like Digital Media Academy. All has changed with smart bots like the Ozobot. Ozobot teaches children STEM in fun and engaging ways without a hefty price tag attached. It is charged, ready to play out of the box, and going to undoubtedly be one of the hottest toys during the holiday season.
The Ozobot in Action!
Ozobot is certainly not your ordinary robot and is a prime example how coding can be as just as educational as entertaining! Want it to follow directional commands? Use the mat or draw color codes on paper with the included markers and it will respond by using optical sensors. It also races, makes audible noises such as yawning, laughing, and snoring; and dances. You can even bring it to life with characters like Black Widow, Iron Man, Captain America, or one of your own.
Overall, I love the Ozobot Evo! It fosters creativity, boundless imagination, and skills like decision-making, problem-solving, and pattern recognition. These are skills that will be beneficial for your child for years to come.
OK, now this is super cool! I think I have to get it for my youngest son so that he doesn’t go through that summer vacation brain drain this year.
This seems like an awesome toy! My oldest is probably a bit young for it, but it would be perfect once she is a little older.
Jessica Joachim recently posted..Save Money With Amazon Prime
What a nice gift for the kids! I’m sure it’s going to keep them busy this summer. I think it’s a great way to help them become more interested in science and technology!
This is awesome!! I love when toys make kids use their noodle. 🙂 I think my little man would enjoy this. Thanks for sharing! I’m going to be on the lookout for Ozobot.
Wow I didn’t even know something like this existed! This would make a perfect gift for my nieces and nephews! I’m sure they would absolutely love it!
Cassie recently posted..Cassie’s Challenges – Eat 2 serves of fruit a day
Ozobot looks like a lot of fun. This is for sure something I would have enjoyed as a kid.
The types of learning toys that are available to kids nowadays is amazing!! I love that the Ozbot is fairly easy to play with, but providing kids with coding experience… That’s awesome.
I love toys that promote STEM learning. This is a new one for me and I love that it teaches beginning coding.
This looks amazing! I love STEM toys! My nieces and nephews learned to code when they were 5, so I’m hoping my 3yo will be interested as well!
Marcie recently posted..Cannery Pier Hotel & Spa in Astoria, OR Review
Educational things like this are great as it’s so nice when kids get fun out of learning x
Rhian Westbury recently posted..Six Trek America Tours I’d Love To Do
Awesome way to keep them learning and to make sure that their minds are active even during the summer vacation! I think it’s nice that there are toys like this one to keep the kids interested in STEM.
How cool is this? I am pretty sure my kids would think this is just the cats meow. Would love to try this with them!!
Ozobot looks like a pretty cool little gadget. It’s great to see STEM items made more affordable so that everyone can have access to them.
Cindy Ingalls recently posted..Fashion Flash Summer!
Wow my kids would be obsessed with this! We’re homeschooling them this year and I’m always looking for fun and educational things for them to play with!
This is a really cool toy to keep kids entertained during the summer. My niece is getting into a lot of STEM stuff so I think she would have a ball with Ozobot.
Cassie @ Southeast by Midwest recently posted..How to Integrate New Pets
This is awesome! My son wants to be a Robotic Engineer and I know he would love this!
Glenda recently posted..Why Women Use Body Pillow During Their Pregnancy
I really believe that robots are the future and I like that they are being used here to aid stem learning. I like that you can create codes for it to follow x
Ana De- Jesus recently posted..An Open Letter To Grenfell Tower: The Cold Hard Truth
My daughters would love this! My oldest is eight and has always been fascinated by math and science. She really enjoys learning with robots and this is something she would enjoy “playing” with! What a great educational opportunity.
Heather recently posted..Hydration for Young Athletes
We have Ozobot! It’s such a neat way to teach kids about coding. FYI, the battery lasts like forever. We got one two years ago and he still runs! I love that about it.
Nikki recently posted..3 Insanely Fun Ways to Let Kids be Kids & Still Learn This Summer
I think this is a super cool toy for kids. I’m sure my nephew will definitely like this one!
I’ve never heard of this but it looks like such a cool toy. I think my daughter would love this.
Rachel Catherine recently posted..Take Off On A New Adventure With Your Favorite Super Heroes In Marvel Universe Live! Age of Heroes
Omg what a cool toy!!!! My daughter is all about all things stem. She would love this!