If you are new to using roundabouts, you might be intimidated by them. This article will provide tips on how to navigate a roundabout safely. But first, we will discuss what a roundabout is and why they were developed.
What is a Roundabout?
A roundabout is a type of traffic control device. When roundabouts were first developed, they were called traffic circles, but this term is now obsolete. The circle of a roundabout allows for one-way flow, which helps with traffic efficiency.
Roundabouts are circular intersections with drivers travelling clockwise around a centre island. Drivers yield to traffic on their right as they approach the circle, enter the roundabout, and exit at their desired street.
Why Were Roundabouts Developed?
Roundabouts were developed to create safer intersections by reducing the number of traffic conflicts. These include right-angle collisions, right turn crashes, and rear-end accidents. In addition, roundabouts address vehicle speeds as drivers must slow down to navigate through them properly.
How do you use a Roundabout?
There are a few key things to remember about driving roundabouts to reduce your risk:
- Slow down as you approach the roundabout and obey the posted speed limit.
- Pick the lane you want to use before entering the roundabout.
- Stay a safe distance away from trucks and oversized vehicles. Driving next to them in a roundabout can be problematic and may result in filing an insurance claim.
- Avoid stopping once in the roundabout. Instead, go with the flow of traffic.
- Yield to traffic in the roundabout. Traffic that is already in the roundabout has the right of way.
How do I go Straight in a Roundabout?
You can use either the right or left lane to go straight in a roundabout with two lanes. However, you must yield to any vehicles from your right and drive clockwise while staying in your lane.
Be sure to exit with care as drivers may have tried to pass you on your left while in the traffic circle. Pavement markings and signs will typically guide you as you navigate through the loop.
How do I Make a Left Turn in a Roundabout?
As you come to the roundabout, be in your left lane. All traffic already in the roundabout has the right of way, so be sure to yield to them. As you drive in a clockwise direction, take your first exit off the roundabout.
How do I Make a Right Turn in a Roundabout?
As you approach the roundabout, be sure to be in the right lane. Traffic already in the roundabout has the right of way, so be sure to yield to them. Then, while driving clockwise in the right lane, exit the roundabout at the three-quarters mark.
Vehicles may have tried to pass you on the left as you move around the roundabout so take care when leaving.
How do I Make a U-Turn in a Roundabout?
As you come to the roundabout, make sure you are in the right lane. As previously stated, traffic already in the roundabout has the right of way, and you must yield to them. While driving clockwise, drive ultimately around the traffic circle, and exit where you entered.
Again, be careful when exiting as vehicles may have tried to pass you on your left as you made your way around the roundabout.
Navigating a roundabout is a quick and easy way to make your way through an intersection. In addition, studies indicate that there are far fewer vehicle accidents and injuries to pedestrians when using a roundabout over a traditional traffic intersection.
How do I Learn More?
Now that you’ve learned how to navigate roundabouts, contact the experts at IronRock Insurance Company to learn more about the often-confusing world of insurance. Our licensed professionals will be happy to answer any questions you have.