It’s February 11, and you know what that means! No? Well, it’s National Inventors’ Day, and we should all be celebrating! Without our inventors, where might we be? Humanity’s inventiveness is what sets us apart from every other species on this planet, and it’s through our inventions that we can see our own progress as a species. We’ve come a long way since the invention of the wheel, and that’s worth celebrating. Here’s to National Inventors’ Day.
National Inventors' Day timeline
Thomas Alva Edison is born in Milan, Ohio.
Edison patents his biggest invention — the light bulb.
President Ronald Reagan declares this day as National Inventors’ Day.
Argentina starts celebrating Inventors’ Day annually on September 29 to honor László Bíró — the inventor of the ballpoint pen.
National Inventors' Day Activities
National Inventors Hall of Fame
If you're in the Washington D.C. area, you've got to check out the National Inventors Hall of Fame. It's an awesome facility in our nation's capital meant to celebrate our greatest innovators through various exhibits and programs at its in-house museum
Most inventions are created to solve a problem. What’s something that’s been bugging you? Invent something to solve it!
Try Patenting Your Own Idea
The patenting process can seem daunting, but it's actually surprisingly straightforward. After coming up with your own invention, try patenting it!
Why We Love National Inventors' Day
It’s A Celebration Of Ingenuity
Ingenuity is a special thing, and it's something we should foster. For every great inventor, there was a community of people behind them that helped to realize their vision. National Inventors' Day helps draw light to our inventors, and hopefully, we'll be able to encourage the next generation of inventors to be meet their fullest potential.
Every country has inventors that they're proud of. As we enter an age of increased globalization, many of our latest inventions come from the greatest minds across different cultures, but looking at inventions of any given culture can be an interesting lens through which to view its history.
It Encourages Learning
The processes of inventing and learning might be distinct, but they're inseparable. A society that encourages their inventors encourages learning, which is something worth celebrating.
National Inventors' Day dates