Growth Trends for Related Jobs
How to Write a Child's Resume
Getting a child to write a resume isn’t just a learning activity for him -- though, admittedly, most teens will eventually need to grasp such a skill. The real benefit, even if an employer asks applicants to fill out an application only, is to have the information all in one place. This makes it easier for teens to complete the necessary documents for a job.
No matter the age of the applicant, all resumes should include basic information, such as name, address, phone number and email address. With children and teens, you should also add educational information, such as the name of their school, years completed or grade level, GPA and expected graduation date. Then, detail any work experience, skills and even interests. Like adult resumes, you may also choose to include a goal or objective, such as working in a part-time position at a retail store.
With a first job, you won’t have a lot of work experience to document on a resume, so the bulk of the information details your education, skills and honors, awards and memberships. However, certain school activities can be applicable experience, such as working for the school newspaper, yearbook or library. The same can be said for any volunteer work, such as building homes for Habit for Humanity. If this is the case, list this information under “Experience” after your contact and education information, and then detail the duties and responsibilities of the activity or volunteer work. From there, include a “Studies and Skills” section to list any classes or skills relevant to the desired job, such as technical writing, proofreading, mathematics or graphic design. After studies and skills, add a section for “Honors, Awards and Memberships,” which might include National Honor Society, Spanish Club, Drama Club, Cross Country, Football or Soccer.
Resumes for summer jobs will follow the same basic format as those for first jobs. Provide your contact information, education, applicable experience, studies and skills and honors, awards and memberships. With summer jobs, however, you may be able to parlay past experience in baby sitting or dog sitting, for example, into seasonal employment at a daycare center or dog groomer. If this is the case, include this information within the “Experience” section on your resume. Also, some summer jobs, such as lifeguarding, may require certifications. Add an additional section on your resume to list these designations, including lifeguard training and CPR.
Performing Arts Jobs
Performing arts resumes are different from standard resumes. While they include the basic information -- name, address, phone number and email address -- these resumes also detail other personal information, including age, eye color, hair color, height and weight. Performing arts resumes also use a different format. After listing your contact information and statistics, set up three columns. The first column will list the titles of the plays or projects in which the child has performed, the second column will list the role played and the third will list the director or studio of the production. Then set up another section to include any special skills, such as juggling, dancing or dialects. After the skills section, list any training in the industry, such as voice, dance or acting, and include the name of the instructor or coach.
Based in Minneapolis, Minn., Dana Severson has been writing marketing materials for small-to-mid-sized businesses since 2005. Prior to this, Severson worked as a manager of business development for a marketing company, developing targeted marketing campaigns for Big G, Betty Crocker and Pillsbury, among others.