Your bathroom is your private sanctuary where you get ready to greet each day. It’s the space for some ‘me time’ and for you to relax and unwind after a long day. However, these common habits are actually turning your retreat into a space alive with bacteria.
1. Leaving makeup on your bench
Bathrooms are typically the best place to apply makeup due to the natural light, storage space and mirrors. A common habit is to leave makeup products on the bathroom counter. However, the moist air in bathrooms makes it a harmful environment for storing cosmetic products. The same also applies to your makeup tools such as sponges and brushes, which can also harbour bacteria.
It’s a good idea to start storing your make-up products and tools in cupboards, drawers or beauty cases to protect them from germs. For make-up tools, it’s also beneficial to clean them with hot soapy water or a makeup applicator cleaner on a regular basis.
2. Not cleaning your toilet
Considering that 93 days in a lifetime is spent on the toilet and the fact that there’s an average of about 50 bacteria per square inch on a toilet seat, it’s vital that your toilet be clean to prevent illnesses.
It’s a common habit to wait until you can see that your toilet is dirty before you clean it. However, bacteria are so small that you can’t see them with the human eye. So, it would help if you were cleaning your toilet at least once a week to minimise the number of bacteria. If cleaning weekly is not enough for you after hearing these facts, you could consider purchasing a new toilet. American Standard’s rimless design toilets are built with hygiene systems making them easy to clean.
3. Using your mobile phone
Nowadays, the most common bad habit is using your mobile phone or tablet in the bathroom, and you’re not alone – 41% of Australians also use their phones on the toilet (Finder, 2018). Maybe you’re probably reading this blog whilst on the toilet.
Using your device on the toilet can spread the same illness-causing bacteria and pathogens that are created when you don’t wash your hands. Considering that phones are constant companions for most people, you could be transferring bacteria leading to serious illnesses including diarrhoea, salmonella and respiratory infection.
4. Sharing towels
Unknown to most, towels are a breeding ground for germs as they retain moisture for long periods of time, allowing the bacteria to survive. Research has shown that towels are more likely to be bacteria-ridden than any other household item and another study found that nearly 90% of bathroom towels were contaminated with coliform bacteria (Time, 2018).
It’s impossible to keep your towels 100% germ-free, but you can protect yourself by washing your towels a lot more frequently than you do now. Bathroom towels should be thoroughly cleaned after about 2 days of use using hot water and a product activated with oxygen bleach.
So, there you have it, folks. We’ve all got bad bathroom habits that are doing more harm than good. Hopefully this blog has inspired you to change those habits to ensure that your bathroom remains a stylish and hygienic private sanctuary.