On Wednesday, the National Endowment for the Humanities held its 50th annual Jefferson Lecture.The modern case for reparations began with a 2014 Ta-Nehisi Coates Atlantic magazine article.
Each year, the lecturer is chosen based on distinguished intellectual achievement in the humanities. Being selected to give the Jefferson Lecture is considered the highest honor given by the federal government in the field of the humanities.
This year's honoree was Andrew Delbanco, the Alexander Hamilton professor of American Studies at Columbia University and the president of the Teagle Foundation.
Delbanco's lecture, titled "The Question of Reparations: Our Past, Our Present, Our Future," addresses reparations for slavery in the United States from a variety of perspectives.
I am trying to understand this. Coates is Black, and wants more White goodies. Delbanco is Jewish, married to a Chinese-American woman, with high-status academic credentials. While he would not benefit directly from reparations, he gets a lot academic honors and Jewish respect for attacking Goys.
Here is what he says:
The less measurable injuries, which we associate with the term Jim Crow, remain mind-boggling to me when we read about them in history books or in novels or in memoirs. I mean, Black people being pushed off the sidewalk, especially Black males being pushed off the sidewalk if a white woman walked by.He is 70 years old, and has never witnessed any of these things. He just read about them in history books written by academics like himself.
Children, as Dr. King wrote about so movingly, being told that they can't go to the local water park, or the swimming pool, or the beach, because the color of their skin was offensive to other people who were going to be on that beach. Not to mention the persistence of random beatings and lynchings that were an ever present danger for Black Americans through well into the 20th century.
It's impossible to measure the impact that that had.
So why would a Black man be pushed away from a White woman? I googled this question, and the first answer I found was a Lawrence Auster article:
In the United States in 2005, 37,460 white females were sexually assaulted or raped by a black man, while between zero and ten black females were sexually assaulted or raped by a white man.Got that? Black men commonly rape White women. White men do not rape Black women. If the crime were color-blind, the numbers would be about equal.
What this means is that every day in the United States, over one hundred white women are raped or sexually assaulted by a black man.
So let us balance this out. On the one hand, we have many thousands of Black men raping White women every year. On the other hand, there is some decades-old anecdote about a Black man being pushed away from a White woman.
Just watch this CBS News video about the New York subway. Blacks are waging a war on Whites.
Any honest evaluation would take these factors into account. Coates and Delbanco are just lying to us.
There were no "random beatings and lynchings". Lynchings occurred as punishments for crimes. Blacks were lynched more than Whites, but only because they committed more and worse crimes.
Providing better access to quality health care to try to close those shocking gaps in infant mortality, maternal deaths and childhood, and many others in childbirth.He is just lying again. Here are those shocking gaps in infant mortality, according to the CDC. Asian-Americans have the lowest infant mortality, and Hispanics are not much worse than Whites. Yes, Blacks are worse than everyone else, but it is hard to see how this can be blamed on Whites. Do WHite conspire to somehow get better medical care for Hispanics and Asians than for themselves, and then not let Blacks have that medical care? No, that is ridiculous. Obviously ethnic differences are at work here, independent of any medical policies.
Delbanco is just another example of Jews spreading racial hatred. They do it more than any other ethnic group.
Post a Comment