Coriander is a common spice to flavor food around the world. But did you know the health benefits of coriander seeds yet?
If no, read on to know how coriander is a panacea for your health.
Coriander or dhania belongs to the Coriandrum sativum plant. The leaves of coriander are well-known as cilantro.
Coriander seeds when dries up on the plant, it is then grounded to prepare coriander powder.
Nutritional Value of Coriander Seeds
For centuries, coriander is being added to foods and Ayurveda medicines. This aromatic spice is high in fiber content (only 100g of coriander seeds contain 41.9g of fiber). They are a great source of antioxidants, vitamin C, B, K, iron, calcium, etc.
Coriander is also rich in micronutrients such as zinc, manganese, magnesium, and copper.
Coriander has a characteristic scent. It is due to the presence of potent antioxidants and volatile oils (oleic acid, alpha-pinene, linoleic acid, and others).
Coriander seeds have an amazing nutritional value. But it is advisable to take it in good amount to experience the benefits. Here’s how adding coriander seeds to your curries, salsas, and salads benefits your health:
1. Rich In Potent Antioxidants
Coriander seeds are full of powerful antioxidants. These antioxidants fight free radicals and prevent cell damage. Free radicals are the common cause of cancer, heart disease, stress, and more.
So, coriander seeds help combat free radicals to lower the risk of cancer and delay the signs of aging.
2. Good Source of Vitamin K
Vitamin K is a vital nutrient for the human body. It helps with the formation of blood clots and reduces the risk of heart disease.
Moreover, vitamin K is an important vitamin for the development of bones. It also aids in repairing bones and preventing age-related joint problems, particularly osteoporosis.
3. Prevents Heart Disease
High blood pressure and high bad cholesterol levels are reasons for several heart diseases. Coriander is a diuretic herb. It flushes out extra sodium to keep the blood pressure levels in control.
Not only that, studies have shown that regular consumption of coriander seeds reduces the risk of arteriosclerosis. It lowers bad cholesterol, a common cause of heart attack.
4. Reduces Inflammation
Coriander is an anti-inflammatory spice. It helps reduces inflammations in the body, caused by the immune response to foreign invasion. Untreated inflammation can lead to heart disease and cancer.
Thus, adding coriander seeds to your cuisines slows down the growth of cancerous cells in your body by reducing inflammation.
5. Helps Control Diabetes
Coriander seeds or powder can keep your diabetes in check. Rich in dietary fiber, coriander seeds regulate your blood glucose levels.
In 2008, in a study performed on diabetic rats, the coriander lowered their blood glucose levels. It also boosted insulin production from their pancreas.
6. Treats Skin Conditions
Coriander seeds contain active antioxidants. They boost skin health by fighting free radicals and delaying the signs of aging. Also, coriander water improves several skin conditions such as psoriasis, eczema, and rosacea.
7. Strengthen Hair
Coriander seeds water improves hair health. It is enriched with vital minerals, protein, and healthy fats (volatile oils).
To boost hair strength and thickness you can add coriander seeds can to your food. Or, you can apply coriander water combined with an organic hair wash for better results.
8. Helps In Digestion
Coriander seeds and leaves are being used in Ayurveda medicine to treat digestive issues for ages.
They are rich in dietary fiber and antioxidants. Adding coriander seeds to your daily diet boosts digestion, and improves the absorption of nutrients. It also prevents several stomach problems like diarrhea and constipation.
Also, coriander seeds are rich in fatty acids and volatile oils. They are responsible for the digestive and anti-flatulent properties found in them.
9. Immune-Boosting Herb
Coriander seeds are a rich source of vitamin C, an essential nutrient with immune-boosting power. It helps strengthen your immunity against foreign invasions and infections.
10. Helps With Weight Loss
Coriander seeds are fiber-packed spices. They boost your metabolism, which is helpful in weight loss, particularly in aged people. Moreover, the B vitamins in coriander are a bonus to your weight loss diet.
Coriander seeds are a safe and natural spice for your curies with many health benefits. Make sure to add in moderation and avoid it in case of an allergic reaction.