Together for Girls applauds the strategy’s strong focus on addressing gender-based violence
Washington, D.C., October 22, 2021 — Together for Girls applauds the launch of the first-ever United States National Strategy on Gender Equity and Equality, and the strong focus on addressing gender-based violence as central to reducing inequality.
This is a critical step toward creating a world in which every person, regardless of gender, can realize their full potential. We look forward to continuing to work with partners, including the US government, to build a safer world for all, including children, adolescents and young people.
Read more about this historic strategy by viewing the “Fact Sheet: National Strategy on Gender Equity and Equality” from the White House Briefing Room.
About Together for Girls
Together for Girls is a global partnership working to end violence against children and adolescents, particularly sexual violence against girls. The partnership brings together more than 20 national governments, civil society organizations, UN entities, development partners, and the private sector to improve violence prevention, healing and justice. Together for Girls uses an innovative model of data, advocacy and action to drive lasting change and create a safer world for all.
Survivors and allies demand change
The Generation Equality Forum, convened by UN Women was co-hosted by the governments of France and Mexico in close partnership with civil society and youth activists, launched a collective call to accelerate action for gender equality.
Together for Girls, Darkness to Light, Child USA, and the National Children’s Alliance join forces with a diverse coalition of adult survivors of childhood sexual abuse, advocates, and leading organizations to launch #KeepKidsSafe.
Twenty-five years ago this week, 50,000 people gathered in Beijing for the UN’s Fourth World Conference on Women.
Sexual violence against children affects children everywhere at a staggering rate — one in four girls experience physically forced or coerced sexual intercourse.
Athlete A reminds us how regularly survivors are ignored and how often they are chastised for reporting an abuser. It reveals how self-interested institutions can themselves turn into cloaks of protection for the most heinous crimes.
The COVID-19 lockdowns around the U.S. have exacerbated what was already a widespread problem gripping our nation: the trapping of children at home with sexual abusers.
Survivors of sexual violence, particularly those of color, should be leading the conversations about their needs and the needs of their communities, informing policy, and catalyzing prevention.
Childhood sexual violence differs from other forms of violence, such as physical or psychological violence, as child development and the capacity to consent influence its recognition as a crime.
Six ways to celebrate 16 Days of Activism Against Gender-Based Violence.
To commemorate International Day of the Girl, Together for Girls co-hosted a high-level event at the Embassy of Canada, “Data to Action: Breaking the Cycle of Violence Against Girls”.
Together for Girls had the opportunity to interview Gary Barker, the President and CEO of Promundo and longtime champion of engaging men and boys in gender equality and violence prevention.
For the second annual World in Your Hands Art Contest, Together for Girls and the Coalition for Adolescent Girls asked female artists ages 12-24 about their influences, how they themselves strive to influence others, and how they use their voice and influence to make the world a better place.