The global hemp industry is estimated to be worth $18.6 billion. As the world continues to rebuild after the global pandemic, think producers are turning to this plant-based super crop as a viable alternative to many things.
Hemp can be used as a sustainable substitute for fuel, food and fiber, paper, and more. The opportunity to profit from this lucrative crop is endless – but you’ve got to know how to grow hemp plants!
Whether you’re thinking about starting a hemp farm or just trying your hand at a plant-based superfood, read on to learn more about this in-demand crop.
Know What Hemp Is
Hemp is a plant that is a member of the Cannabis sativa species. It is the same plant as marijuana, but it contains only trace amounts of THC, the psychoactive compound that gets users high.
Hemp has been used for centuries to make rope, paper, and clothing. It is also used in beauty products and as a food source.
Hemp Seedlings and Transplanting
It is important to understand how to properly care for your hemp seedlings to ensure a successful crop. It is important to start with healthy, high-quality seeds and to plant them in well-drained, fertile soil.
Hemp seedlings also need to be protected from excessive heat and cold, as well as from pests and disease. Proper watering, fertilization, and pest control will help ensure a healthy and bountiful hemp crop.
To start transplanting, you’ll need to make sure you have healthy hemp seedlings. Prepare your planting area by making sure the soil is loose and well-drained.
How to Grow Hemp Indoors
When growing hemp indoors, you’ll need to start with a soil mix that is rich in nutrients. You can purchase premixed soil from a gardening store, or make your own by mixing equal parts of peat moss, perlite, and vermiculite.
Once you have your soil mixed, it’s time to sow your hemp seeds. You can do this by simply sprinkling them onto the soil surface and then lightly pressing them into the soil. Make sure to keep the soil moist but not wet, as this will help your seeds germinate.
Once your seeds have germinated, you’ll need to provide them with plenty of light. The best way to grow hemp is to make sure it gets at least six hours of sunlight each day.
How to Grow Hemp Outdoors
If you’re looking to start growing hemp plants outdoors, there are a few things you’ll need to know beforehand. You’ll need to choose a location that gets plenty of sunlight and has well-draining soil. Once you’ve found the perfect spot, you’ll need to prepare the soil by removing any weeds or debris.
Then, you’ll need to sow your hemp seeds and water them regularly. Once your plants have grown tall enough, you’ll need to begin the harvesting process. This involves cutting down the plants and hanging them upside down to dry.
Once they’re dry, you can then remove the CBD-rich flowers and leaves and store them in an airtight container.
Learn How to Grow Hemp Plants
If you’re looking to get into the hemp industry, you need to know how to grow hemp plants. Growing hemp is easy and can be done indoors or outdoors. Luckily, it’s not as difficult as you might think.
With a little research and some planning, you can be on your way to a successful hemp harvest.
To learn more gardening tips and other interesting articles, visit our blog page.
Trevor Anderson wrote this article on behalf of FreeUp. FreeUp is the fastest-growing freelance marketplace in the US. FreeUp only accepts the top 1% of freelance applicants. Click here to get access to the top freelancers in the world.
GreenState and Hearst partners may earn revenue when readers click affiliate links in this article.