It’s important to instill a love for reading from an early age, and the following six books are sure to be engaging to your teen! 

1. The Perks of Being a Wallflower by Stephen Chbosky

Told in letters from Charlie, the introverted and awkward teenage protagonist, this story leads the audience through coming-of-age life lessons. Includes love, friends, tragedies, family, and situations that mold a teenager’s ascent into adulthood. 

2. Holes by Louis Sachar

Sent to Camp Green Lake, teenager Stanley Yelnats is cursed with the worst luck imaginable, all thanks to his “no good dirty rotten pig-stealing great-great-grandfather.” The unruly boys at the boot camp are made to dig holes all day to “build character,” but what is the warden searching for? This book has an element of mystery while also dealing with friendship, heritage, and consequences for actions. 

3. The Girl from the Sea by Molly Knox Ostertag

This graphic novel is about Morgan, a 15-year-old girl on vacation with her family. When she almost drowns while exploring the reefs, a beautiful girl named Keltie saves her, and the pair form a love connection and deep bond that leads to a kiss. The only problem is that Keltie is a selkie, an ancient shapeshifter, so she and Morgan have to figure out a way to be together. 

4. James and the Giant Peach by Roald Dahl 

Poor James Henry Trotter has a hard life of abuse and turmoil with his terrible aunts after his parents are eaten by a rogue rhinoceros. That is until a mysterious man promises him adventure beyond his wildest dreams while standing beneath the branches of a barren peach tree. When a peach begins to grow – bigger and bigger – James crawls inside, meeting a crew of giant insects to keep him company when the peach breaks from the branch and rolls across the world to New York City. 

5. Inkheart by Cornelia Funke 

Meggie and her father are serious bookworms, always reading with stacks of books scattered throughout their home. And now, they have the chance to explore a magical world that’s been overtaken by a horrific nightmare. 

Inkheart is the first book in a three-part series. 

6.  Little Women by Louisa May Alcott 

Set in 1868, Little Women is a story about four sisters, dubbed the March Girls by their peers and neighbors. They each have a unique personality, but all love one another fiercely, creating a powerful dynamic that leads them through life, romance, and heartbreak as they grow up.
