Common Core standards vital to growth of US education
Starting in 1959, President Dwight D. Eisenhower discussed the creation of national goals for education that would enable the next generation of Americans, in every state, to be more competitive against other nations. Since then more than eight major efforts have been promoted to bring our nation's kids to a competitive level with the rest of the world.
This present effort has been initiated and coordinated by the National Governors Association and the Council of Chief State School Officers. Wisconsin fully participated and is well into implementing the standards. The Common Core State Standards were developed to provide a road map for what children need to know and be able to do, beginning in kindergarten through 12th grade. It is a good first step in moving education to even higher standards.
Common Core challenges students to think critically and solve complex problems, to get them ready for college, careers, and living in the 21st century. Also a majority of business leaders, policymakers, educators, parents and other individuals see the creation of these standards as vital to improving student achievement, closing equity gaps between states, and positioning the United States as a global education leader.
During my last six years of teaching students mathematics, I started to change my own thinking about how mathematics should be taught and learned.
I started to move away from a heavy emphasis on teaching students to memorize by rote.
I moved away from having my students just understand superficial facts and figures without more in-depth understanding that was applicable to real-world problems.
For those last six years, I worked with a new curriculum, new resources, and new teaching methods. I worked hard to help kids learn to analyze, to think about ideas and then test them. The main goal of that curriculum was to get kids to think like mathematicians rather than just do math. Time was my greatest challenge in this new approach to helping students learn mathematics.
Time will be a factor in implementing all the new curriculums, new teaching strategies, and using the new resources to help kids accomplish the standards. We must give our kids more time in school to truly accomplish this effort to raise the performances of our kids. Adjustments must be made in school day time on task and the school year will have to be expanded.
I keep a close watch on my three grandchildren's public school education and I fully support the Common Core standards.
I agree with U.S. Secretary of Education Arne Duncan's statement that says: "The (Common Core standards) will help teachers, students and parents know what is needed for students to succeed in college and careers, and will enable states, school districts and teachers to more effectively collaborate to accelerate learning and close achievement gaps nationwide."
John Binder taught middle school math for 34 years in Greenwood, Wi., before retiring to the Sheboygan area nine years ago.