Protecting Our Planet Starts with Us
Did you know that just 50 years ago, there was no Clean Air Act, no Clean Water Act? A factory could spew black clouds of toxic smoke into the air or dump tons of toxic waste into a nearby stream, and that was perfectly legal.
In spring 1970, a U.S. senator from Wisconsin, Gaylord Nelson, created Earth Day on April 22nd as a “national teach-in on the environment” and a way to raise awareness and issues of the environment onto the national agenda. That first year, 20 million Americans demonstrated in different U.S. cities and it has been growing ever since.
In honor of Earth Day tomorrow we want to share 10 simple choices that you can make to better our planet.
Help out in your community by volunteering in local cleanups. You can also help by simply picking up and trash you see as you’re walking in your neighborhood or on a hike.
Be cautious of how much water you’re wasting. We recommend turning off the water while brushing your teeth or washing your hands. The less water you use, the less wastewater will eventually end up in the ocean.
Ride Your Bike
Drive less and ride your bike more, if you have the option, to reduce your carbon footprint while getting yourself moving.
Buy less plastic and bring reusable shopping bags at the grocery store. It’s been estimated that Americans use 100 billion plastic bags a year. Many take up lots of places in landfills and they cause major problems for marine wildlife.
Refillable Water Bottles
It’s important to always stay hydrated! Using a refillable water bottle, preferably with a filter, helps you get fresh water every time without contributing to the estimated 2 million tons of plastic from water bottles that end up in landfills.
Plant A Tree
Not only do trees help cool things down by providing shade, they also provide food and oxygen, while saving energy, cleaning the air, and helping combat climate change.
Shop Your Local Farmer’s Market
Support small businesses by helping our planet when you buy fruits and vegetables locally. When you shop at the grocery store you’re also contributing to the shipment and travel that it takes to get from the farmer to the store, which can cause pollution and carbon emissions.
Shop Smart for Cloths
When shopping for a new outfit consider buying something that has already been used. This is great as it doesn’t involve any new resources to make the clothing.
Enjoy our beautiful planet and spend some time in nature and under the sun. Get your daily dose of Vitamin D by having a picnic, reading in a hammock, or simply running around with your kids or pets.
Reduce, Reuse, Recycle
Cut down on what you throw away by following the three “R’s” to conserve natural resources and landfill space.
At Image Cube, we continue to do our part year-round by delivering the highest quality products that require environmentally sustainable practices at every stage of our business. Learn more about our green marketing commitment towards environmental conservation. How will you be doing your part this Earth Day?