Welcome to Title 1 Marion Elementary
My name is Leslie Kazee and I am the Title 1 Teacher and Testing Coordinator at Marion Elementary. I have taught in McDowell County Schools for 28 years. My husband, Curtis and I live in Marion and have two amazing children and a lovely daughter in law. Our son, Aikman, is currently the Recreational Program Administrator at the McDowell County Parks and Recreation Department and our daughter, Landry, is a junior at Western Carolina University. My son's wife, Alyssa is a 4th grade teacher at West Marion Elementary.
I am passionate about reading and believe that children need a strong foundation in reading in to be successful in all areas of school. I strive to help each child reach their fullest potential.
I look forward to working with the students of Marion Elementary and their families this school year! If you should ever have any questions or concerns, please feel free to email me at firstname.lastname@example.org or call me at 828-652-2141.
What is Title 1?
McDowell County Schools
Title 1 Programs
All Title 1 programs in McDowell County use the Orton Gillingham Approach.
What is the Orton Gillingham Approach?
The Orton-Gillingham Approach is a direct, explicit, multisensory, structured, sequential, diagnostic, and prescriptive way to teach reading, writing, and spelling. The Orton-Gillingham Approach was derived from two sources: first from a body of time-tested knowledge and practice that has been validated over the past 80 years, and second from scientific evidence about how individuals learn to read and write.
Who is the Orton Gillingham Approach for?
The Orton-Gillingham Approach is most often associated with a one-on-one teacher-student instructional model or in small groups.
Orton Gillingham Focus:
Orton–Gillingham focuses on teaching reading at the word level. It can also help develop reading comprehension, but that’s not the main goal. This approach uses multiple senses to help students learn. For example, students might learn the letter p by seeing it, saying its name, and sounding it out while writing it with their fingers in sand. Orton–Gillingham also helps students understand the rules and patterns in reading. With those skills, they’re better able to decode, or sound out, words.
How Orton Gillingham Works:
The first step is for a specialist or teacher trained in the Orton–Gillingham approach to assess students. This shows students’ reading skills and areas of strength and challenges. Students are then taught in small groups. Instructors teach skills in a particular order, which is based on how people naturally develop language.Students must master each skill before they move on. If a student is confused, the instructor will reteach that skill. The goal is for students to use the skills they’ve learned to decode words independently.
School Improvement Plan