Safety training in the workplace prevents injuries and saves lives. This is why employers work with OSHA trainers to obtain OSHA safety certification that is relevant to their industry and specific requirements. Read on to discover the benefits of OSHA safety training and why you need it.
OSHA stands for ‘Occupational Safety and Health Act,’ a US federal agency that aims to protect employers and employees in all 50 states and certain territories, as well as jurisdictions under federal authority, such as Puerto Rico. OSHA training modules—particularly the OTI (OSHA Training Institute) Education Center program and the Outreach Trainiwng Program—are meant for employees covered under the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 that are within the geographic jurisdiction of the agency.
The Outreach Training Program is offered as the OSHA 30-hour training and OSHA 10-hour training module.
The 30-hour program is best suited for workers as well as supervisors who have safety responsibilities within the workplace. The program emphasizes hazard control, prevention, avoidance, and identification, as well as OSHA standards.
The 10-hour training module is not as in-depth, but will still teach workers how to identify, prevent, and abate job-related hazards while at work. It encompasses various general industry health and safety hazards that a worker may encounter in the workplace. There is an emphasis on basic hazard management as well as on employees’ rights when it comes to workplace safety, employer responsibilities, and how to file a complaint.
Training to obtain an OSHA safety certification is largely voluntary, but some state jurisdictions, employers, and unions make it mandatory. It’s important to check with them before enrolling in OSHA 10- or OSHA 30-hour training.
That said, all workers can benefit from training. The OSHA 30- or OSHA 10-hour training program can be used by employers as a means to introduce workplace safety hazards and the rights of workers under OSHA.
Following the course, an employer may require employees to complete more training on site-specific hazards that may be present (or are already present) in the worksite. After obtaining your OSHA safety certification, you will be given a completion card. This card doesn’t expire, but it’s still a good idea to invest in regular training to keep your skills and knowledge up to date. Consider taking OSHA outreach safety training courses every four to five years to stay on top of safety regulations and industry practices.
If you work in an industry that requires OSHA training and you are responsible for worker safety, then you should consider OSHA 30-hour training. The certification is ideal for site leads, supervisors, engineers, safety specialists, and project managers. All entry-level workers in construction or in the general industry may consider taking an OSHA 10-hour training course.
Regardless of your industry or field, you can find the right training and obtain OSHA safety certification from Impact Safety. We are a comprehensive safety source for a wide range of businesses looking for reliable OSHA 30-hour training or OSHA 10-hour training to reduce risk, protect their assets, and establish a compliant and safe work environment.