WAEC Literature In English Questions and Answers 2023 | Theory and OBJ- Download PDF. If you are about to write the West African Senior Certificate Exams (WASSCE), you will realize that you need the WAEC Past Questions and Answers.
This article provides you with WAEC Literature In English Questions and Answers for the WASSCE 2023. It contains information regarding the WAEC Literature In English Theory and Objective Questions and Answers.
The West African Examination Council (WAEC) Senior School Certificate Examination (SSCE) for May/June 2019 Literature-In-English paper will be written on Thursday 5th April.
For your information, there are three papers in Lit in Eng WAEC – Papers 1, 2 and 3, all of which must be taken different days.
Paper 1 & 2 (Objective and Prose) is combined in a paper taken at one sitting from 8:30am to 10:45am while Paper 3 (Drama and Poetry) will take place on Monday, 16th April from 1:30pm to 3:30pm [details will be posted as the day arrives].
WAEC Literature In English Objective Questions
1. Which of the following is common to all forms of literature?
2. The three major forms of literature are
A) tragedy,comedy, tragi-comedy
C) drama,lyric,prose fiction
D) poetry, drama, prose
3. Beauty in poetry depends mainly on
expression and rhythm
length and theme
vowels and consonants
mood and verse form
4. Read the extract below and answer this question.
But the towering earth was tired of sitting in one position. She moved, suddenly, and the houses crumbled, the mountains heaved horribly, and the work of a million years was lost. The predominant figure of speech in the above extracts is
WAEC Literature In English Theory Questions
VERIFIED LITERATURE OBJ
1. Comment on the attitude of the people of kufi towards superstition ? “Lonely days”
*Superstitions: *The novel explains how superstitious beliefs impact on
behaviour. For instance, wives were accused of killing their husbands
the belief that someone had to be responsible for every death. They also
suspected feathered creatures like birds as they were usually linked to
*2. How is Ajumobi portrays in the novel “Native Son”?*
Through Yaremi’s reminiscences, the author introduces his readers to
Ajumobi was a brave and powerful hunter who enjoyed boasting of his prowess
successful hunter. In his lifetime, he was firm and had absolute control of
Ajumobi was a happy and lively man. Like most men in Kufi, he liked
in the company of friends. He was quite ambitious. Prior to his death, he
renovate his house and even take a second wife.
Ajumobi is Yaremi’s late husband. He was a brave hunter who loved to boast
hunting prowess. He died after a brief illness. He was an ambitious man.
prior to his death he planned to renovate his house and take a second wife.
He was short
tempered and often reacted to Yaremi’s nagging. Like other men in Kufi, he
on few occasions.
Ajumobi was a brave and powerful hunter who enjoyed boasting
of his prowess as a successful hunter.
In his lifetime, he was firm and had absolute control of his household.
Ajumobi was a happy and lively man.
Like most men in Kufi, he liked
drinking palmwine in the company of
friends. He was quite ambitious. Prior
to his death, he planned to renovate his house and even take a second
wife. Yaremi loved her husband
greatly and in spite of their many
squabbles in his lifetime, she missed
his affection and companionship.
In Kufi, wives were accused of killing their husbands because of the belief that someone had to be responsible for every death. They also suspected feathered creatures like birds as they were usually linked to witchcraft
In the ancient Greek drama, Oedipus the
tragic hero is convinced he can overcome the Oracle’s predication that he will unwittingly kill his father and marry his mother. He blinds himself in a fit of rage after the prophecy is fulfilled.
Is the word given to the excessive pride exhibited by the tragic hero in
ancient Greek drama, which brings about his downfall. It is hubris that ultimately causes Bigger’s death. Filled with excitement after committing the
seemingly ultimate crime-killing and decapitating a white woman-Bigger puts aside his doubts and his instinctual desire to run and save himself and repeatedly returns to the scene of the crime, the Dalton house.
6. The use of irony in the text is called situational irony. Bigger has always regarded every white person as his mortal enemy and as fake will have it,a white friend is brought his way. To him, Every white person is a symbol of oppression. On the contrary. Many Dalton is friend to bigger but bigger is ready to exhibit his disdain for white folks as the same feelings is felt towards Jan too. On the other hand, many and jam (the two I white lovers ) shows him love and friendliness which makes him ashamed of himself. Both lovers are closing so at the rock of disapproval from their own folks. The two parties are actually operating in total ignorance of the other hand situation , a condition brought about by years of unhealthy extreme opinion of the other .
It is ironical that jam,whom bigger tried blame his murder of Mary on, would later take step to free the some bigger of culpability in the crime. He is the one who brings max to Bigger to act as his counsel during his arraignment.
Another ironic situation is noticed with the respect of bigger is freedom. While restricted to a cell in prison , he feels free where as outside he feel.
WAEC Literature Books and Reading Text for 2020 SSCE:
- AmmaDarko – Faceless
- BayoAdebowale – Lonely Days.
- Richard Wright – Native Son
- Patience Swift – The Last Goodman
- *William Shakespeare – OTHELLO.
- Oliver Goldsmith – She Stoops to conquer
- Lorraine Hansberry – A Raisin in the Sun.
- Frank Ogodo Ogbeche – Harvest of Corruption
- Dele Charley – The Blood of a Stranger.
- Birago Drop – Vanity
- Gbemisola Adeoti – Ambush
- Gabriel Okara – Piano and Drums
- Gbanabam Hallowell – The Dinning Table
- Lenrie Peter – The Panic of Growing Older
- Kofi Awoonor – The Anvil and the Hammer.
- Alfred Tennyson – Crossing the Bar
- George Herbert – The pulley
- William Blake – The School Boy
- William Morris – The Proud King
- Robert Frost Birches – Birches
- William Shakespeare – Shall I compare thee to a Summer’s Day?
(i) The Unseen Prose passage for Paper 1 shall be about 120 – 150 words long.
(ii) Only context questions shall be set on the Shakespearean text. The context questions will test such items as theme, characterization, style and setting in the Shakespearean text.
(iii) No essay question shall be set on the Shakespearean text.
- WAEC Physical Education Questions and Answers 2023 | Theory and OBJ- Download PDF
- WAEC Hausa Questions and Answers 2023 | Theory and OBJ- Download PDF
- WAEC Government Questions and Answers 2023 | Theory and OBJ- Download PDF
- WAEC Geography Questions and Answers 2023 | Theory and OBJ- Download PDF
- WAEC Agriculture Questions and Answers 2023 | Theory and OBJ- Download PDF
How to Download WAEC Past Questions and Answers
WAEC Past Questions and Answers are available for download for all subjects in PDF. To download WAEC Past Questions and Answers for Literature In English, you only need a phone, a whatsapp account and a Gmail address.
Then call 07063986527 and drop and WhatsApp message.
Click the Link Below to download WAEC Past Questions and Answers for Literature In English.
Download WAEC Past Questions and Answers for all Subjects Including practical
Disclaimer: Please note that we are not in any way affiliated to any of the organization’s mention here. Some of the organizations here do not release their past questions, so we can only compile likely questions and answers very related to the organization.
If You Want More Information, please subscribe to our email list and leave a comment with your number below, also Follow us on Facebook, Twitter, and Linkedin
Disclaimer: Please note that we are not in any way affiliated with any of the organizations or institutions here. All articles here are for the sole purpose of providing information. All Past questions are gotten from previous years’ examinations and likely questions from the Internet and related exams. We are not in any way promising that what you find in the past questions is what you will find in your examination. We are not in any way responsible for how the reader uses the information here. Please do consult an expert or professional in your field should the need arise.
Copyrights Infringement: No article from this website should be copied without a proper reference and link to the page picked from. Anything otherwise will lead to legal action of copyright infringement. All articles on this website are products of painstaking research from our writers and journalist. Should you find any material bearing semblance here to any material on your page, please quickly notify us by sending a mail to [email protected] and we will immediately commence the process of taking it down.
1 thought on “WAEC Literature In English Questions and Answers 2023 | Theory and OBJ- Download PDF”