ABALONE IS A
Did you know that Abalone is a great source of Nutrition?
Abalone is of the highest grade of seafood, living in clean and pristine environments where it grazes on the finest grasses and seaweeds of the oceans. This results in seafood, that is not only delicious but uniquely nutritious as well. It’s nutritional benefits include strengthening the immune system, improving appetite, good for eye health, as well as being a good source of nutrition. Most people think that Abalone is high in cholesterol, but this is not true.
Abalone is very high in protein and contains a wonderful and unique blend of important vitamins and minerals including but not limited to, calcium, iron, potassium, zinc, beta carotene, yet the fat content remains extremely low and it contains almost no cholesterol.
Compare the nutrition of Raw Abalone with the nutrition of other Raw Seafood and Meat per 100 g:
Nutrition Information Sourced from: 中国料理百科事典 by 同朋舍 (Encyclopedia of Chinese Cuisine)
• the health benefits of natural abalone •
Calcium is very important for a healthy body, playing a role in heart health, muscle function and nerve signalling, as well as strengthening your teeth and bones.
Energy is provided in foods we eat through nutrients such as carbohydrates, protein and fat, and is important to ensure we consume foods that provide us with energy in a balanced diet.
Iron is an important nutrient that helps in the functioning of all our cells, including red blood cells responsible for transporting oxygen around our body.
Vitamin B help to keep our cells and nervous system healthy, as well as helping break down food an convert into energy.
Potassium is one of the most important minerals in the body, which helps and allows nerve signals and muscle contractions. It also helps regulating fluid balance in the body.
Dietary fats are essential to give our bodies energy, support cell growth, keep us warm and protect our organs. It is very important to consume foods that will give you a balanced diet.
Phosphorus is key for formation of teeth and bones, and needed to make protein for the growth, maintenance and repairs of cells and tissues.
FAT AND CHOLESTEROL INTAKE FROM ABALONE
Percentage Fat Intake Per Day:
High intake of saturated fat, which is associated with high blood total and LDL ("Bad" type) cholesterol levels, may increase the risk for cardiovascular disease, according to Dietary Guidelines for Americans from USFDA. Major sources of saturated fatty acids in diet includes pork (24% of max. daily saturated fat intake) and beef (10%). Abalone only contributes to 1%, which is very low as compared with other food in your daily intake.
Percentage Cholesterol Intake Per Day
Some people think abalone is very high in cholesterol, but it is not true. According to nutrition facts from Calorie Count, USDA, FSANZ, and China's health research institution, cholesterol level in abalone is much lower than that in king prawn, octopus and cuttlefish, and is similar to those contained in beef, pork and chicken in your daily intake.
Cholesterol in food is called dietary cholesterol. Eating food high in dietary cholesterol actually only has a small impact on blood cholesterol in most people. High blood cholesterol level, especially the 'bad' type (LDL), are mainly caused by eating food high in saturated fat and trans fat.
• a deeper look into fat & cholesterol •