How to Report Material Losses on an Income Statement
Businesses use income statements to communicate to end users their performance at running their operations across a specific period of time. This performance is measured using net income, this being the total resultant change in the business's financial holdings due to it running its operations for the period. Net income is revenues minus expenses plus the net of nonoperating gains and losses. The net of nonoperating gains and losses is equal to nonoperating gains minus nonoperating losses.
Expenses and Nonoperating Losses
Expenses and nonoperating losses are similar in that both decrease the business's net income. Expenses are the sums the business spends in order to run its operations. In contrast, nonoperating losses occur when transactions arise out of events unrelated to the business's main operations. For example, the business spending cash to purchase products intended to be sold counts as an expense while an asset being sold for less than its value recorded on the accounts counts as a nonoperating loss.
Material means that the values of the nonoperating losses in question are large enough to influence the decision making of end users of financial statements. In contrast, being immaterial means accountants can choose to disregard such sums because their inclusion do not matter to the end users' decision making. As such, all losses reported on the income statement are considered material.
Accounting for Material Losses
Material losses are accounted for in much the same manner as expenses on the accounting ledger. The loss is recorded as a debit on the ledger's left side and then a corresponding credit is recorded on the ledger's right side. For example, if a business had an asset valued at $2,000 that is sold for $1,800, that business reduces the asset account by $2,000, increases its cash by $1,800, and then records the remainder as a $200 loss on sale of asset. In this case, the loss's corresponding credit lies in the $2,000 deduction of the asset account.
Accounting for the Income Statement
At the end of each accounting period, the value of losses is transferred to the income account. Similar to expenses, losses decrease the value of the income account as opposed to revenues and gains that increase the income account. On the income statement, this tends to be depicted in one of two ways -- either the losses are included in a small subsection after the expenses or both gains and losses are included in their own section after the expenses. In either case, their impact on the business's net income is the same.
Alan Li started writing in 2008 and has seen his work published in newsletters written for the Cecil Street Community Centre in Toronto. He is a graduate of the finance program at the University of Toronto with a Bachelor of Commerce and has additional accreditation from the Canadian Securities Institute.