Its natural characteristics, united by a varied and unique geography, achieve the perfect combination for the land to offer us wines with diverse and unparalleled flavours. Chile holds many secrets in its land with a rich geography like no other.al.
Chile has geographic barriers that are unique in the world. It includes the Atacama desert in the North, the Andes mountains to the East, the ice fields of Patagonia in the South and the Pacific Ocean to the West. These natural borders make it an agricultural island beyond compare.
The fresh sea breeze is partially blocked by the coastal mountains, but it finds new ways in to the valleys and across their rivers. During the day, the sea breeze generated by the Humboldt current penetrates inland and each night, the fresh air descends from the mountains and covers the mountainous Andes regions in snow.
Chile: Not by length, but by width
Despite what one might think, it isn’t the distance from the equator that has the dominant role here. Instead it is the proximity to the Pacific Ocean or the Andes mountains. Chile has much more diversity in soils and climate from East to West, not North to South.
Blessed flora and fauna
The combination of natural barriers and a mild Mediterranean climate gives us sustainability and prosperous development in the nation’s viniculture. For that reason, Chile has one of the biggest organic vineyards in the world.
The influence of the Pacific on the climate
The cooling effect of the Pacific Ocean and the Humbolt current, which begins at the frozen waters near Antarctica, have an important influence on the climate of our country. When the cold current hits the coast of North Chile it produces clouds and fog, but little or no rain. This contributes towards the existence of the Atacama desert, the driest desert in the world.
Ideal mediterranean climate
The Mediterranean climate of Chile can count on warm and dry summers, along with cold and wet winters, ideal for wine lovers. The interaction between the effects of the sea and the Andes mountains favours the vineyard in its growing season. The vines delight in sunny days and temperatures that have a spectacular drop each night, creating a wide thermal amplitude daily that helps the wine grapes develop fresh fruit flavours, acidity, and in the case of red wines, mature textures with deep colour and high levels of antioxidants and quality.
Altitude in the mountains
The omnipresence of the mountains covered in snow that tower over the valleys is our trademark, and with it they bring characteristics that are unique in the world. In the last few years, a countless number of vineyards have developed from the high peaks of the mountains, where the sun arrives late from the East and compensates its late arrival with intensity. Wind streams rise and fall throughout the day in order to create a daily pendulum of temperatures, which oscillate widely between the maximum daily temperatures and the minimum nightly temperatures. This is the ideal setting for flavourful red grapes to flourish, like Cabernet Sauvignon.
Soil and terrains
The chilean landscape also offers a vast mosaic of terrains and types of soil. The soils are healthy, with good drainage and have a good variety of origins (alluvial, colluvial, fluvial etc) and textures (loam, clay, sand, limestone etc). Despite the relatively dry atmospheric conditions, there is abundant water for irrigation which flows from the never-ending layers of ice in the Andes mountain range.
The marvel of the valleys
Through the Central Valley you can visit a long stretch of Chile. The rivers flow towards the West of the Andes and turn to the Coastal Mountain range which appear towards the interior. Varieties like Carmenere adore this characteristic of the environment, where the climate is stable and the land is generally rich.
The cold waters
Anyone who has taken a dip into the Pacific Ocean knows how cold the water is. And when this hits the coast, you feel it. It covers the land with a thick and cool fog every morning which lifts by midday to permit the sun light to come through. As a result, grapes like Sauvignon Blanc, Chardonnay and Pinot Noir flourish because of these exact conditions that cool the climate.
The diverse geography and beneficial climate of Chile are factors that immediately make this country the logical option for wine consumers who today expect high quality products. Natural characteristics help maintain healthy conditions and protect the vines against the presence of plagues and illnesses. Geographical diversity allows Chile to have a climate with tremendous variation and perfect for viniculture.