It has always been a bit of a puzzle - why is Thanet known as an isle?
For the occasional flooding across some of the lowland areas, Thanet certainly isn't actually an island - so was it a historical oversight, or does it perhaps give us a glimpse into the areas past?
Thanet is well connected. It has trains to London and other parts of Kent, motorways, and even ships to France. But it hasn't always been that way.
Some 5,000 years ago Thanet was separated from mainland Britain by 600 metres of sea - The Wantsum Channel.
When the English Channel was formed by the sea breaking through, an island of chalk was left on the east side of the county - now known as the Isle of Thanet.
The Wantsum Channel, which stood between Kent and Thanet, was originally up to two miles wide and traces of it can still be seen today.
The Channel was protected by the Roman-built Richborough Castle at one end and Reculver Fort at the other.
The first bridge to connect Thanet to Kent was built in 1485 and there wasn't even a ferry from Sandwich until the mid 1700s. So where did it go?
Over the last 1000 years, the channel has become silted up with silt from the River Stour.
So with this silt and the shingle which was building up along the coast, the Channel has disappeared and joined Thanet to Kent.
But the land where the Channel used to lay is still only a few feet above sea level and traces can still be spotted from the peninsular.
Cut off again
In January 1953 the Kent coast was battered by a storm causing death and destruction.
The infamous storm also caused a huge flood that let to the Island being virtually cut off again, which prompted urgent action to strengthen sea defences.
But if you walk along the sea walls from Reculver, you can still see how low the land is and today, small harbours and quays remain in the villages surrounded the old Channel.
So where does 'Thanet' come from?
There are a number of suggestions,some darker than others, as to where the name 'Thanet' originates.
The similar name 'Tenet' was listed in the Domesday book in 1086, which could give some clue.
The classical 18th century dictionary of John Lemprise includes the word 'tane'tus', which is a small island of Albion.
Alternatively Greek astrologer Ptolemy called the Isle 'Tolianis'.
In-keeping with the Greek theme, according to Greek legend Britain was the home to the dead and the bodies were rowed across the sea in un-manned boats in the middle of the night.
They were then returned empty before dawn from a mysterious place was called "Ynys Thanatos" - the Isle of the Dead.
Thanet has more Bronze age burial mounds than anywhere else in Britain, which could have been seen right out to sea.