4.1 Overview: Etiologies of Cutaneous Ulcers
Identifying the cause of a cutaneous ulcer is of- ten a multi-staged, challenging process. Not in- frequently, it requires considerable expertise in general medicine as well as in dermatology and a thorough laboratory investigation. This chap- ter, together with Chaps. 5 and 6, reviews etiolo-
Etiology and Mechanisms
of Cutaneous Ulcer Formation 4
4.1 Overview: Etiologies of Cutaneous Ulcers 31 4.2 Mechanisms of Ulcer Formation 31 4.3 Mechanisms of Formation
of Specific Types of Cutaneous Ulcers 36 4.3.1 Ulceration Following Injury/
External Damage to the Skin 36 4.3.2 Infections 37
4.3.3 Vascular Disease 41
4.3.4 Leukocytoclastic Vasculitis 44 4.3.5 Connective Tissue
and Multisystem Diseases 44 4.3.6 Hypercoagulable States 44
4.3.7 Metabolic Disorders: Diabetes Mellitus 45 4.3.8 Hematologic Abnormalities 47
4.3.9 Nutritional Disorders 48 4.3.10 Other Causes 48
I t is better not to stand in the case of an ulcer on the leg.
gies of skin ulcers and discusses the basic pro- cesses underlying these mechanisms.
It is a well-known axiom in medicine that things do not always turn out to be as they first appear. A cutaneous ulcer that seems to result from venous insufficiency may, following thorough investigation, turn out to be a mani- festation of carcinoma or the outcome of an occult infectious process. In some cases, the underlying disease is rare, requiring consider- able clinical experience for its identification.
Etiologies of cutaneous ulcers are presented in Table 4.1. Note that in many patients, there are several co-existing etiologies. Moreover, in certain conditions, such as venous insufficien- cy, lymphedema, peripheral arterial disease, or diabetes, the skin is much more vulnerable. In these cases, development of a cutaneous ulcer is not necessarily ‘spontaneous’ – the skin tends to ulcerate following various triggers such as pen- etrating injury, blunt trauma, or contact derma- titis. One should distinguish between underly- ing conditions that gradually affect the quality of the skin and actual triggers that result direct- ly in ulceration .
4.2 Mechanisms of Ulcer Formation As Table 4.1 indicates, there is a wide array of possible etiologies of cutaneous ulcers. Howev- er, in many cases, it is not sufficient to merely
‘label’ or classify an ulcer as being caused by a specific disease. In a given disease, or for any given ‘etiology’, the ulcer may be formed by a series of complex mechanisms. Hence, the exact mechanism by which the ulcer was formed should also be considered.
One may assume that the main mechanism
of ulceration in an infectious process is a direct
Trauma (including self-inflicted ulcers) Burns
Injection sites (e.g., heroin, cocaine, steroids) Severe contact dermatitis (e.g., chrome ulcers)
Cold exposure: frostbite; chillblain (perniosis); Raynaud’s phenomenon Radiation dermatitis
Bites (spider, scorpion, snake)
Pressure ulcers (presented here as a model of ongoing injury)
In the course of bullous erysipelas (or cellulitis) Necrotising fasciitis
Skin over a bone affected by osteomyelitis Ecthyma
Meleney’s ulcer (progressive bacterial synergistic gangrene) Noma (chancrum oris)
Tropical ulcer (tropical sloughing phagedena) Mycobacterial
Tuberculosis (M. tuberculosis)
Swimming pool granuloma (M. marinum) Buruli ulcer (M. ulcerans)
Leprosy (M. leprae) Spirochetal
Tularemia (Francisella tularensis) Anthrax (Bacillus anthracis) Viral
Herpes genitalis CMV
Ecthymatous varicella zoster Fungal
Deep fungal infections Protozoal
Lymphogranuloma venereum Granuloma inguinale Herpes genitalis
Table 4.1.Etiologies of cutaneous ulcers
Mechanisms of Ulcer Formation 33
Table 4.1.Etiologies of cutaneous ulcers (Continued)
Peripheral arterial disease
Thromboangiitis obliterans (Buerger’s disease) Embolus: atheromatous,
cholesterol, cardiac origin Lymphedema
Nodular vasculitis (erythema induratum) Serum sickness
Cryoglobulinemia (mixed, type II & III) Erythema elevatum diutinum
Connective tissue/multisystem diseases
Rheumatoid arthritis Systemic lupus erythematosus Dermatomyositis
Polyarteritis nodosa Wegener’s granulomatosis Churg-Strauss syndrome Systemic sclerosis Behçet’s disease Sjögren’s syndrome Temporal arteritis Takayasu disease
Cryoglubulinemia (monoclonal, type 1) Cryofibrinogemia
Coumarin-induced necrosis Heparin necrosis
Disseminated intravascular coagulation Purpura fulminans
Protein C deficiency
Activated protein C resistance Protein S deficiency
Anti-thrombin III deficiency Hyperhomocystinemia
Table 4.1.Etiologies of cutaneous ulcers (Continued)
Hemolytic anemia Hemoglobinopathies
Sickle cell anemia Thalassemia
Hereditary spherocytosis Pyruvate kinase deficiency
Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
Myeloproliferative diseases Polycythemia vera Essential thrombocytosis
Lymphoproliferative diseases B-cell lymphoma
Acute and chronic leukemia
Epithelial tumors Basal cell carcinoma Squamous cell carcinoma Keratoacanthoma
Other epidermal tumors Malignant melanoma Merkel cell carcinoma Tumors of skin appendages
(i.e., sebaceous carcinoma)
Lymph vessel/Vascular tumors Hemangioma
Kaposi’s sarcoma and other sarcomatous tumors
Other soft tissue tumors Histiocytosis syndromes
Malignant peripheral nerve tumors
Other tumors (non-cutaneous) that may affect skin By direct invasion into the skin
Skin metastases originating from an internal malignant tumor
Mechanisms of Ulcer Formation 35
Table 4.1.Etiologies of cutaneous ulcers (Continued)
Diabetes mellitus Leprosy
Tabes dorsalis Syringomyelia Poliomyelitis
Hereditary peripheral sensory neuropathy type 4 (insensitivity to pain)
Diabetes mellitus Prolidase deficiency Calciphylaxis
Pancreatic fat necrosis Weber-Christian disease
Histiocytic cytophagic panniculitis α 1 anti-trypsin deficiency panniculitis Nodular vasculitis
Noma (chancrum oris)
Tropical ulcer (Tropical sloughing phagedena) Vitamin C deficiency
Pyoderma gangrenosum Metastatic Crohn’s disease Necrobiosis lipoidica diabeticorum Atrophie blanche
Kawasaki syndrome Klinefelter’s syndrome Insect infestation
Drugs that induce ulceration directly
Drugs that interfere with normal mechanisms of wound healing Drugs that adversely affect the quality of the skin
(detailed in chapter 16)
toxic effect and its subsequent abnormal local inflammatory processes [2, 3]. However, some infectious diseases may result in ulcers by other mechanisms. For example, hepatitis B may in- duce leukocytoclastic vasculitis, cryoglobuline- mia, or periarteritis nodosa, all of which may lead to the development of cutaneous ulcers.
Moreover, in certain infectious diseases such as syphilis, tuberculosis, and leprosy, there are unique pathways by which cutaneous ulcers may appear, as detailed below.
Similarly, several pathways may lead to ulcer- ation in connective-tissue diseases. Ulcers may be caused by vasculitis, Raynaud’s phenome- non, secondary anti-phospholipid syndrome, or other mechanisms, as discussed below.
4.3 Mechanisms of Formation of Specific Types
of Cutaneous Ulcers
Since the subject of cutaneous ulcer formation is extensive, this section limits the discussion to the mechanisms of formation in certain types of cutaneous ulcers, with reference to the data pre- sented in the table above. We shall concentrate here on those topics particularly important for establishing an etiologic diagnosis clinically.
4.3.1 Ulceration Following Injury/
External Damage to the Skin
22.214.171.124 Trauma and Ulcers
Mechanical trauma or some other injury may result in a cutaneous ulcer. In some cases, the external trauma may be minor. Although the patient may consider it to be the cause of the ul- cer, the skin may have been previously affected by some underlying process (e.g., deep fungal infection or malignancy) which may well be the actual cause of the ulcer and should be identi- fied.
Note that a skin injury may become a portal of entry for bacterial or fungal infection, with subsequent ulceration. Even a superficial ero- sion due to trauma may become an ulcer fol-
lowing bacterial infection. The chances of this occurring are much higher when there is an underlying problem such as diabetes or periph- eral arterial disease.
Self-Inflicted Ulcers. In most cases, self- inflicted ulcers are induced by continuous scratching, rubbing, or cutting of the skin. Once an ulcer exists, the continuing ‘fiddling’ with it by the patient interferes with its normal heal- ing process.
The clinical appearance of such ulcers de- pends on the way in which they were created.
For example, they may present sharp angular borders as a result of the device or instrument that was used. In some cases, self-inflicted ul- cers are induced by injecting foreign material into the skin. This issue is discussed in Chap. 16.
126.96.36.199 Contact Dermatitis
Patients with leg ulcers often suffer from con- tact dermatitis. Leg ulceration has been report- ed following exposure to numerous topical preparations applied to cutaneous ulcers such as topical antibiotics, certain vehicles (e.g., lan- olin), or preservatives [4–6]. In these patients, the application of such preparations may sig- nificantly aggravate the ulcers. Be aware of this possibility; topical treatment should be re-eval- uated and patch tests performed when needed.
Moreover, skin areas affected by contact der- matitis may be secondarily infected, with the subsequent formation of cutaneous ulcers.
In addition, the following should be noted with regard to cutaneous ulcers and contact dermatitis:
5 A few substances such as chromates [7, 8] or sodium silicate  are well- known inducers of contact derma- titis. They have a highly irritant and corrosive effect, and patients may present with severe dermatitis char- acterized by the appearance of cuta- neous ulcers. Skin ulceration has al-
so been documented following the use of povidone iodine .
5 The scrotal skin is highly vulner- able. Certain topical preparations that would not normally cause con- tact dermatitis elsewhere may in- duce severe irritant contact derma- titis with ulceration when applied to the scrotal skin .
5 Jacquet’s erosive diaper dermatitis has been attributed to the presence of various chemicals used in home diapering. This problem is much less common these days due to the widespread use of disposable dia- pers .
188.8.131.52 Pressure Ulcers
Pressure ulcers are presented here as a model of continuous injury. The prevalence of pressure ulcers varies from population to population.
Elderly patients, or patients who are bed-rid- den or bound to a wheelchair, are particularly prone to pressure ulcers. They may occur in an immobilized or bed-ridden patient of any age [13–15]. For example, among patients admitted to hospital following spinal cord injury, the prevalence, 1–5 years after the initial injury, is between 20% and 30% .
Two other commonly accepted terms for pressure ulcers are ‘pressure sores’ and ‘decubit- us ulcers’.
Mechanism of Formation. Local pressure on the affected site is the most important etiolog- ic factor, with the degree of pressure and its du- ration being the most significant variables [14, 17]. Pressure ulcers tend to develop in areas where soft tissues are compressed for pro- longed periods between a bony prominence and any external object, but they may also evolve over any cutaneous region that is ex- posed to continuous pressure. Pressures ex- ceeding normal capillary pressure result in re- duced oxygenation and impair the microcircu-
lation of the affected tissue. Garfin et al.  de- termined that 30 mmHg was the critical value for ischemia. However, high pressures of 70 mmHg or more, which may occur when a patient lies on a standard hospital mattress, may induce tissue death within a few hours [14, 19–21]. Most of the potential damage may be prevented by relieving the pressure intermit- tently [22, 23]. Therefore, prolonged immobil- ization is a significant risk factor [24, 25]. This emphasizes the importance of frequently mov- ing and repositioning immobilized patients in order to prevent the formation of pressure ulcers.
Apart from pressure, there are other me- chanical factors such as shearing forces and friction which may enhance ulceration [14, 26–29]. Significant topical factors include ex- cessive moisture and exposure to irritant sub- stances. Both the general condition and nutri- tional status of the patient play a major role in the formation of pressure ulcers.
Location. More than 90% of pressure ulcers appear on the lower parts of the body – 65% in the pelvic region and 30% on the lower legs.
Heels and malleoli are also frequently affected [14, 30].
Clinical Appearance. The clinical appear- ance of a pressure ulcer depends on its severity.
Several gradation scales have been proposed. A commonly accepted system was developed in the USA in 1987 by The National Pressure Ulcer Advisory Panel (NPUAP) (see Chap. 1) .
Pressure ulcers are characterized by periph- eral undermining. At any stage, the initial im- pression of the depth of a pressure ulcer may be misleading and the ulceration of the tissue may be much deeper and more extensive than origi- nally thought.
Mild injuries may be aggravated when they be- come secondarily infected by bacteria such as Staphylococci or Streptococci. In some cases, an ulcer caused by a relatively minor trauma may become deeper as a result of infection.
Mechanisms of Formation of Specific Types 37
As described below, legs affected by venous insufficiency, peripheral arterial disease, or dia- betes are at a particularly high risk of develop- ing ulcers following trivial trauma, which may be associated with infection. By the same token, erosions of bullous diseases may deepen in the case of a secondary infection, resulting in the formation of cutaneous ulcers. We discuss be- low classical examples of cutaneous infectious processes: cellulitis, necrotizing fasciitis, and ecthyma.
184.108.40.206 Erysipelas and Cellulitis
Erysipelas and cellulitis may cause leg ulcers.
The main mechanism of ulcer formation in these cases is the direct effect of bacterial tox- ins. Presumably, the associated edema also interferes with lymphatic and venous return and further contributes to the ulceration.
Approximately 3% of bullous erysipelas may result in ulceration  (Fig. 4.1). Other (less frequent) cases of ulceration in erysipelas or cellulitis are due to abscess formation, or con- comitant trauma. Note that cellulitis or erysipe- las can be associated with a pre-existing ulcer.
Repeated episodes of cellulitis or erysipelas cause cumulative tissue damage, which almost certainly further compromises lymphatic and venous return. Following an episode of cellu- litis there is some degree of damage to the limb
tissue, which increases the likelihood of recur- rent local infection.
220.127.116.11 Necrotizing Fasciitis
Necrotizing fasciitis is an extreme example of an ulcerative process caused by bacterial infec- tion. It is defined as a deep-seated infection of the subcutaneous tissue, causing invasive de- struction of the fascia and subcutaneous fat, with or without overlying cellulitis . In cas- es where the genitalia are involved, the pre- ferred term is Fournier’s gangrene.
In the past two decades there has been a no- ticeable increase in reports of invasive group A streptococcal infections, leading to necrotizing fasciitis. Other types of bacteria, such as Clos- tridium perfringes or Clostridium septicum, may also cause necrotizing fasciitis. In addition, it may be caused by a synergistic combination of organisms such as anaerobes with aerobic gram-negative bacteria. Mixed infections tend to occur in children, in diabetic patients, or in patients with an open wound exposed to bowel content [34, 35].
The course of necrotizing fasciitis is ex- tremely severe, frequently with a fatal outcome.
This quality has earned it the science-fiction- like name, ‘flesh-eating bacterium’. It can occur in normally healthy people, sometimes follow- ing a relatively minor trauma. A high incidence of necrotizing fasciitis has been reported in people with diabetes, malnutrition, obesity, and malignancy, and in drug addicts [36, 37].
Its severe pathogenicity is attributed to bac- terial toxins such as exotoxin A in the case of group A Streptococcus. Delay in the diagnosis or treatment of this disease can have fatal conse- quences. It requires radical debridement, high- dose antibiotic therapy, and intensive suppor- tive care.
In view of the unique, severe character of this condition, it may be regarded as a separate category, different from the various types of cu- taneous ulcers described in this chapter. How- ever, even after the invasive process has been arrested, it may leave a residue of chronic, diffi- cult-to-heal ulcers.
Fig. 4.1.Bullous erysipelas with erosions. In many cases, chronic leg ulcers may evolve
Ecthyma (Fig. 4.2) is a classic example of an ul- cer caused by Streptococcal toxins (Staphylo- cocci may also be identified within a lesion).
Such a lesion begins as a vesicle or a pustule that undergoes ulceration. It occurs most com- monly on the lower extremities. Ecthyma usu- ally occurs following minor trauma in children or elderly people under poor hygienic condi- tions. It is frequent in warm, moist, tropical re- gions .
In other infectious diseases and pathologic processes the mechanisms of ulcer formation are more complex. As described below, ulcers may develop in certain specific or unique forms of certain diseases.
Apart from the primary chancre (detailed in the section ‘Venereal Ulcers’ in Chap. 5), oth- er types of ulcerated lesions may evolve in the course of syphilis:
5 Ulcerated skin lesions may occur in the nodulo-ulcerative type of late/tertiary syphilis. Syphilitic gummata, appearing as pink/red painless nodules in late/tertiary syphilis, may also undergo ulcera- tion [39, 40].
5 In addition, cutaneous ulcers may appear in ‘malignant’ syphilis (lues maligna, rupial syphilid) in the con- text of secondary syphilis. Typical papulopustules, located mainly on the face and scalp, gradually become necrotic, with subsequent formation of ‘rupioid’ ulcers. The adjective
‘rupioid’ is derived from the appear- ance of the crusts that cover the ul- cers, which are thick and dark in color and resemble an oyster shell [39, 41]. Recently, cases of malignant syphilids have been reported in HIV patients .
Ulcers may occur in several types of tuber- culosis:
5 Lupus vulgaris: Plaques of lupus vul- garis may ulcerate. Most commonly, the lesions appear in the head and neck region, i.e., on the nose, cheeks, and earlobes. Ulcerative and mutilat- ing forms of lupus vulgaris are char- acterized by ulceration that may be severely invasive .
5 Tuberculous chancre: This may ap- pear as a ragged ulcer with under- mined margins .
5 Scrofuloderma: The lesion begins as a bluish-red nodule that may ulcer- ate. It is situated over an infected lymph node or over an infected joint.
5 Papulo-necrotic tuberculid: In this form, symmetrically distributed reddish papules, usually located on the extensor regions of the extrem- ities, back, and buttocks, may break down and form ulcers.
5 Tuberculous gumma: In this form of tuberculosis, also called ‘metastatic tuberculous abscess’, a subcutaneous nodule may ulcerate. Lesions may oc- cur in malnourished children [43, 44]
5 Miliary tuberculosis: Lesions of miliary tuberculosis may ulcerate [43, 45].
Mechanisms of Formation of Specific Types 39
The classical form of ulcers in leprosy is the ‘neu- ropathic ulcer’. Infiltration of peripheral nerves of the lower limbs by Mycobacterium leprae is followed by the development of cutaneous ulcers due to sensory and motor neuropathy. The for- mer results in anesthesia of the sole with subse- quent loss of protective sensation, while the lat- ter leads to difficulty in activating certain muscle groups and to inadequate distribution of pres- sure on the sole while walking [46–50].
In addition, cutaneous nodules infiltrated by the bacteria may ulcerate. This occurs more of- ten in areas exposed to trauma.
One should identify other conditions that may develop in the course of leprosy, where cutaneous ulcers may develop:
5 Lesions of erythema nodosum lepro- sum may ulcerate [51, 52].
5 A relatively rare complication of dif- fuse lepromatous leprosy is known as
‘Lucio’s phenomenon’. This is a cuta- neous vasculitis manifested by the ap- pearance of pink-to-red plaques, lo- cated mainly on the buttocks and low- er limbs, which may undergo severe ulceration [51, 53, 54].
18.104.22.168 Infections in Immuno- compromised Patients
In immune deficiency states, organisms which usually do not cause ulceration may re- sult in the development of ulcerated lesions:
5 In HIV patients, varicella infection may result in ecthymatous varicella zoster.
5 Perianal ulcerated lesions have been documented in immunocompromised patients due to the herpes virus or CMV [55, 56] (Fig. 4.3).
5 Ecthyma gangrenosum is a typical le- sion appearing in immunocomprom-
ised patients (Fig. 4.4). It begins as a he- morrhagic vesicle or pustule that undergoes ulceration. In more than 80% of cases, it occurs in the perineal region or on the extremities. Ecthyma gangrenosum lesions are usually caused by Pseudomonas. However, Klebsiella and other bacteria have also been iso- lated. It may occur in the course of bac- teremia, when it is considered to be a marker of poor prognosis .
5 Fungal infections tend to be more ag- gressive in immunocompromised pa- tients . In rare cases, atypical fun- gal ulcerating lesions have been doc- umented in patients with no known immune system disorder [59, 60].
Fig. 4.3. Perianal ulceration in a leukemic patient;
herpes virus was cultured from the lesion
Fig. 4.4.Ecthyma gangrenosum, initial lesion
4.3.3 Vascular Disease
22.214.171.124 Venous Ulcers
Around 70% of leg ulcers are venous in origin [61–63] (Fig. 4.5). Older sources of data may present a higher percentage. However, in mod- ern medicine, the prevalence of venous ulcers is declining. This is attributed to the higher stan- dards of medical care currently practiced. The significance of compression therapy is well rec- ognized nowadays; the use of low-molecular- weight heparins prevents venous thromboem-
bolism in high-risk situations. In addition, vein surgery has become minimally invasive.Venous insufficiency may coexist with peripheral arte- rial disease in 10–15% of patients with leg ulcers [63, 64]. In many cases, the direct trigger for ul- ceration is some external physical injury [1, 65].
Whereas in a healthy person mild injury does not cause significant damage, in patients with venous insufficiency the skin runs a much higher risk of developing ulceration.
Histologically, microvessels in areas subjected to chronic venous hypertension become dilated and coiled; i.e., they have a glomerular appear- ance in intravital capillaroscopy. In the advanced disease, the number of functioning, perfused capillaries is markedly reduced [66–69]. The se- verity of cutaneous microangiopathy has been found to correlate closely to the development of clinical cutaneous trophic changes [66, 70].
Mechanisms of Formation. At present, the exact mechanism leading to the histologic pic- ture and tissue damage in venous insufficiency remains uncertain. Nevertheless, in recent years we have acquired an increased under- standing of certain physiological mechanisms involved in this process.
In chronic venous insufficiency, the venous pressure (or venous hypertension) in the deep venous system may be transmitted to the superficial system. Partsch  suggested that venous insufficiency is characterized by peaks of pressure occurring with every muscle con- traction and transmitted to the capillary net- work. It is suggested that these pressure peaks have a progressive, gradual, destructive effect on the capillaries in the skin and subcutaneous tissues [72–74].
In addition, leakage of fluids from within the capillaries into the interstitium of the dermis and subcutaneous tissues results in edema.
Whatever the mechanisms leading to edema, edema in itself has been shown to affect the quality of the skin. It induces sclerotic changes in subcutaneous tissue, with consequent interfer- ence of metabolic and gas exchange . More- over, due to the presence of edema, lymphatic vessels and their valves are subjected to fibrotic changes, with a further reduction in normal lymphatic function and drainage of the tissues, which sets up a vicious cycle of edema [76, 77].
Mechanisms of Formation of Specific Types 41
Fig. 4.5 a, b.Venous ulcers.a.Brown pigmentation of sta- sis dermatitis around the ulcer.b.Lipodermatosclerotic leg; varicosities are seen in the medial area of the foot
Endothelial damage, therefore, is the result of edema with subsequent impaired oxygena- tion and interference of metabolic activity (and, perhaps, peaks of venous pressure). Inter- cellular adhesion molecules seem to play a sig- nificant role in the pathologic process, as re- flected by their expression on endothelial cells [78–81]. This process is followed by endothelial- leukocyte adhesion and the trapping of white cells within the capillaries. Loss of endothelial integrity, together with the increasing presence of white blood cells, may lead to the destruction of adjacent tissue, protracted inflammation, and fibrosis [82–86].
In addition to the above, numerous hypothe- ses have been put forward to explain the ex- act mechanism of skin damage and the de- velopment of ulceration in the presence of venous insufficiency.
Two presented below are worth mentioning:
5 Pericapillary fibrin cuffs are a prom- inent histological feature of venous insufficiency. In 1982, Browse and Burnard [87, 88] suggested that ve- nous hypertension, transmitted to the capillary network, results in the distention of capillary walls and the widening of capillary pores. Subse- quently, fibrinogen molecules leak into the extracellular fluid, forming complexes of fibrin around the cap- illaries. The pericapillary fibrin layer is claimed to form a mechanical bar- rier, which prevents the transfer of oxygen and nutrients, leading to progressive damage to the skin and subcutaneous tissues.
However, other researchers have in- dicated that the fibrin cuffs do not function as a barrier for oxygen transport . If so, these cuffs only seem to reflect abnormal microcir- culation with transmural deposition of plasmatic macromolecules.
5 Falanga and Eaglstein  have suggested that growth factors may be trapped by certain macromole- cules leaking through the capillary pores into the dermis. Therefore, growth factors are unable to partici- pate and function in the processes of tissue repair.
Location. The above discussion may help to explain the distribution of venous ulcers. Since venous pressure and the subsequent detrimen- tal effect on tissue is maximal distally, venous ulcers tend to occur in the lower calf. The me- dial malleolus is more commonly affected than the lateral. This finding is attributed to the anatomy of the venous system, in which a larg- er mass of venous vessels is located medially.
Therefore, the medial aspects of the legs are subjected to higher venous pressures. Never- theless, not infrequently these ulcers may ap- pear above the lateral malleolus as well .
Lateral venous ulcers usually reflect the pres- ence of an incompetent lesser saphenous vein, with or without deep venous insufficiency. Oth- er characteristics of venous ulcers are detailed in Chap. 5.
126.96.36.199 Ulcers in Peripheral Arterial Disease
Most patients with peripheral arterial disease are over the age of 70. In contrast to venous ul- cers, arterial ulcers are increasing in number.
People live longer nowadays, and peripheral ar- terial disease is becoming more prevalent. Arte- rial ulcers are estimated to constitute about 10% of leg ulcers . Mixed ulcers, of arterial and venous disease, are said to affect approxi- mately 10–15% of patients with leg ulcers [63, 64].
Mechanisms of Formation. In many cases, so-called ‘arterial’ ulcers develop following physical trauma . The trauma may be mi- nor, but it affects vulnerable, poorly vascular-
ized tissue, which is not able to heal as normal- ly vascularized healthy tissue does. Moreover, the trauma site may become the portal of entry for infectious agents, further aggravating ulcer- ation.
In other cases, arterial ulcers may appear without trauma, when critical limb ischemia has developed. Beyond a certain degree of is- chemia, there is a complex chain of events that may end in necrosis.
The definition of critical limb ischemia, according to the Trans-Atlantic Inter-Society Consensus Document on the Management of Peripheral Arterial Disease (The TASC Work- ing Group 2000), is based on a patient having chronic ischemic rest pain, ulcers, or gangrene attributable to objectively proven arterial oc- clusive disease [92, 93]. The suggested inclusion criteria in TASC for critical leg ischemia were absolute ankle pressure below 50–70 mmHg or reduced toe pressure (<30–50 mmHg).
Atherosclerosis of large arteries is the funda- mental process in the pathogenesis of chronic critical limb ischemia. It results in occlusion or severe narrowing of vessels, with subsequent reduction of blood flow and decreased perfu- sion to distal regions. Other parameters such as low blood pressure or the presence of anemia may influence the degree of ischemia, and hence the likelihood of progression to necrosis.
Location. Since a high percentage of arterial ulcers are caused by trauma, arterial ulceration (above the threshold of critical limb ischemia)
may develop anywhere on the lower calves. Ul- cers tend to appear in the lateral or pretibial ar- ea of the leg or on the dorsum of the foot (Fig.
4.6). Note that they may appear in the malleo- lar region as well.
If critical limb ischemia has developed, it may be manifested by distal necrosis of the toes or forefoot (Fig. 4.7). This condition has a poor prognosis, and amputation may be required.
The dorsum of the feet and heels may be affect- ed as well.
Other characteristics of arterial ulcers are detailed in Chap. 5.
188.8.131.52 Peripheral Arterial Disease and Hypertensive Ulcers
Hypertensive ulcers were described by Marto- rell in 1945 as ulcers located in the pretibial or lateral area of the leg. These ulcers were said to occur mainly in hypertensive women above the age of 60 . Some suggest that the so-called Martorell’s ulcer represents a special variant of an arterial leg ulcer, which should not be re- garded as a separate entity. Others doubt the validity of this clinical term, based on nonspe- cific histologic features in leg ulcers clinically diagnosed as ‘Martorell’s ulcers’ [95, 96]. In any case, the elderly population is prone to develop- ing hypertension, as well as atherosclerotic changes within blood vessels.
Mechanisms of Formation of Specific Types 43
Fig. 4.6.An ulcer in peripheral arterial disease Fig. 4.7.Arterial occlusion with significant ischemia, pending ulceration
An acute, rapid development of limb ischemia is caused by emboli. An atheromatous plaque that becomes detached from a blood vessel wall is a relatively large embolus that occludes a large vessel and generally affects a specific ana- tomic region. Cholesterol emboli, on the other hand, are microemboli composed of cholesterol crystals, 100–200 µm, which may occlude many small arteries with the induction of multiple le- sions [97, 98].
4.3.4 Leukocytoclastic Vasculitis Note that leukocytoclastic vasculitis may be in- duced by several types of infections, most com- monly Streptococcus group A, Mycobacterium leprae, and the hepatitis B and C virus .
Sometimes leukocytoclastic vasculitis may ap- pear following the use of certain drugs (see Chap. 16).
4.3.5 Connective Tissue
and Multisystem Diseases
Cutaneous ulcers appear in connective tissue diseases and multisystem diseases. A classical example is systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), which may present in several forms. In most cases, ulcers in connective tissue diseases are attributed to vasculitis. For example, the in- cidence of cutaneous ulcers in idiopathic SLE patients is about 5%. The ulcers are usually lo- cated in malleolar or pretibial areas [100, 101]
due to the vasculitic process. Vasculitis may al- so result in gangrene of the finger tips. Howev- er, SLE may also lead to a secondary form of anti-phospholipid syndrome with the subse- quent development of cutaneous ulcers. Simi- larly, the presence of cryoglobulins in SLE may lead to the formation of cutaneous ulcers locat- ed in the extremities.
In rheumatoid arthritis, various forms of cu- taneous ulcers may be seen: leg ulcers or digital necrosis, due to the vasculitic process, similar to those of SLE; ulceration of subcutaneous
nodules; and pyoderma gangrenosum, which may be found in rheumatoid arthritis. Pro- longed glucocorticoid therapy may be detri- mental to the quality of the skin in these cases, thus further hindering the repair of cutaneous ulcers.
Vasculitic involvement may induce ulcera- tion in other connective tissue diseases, such as dermatomyositis, Sjögren’s syndrome, or scler- oderma. However, there may be other reasons for ulceration in connective tissue disease. For example, Raynaud’s phenomenon, which may be associated with connective tissue diseases, may result in digital ulceration. Similarly, the gradual damage to the quality of the skin in scleroderma predisposes to ulceration.
4.3.6 Hypercoagulable States
Some of the ‘hypercoagulable’ conditions listed in Table 4.1, such as coumadin-induced necro- sis, heparin necrosis, or disseminated intravas- cular coagulation, are characterized by the de- velopment of micro-thrombi . The histo- logic hallmark of these cases is the presence of fibrin thrombi (see Chap. 6). The occlusion of blood vessels by fibrin thrombi may manifest clinically as cutaneous ulceration.
Other conditions listed in Table 4.1, i.e., pro- tein C deficiency, activated protein C resistance, protein S deficiency, and anti-thrombin III defi- ciency, classified under the heading ‘thrombo- philia’, may lead to vascular thrombosis. In many cases, the mechanism leading to ulcera- tion is not direct. Thrombophilia may result in deep vein thrombosis which, in itself, predis- poses to chronic venous ulceration [103, 104].
However, fibrin thrombi have been described in such cases as well . Most of these cases have been associated with coumadin or hepar- in therapy.
Conditions such as hyperhomocystinemia have been implicated in the formation of deep venous thrombosis with the subsequent devel- opment of venous ulcers . To the best of our knowledge, it has never been described in the literature as having directly caused a cuta- neous ulcer through the formation of fibrin thrombi.
4.3.7 Metabolic Disorders:
Diabetic ulcers are included in Table 4.1 under the term ‘metabolic ulcers’. The metabolic ab- normalities in diabetes may lead to the forma- tion of ulcers by several mechanisms, as de- tailed below.
184.108.40.206 Peripheral Arterial Disease and Atherosclerosis (Macroangiopathy)
Peripheral vascular disease is more common in people with diabetes than in the rest of the pop- ulation. In the presence of additional risk fac- tors such as smoking, hyperlipidemia, or hy- pertension, the incidence is even higher.
The prevalence of peripheral arterial disease in diabetic patients is between 20% and 40%, and it is regarded as a sign of premature aging of blood vessels [107–109]. A distinguishing feature of diabetes is that the ulcers tend to oc- cur more distally than they do in non-diabetic patients with peripheral arterial disease .
Diabetic ulcers due to peripheral arterial disease may therefore appear anywhere on the lower calves, usually on the lateral or pretibial aspect of the leg, dorsum of the foot, or malleo- lar region. As in peripheral arterial disease, ne- crosis of a distal toe or foot may develop if there is severe ischemia of a diabetic limb. In ad- vanced cases, widespread calcification may de- velop along the length of the media of the arte- rial wall. Hence, Doppler measurement of ankle blood pressure (and consequently ABI meas- urement) may indicate high pressures, which does not accurately reflect the true degree of is- chemia of the limb [110, 111].
Neuropathy in diabetes affects sensory, motor, and autonomic fibers. It is estimated that al- most 30% of type-2 diabetic patients have neu- ropathy, while it affects 50% of patients over the age of 60 years . Ulceration of the soles of
diabetic patients is, in most cases, attributed to neuropathy [113, 114].
The detrimental effects of sensory, motor, and autonomic neuropathy are as follows:
5 Sensory neuropathy results in anes- thesia and loss of protective sensa- tion.
5 Motor neuropathy results in diffi- culty in activating certain muscle groups, resulting in inadequate dis- tribution of pressure on the sole while walking. Areas subjected to repetitive focal pressure may ulcer- ate or, alternatively, may develop a callus, which predisposes to ulcera- tion. The consequences of motor neuropathy are reflected in the pres- ence of typical foot deformities seen in diabetic neuropathy, such as pro- trusion of the metatarsal heads.
Mal perforant is a common neuro- pathic ulcer of the sole, which ap- pears over the metatarsal heads .
5 Autonomic neuropathy is associated with dry skin and further contrib- utes to fissuring and callus forma- tion. In addition, it leads to arteriov- enous shunting which, although ac- companied by increased blood flow, reduces nutritive cutaneous capil- lary flow [115, 116].
The above-mentioned processes may mis- lead the physician, due to the following phe- nomena:
5 Sensory neuropathy may conceal symptoms of intermittent claudica- tion and rest pain.
5 An ischemic foot may nevertheless be warm and pink on clinical exam- ination, due to autonomic neuropa- thy [115, 117, 118].
Mechanisms of Formation of Specific Types 45
The neuropathic process leads to the formation of ulcers on the sole or on the lateral and medi- al regions of the foot in diabetic patients (Fig. 4.8). Typically, a neuropathic ulcer of the sole is surrounded by circumscribed callus for- mation. Neuropathy and decreased sensation render the patient even more prone to trauma and subsequent ulceration, which may occur anywhere in the distal regions of the limbs. In some cases, the presence of neuropathy pre- vents early identification of an ulcer by the af- fected person, and appropriate intervention, therefore, is not carried out.
220.127.116.11 Microangiopathy in Diabetes Diabetic microangiopathy is characterized by the thickening of basal membranes and in- creased capillary permeability. In its advanced stages, it results in compromised gas exchange, a decrease in cutaneous pO2
, and ischemia [110, 119].
The main clinical implications of microan- giopathy with respect to skin ulcers are as follows:
5 The ischemic changes described above (together with macroangio- pathy) cause additional damage to the skin, thereby increasing the probability of ulceration. The com- bination of macroangiopathy and microangiopathy seems to be the reason why diabetic ulcerations tend to be located more distally, compared with ulceration in non- diabetic peripheral arterial disease.
5 Microangiopathic involvement of the vasa nervosum results in diabet- ic neuropathy.
Note: The effect of microangiopathy is most ob- vious in the kidneys and the retina. The possible influence of these vascular changes on ulcer for- mation in the diabetic leg is questionable and
has not yet been fully evaluated. It is reasonable to assume that they affect capillary function [111, 120].
18.104.22.168 Other Factors:
Charcot’s osteoarthropathy describes a de- structive process of the joints, occurring in dia- betic neuropathy. It creates excessive focal pres- sure on the sole of the foot, predisposing it to ulcer formation. Another process is known as cheiroarthropathy, in which there is a thicken- ing of the skin with limitation of joint mobility and an abnormal gait, with subsequent inap- propriate weight distribution on the sole of the foot [121, 122].
22.214.171.124 Reduced Resistance to Infections
Infection is a frequent complication of dia- betes, which aggravates tissue damage. Dia- betes is associated with decreased phagocytic activity and decreased function of leukocytes
Fig. 4.8.A neuropathic ulcer in diabetes
. Chemotaxis of leukocytes and phagocy- tosis are impaired in poorly controlled diabetes . Hyperglycemia has been found to inhibit the cellular transport of vitamin C into fibro- blasts and leukocytes, with reduced chemotaxis of leukocytes .
126.96.36.199 Location of Ulcers in Diabetes In view of the above-mentioned pathologic characteristics of diabetes, even minor trauma or otherwise negligible superficial infection may be sufficient to induce ulceration.
In a diabetic patient, ulcers may be located as follows:
5 Lateral or pretibial regions of the leg, dorsum of the foot, or malleolar regions, due to peripheral arterial disease and subsequent damage to the skin and subcutaneous tissue 5 Distal toes (Fig. 4.9) or distal forefoot,
due to the severe ischemia of periph- eral arterial disease
5 Neuropathy predisposes to ulcera- tion mainly on the sole. Neverthe- less, the decreased sensation com- bined with increased susceptibility to trauma may occur anywhere on the distal limb. Osteoarthropathy further contributes to the formation of plantar ulcers.
In summary, the classical diabetic ulcer appears on the sole. However, in view of the combination of several detrimental factors including macro- angiopathy, microangiopathy, neuropathy, and reduced resistance to infections, ulcers in dia- betes can, in fact, occur anywhere on the lower leg.
4.3.8 Hematologic Abnormalities
188.8.131.52 Hemolytic Anemia and Cutaneous Ulcers
Most of the literature in the field of hemolytic anemia and cutaneous ulcers relates to sickle cell disease. Blood vessels occluded by the sludging of sickled erythrocytes are the histo- logic hallmark of an ulcer in sickle cell anemia.
Sickle cells are relatively rigid, with a re- duced ability to alter their shape. It seems that the reduced deformability of sickled erythrocy- tes is a major factor leading to vascular occlu- sion and ulceration . These features of sickled erythrocytes may significantly decrease blood flow, especially in capillary beds subject- ed to venous stasis . Below a certain level of blood flow, there is a clumping of sickled erythrocytes with subsequent obstruction of blood vessels [125, 127]. The vascular occlusion leads to ulceration. When the level of oxygen is reduced, these processes are more pronounced.
The causes of ulceration in other types of anemia such as thalassemia, hereditary sphero- cytosis, or pyruvate kinase deficiency are not fully understood. For example, leg ulcers are rare in α-thalassemia, but relatively common in severe β-thalassemia . It is reasonable to assume that, in these cases, there is also a di- minished deformability of abnormal erythroc- ytes. The tendency for ulcers to appear in the gaiter area of the lower limbs suggests that there is an element of venous stasis that con- tributes to a reduction in blood flow.
In certain types of hemolytic anemia such as hereditary spherocytosis, cutaneous ulcers have been reported to improve and heal follow- ing a splenectomy [129, 130]. In other cases of anemia, such as in β-thalassemia, no beneficial
Mechanisms of Formation of Specific Types 47
Fig. 4.9.An ulcer on the toe of a diabetic patient
effect of a splenectomy has been observed .
A possible explanation for the above observation regarding hereditary spherocytosis has been suggested: During their passage through the spleen, red blood cells may lose a membrane lip- id. This change may lead to the entrapment of cells in the microvasculature, resulting in stasis with impaired oxygenation and the formation of cutaneous ulcers. A splenectomy prevents this sort of damage to red blood cells; their improved function and increased capacity of deformabil- ity leads to healing of the ulcers [125, 132].
4.3.9 Nutritional Disorders
In most cases, malnutrition is not a direct cause of ulceration. However, malnutrition does interfere with wound healing and has a detri- mental effect on the general condition of the patient. This issue is discussed in detail in Chap. 18.
Conditions in which malnutrition may in- duce ulceration directly are:
5 Vitamin C deficiency
5 Noma (cancrum oris, necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis)
5 Tropical ulcer (tropical sloughing phagedena)
Vitamin C deficiency results in impaired colla- gen synthesis with subsequent poor wound healing. The classical clinical descriptions of scurvy by Lind  documented the appear- ance of ulcers on affected skin, induced mostly by minor trauma. Boulinguez et al.  docu- mented three patients with scurvy presenting with ecchymotic purpura and hemorrhagic ul- cers of the lower limbs.
However, vitamin C is an important factor not only in those relatively rare patients whose ulcers are caused directly by vitamin C defi- ciency. It is also very important to identify pa- tients with cutaneous ulcers (caused by other etiologies) who happen to be deficient in vita- min C. In these cases, vitamin C supplementa- tion may improve wound healing.
In the latter two conditions, i.e., noma and tropical ulcer, the specific mechanisms leading to ulceration have not yet been identified, but it appears that opportunistic infection, related to the state of malnutrition, plays a significant role in their pathogenesis.
4.3.10 Other Causes
Epithelial tumors and leg ulcers are discussed in Chap. 6, and a detailed review of drugs and cutaneous ulcers is presented in Chap. 16.
1. Shai A, Halevy S: Direct triggers for ulceration in patients with venous insufficiency. Int J Dermatol (in press)
2. Reed BR, Clark RAF: Cutaneous tissue repair. Prac- tical implications of current knowledge. II. J Am Acad Dermatol 1985; 13 : 919–941
3. Robson MC, Stenberg BD, Heggers JP: Wound heal- ing alterations caused by infection. Clin Plast Surg 1990; 17 : 485–492
4. Rietchel RL, Fowler JF: The role of age, sex and col- or of skin in contact dermatitis. In: Rietchel RL, Fowler JF (eds) In: Fisher’s Contact Dermatitis, 4th edn. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins.1995; pp 41–65 5. Dooms-Goossens A, Degreef H, Parijs M, et al: A
retrospective study of patch test results from 163 patients with stasis dermatitis or leg ulcers. Der- matologica 1979; 159 : 93–100
6. Wilson CL, Cameron J, Powell SM, Cherry G, Ryan TJ: High incidence of contact dermatitis in leg-ul- cer patients-implications for management. Clin Exp Dermatol 1991; 16 : 250–253
7. Rietchel RL, Fowler JF: Contact dermatitis and oth- er reactions to metals. In: Rietchel RL, Fowler JF (eds) In: Fisher’s Contact Dermatitis, 4th edn. Bal- timore. Williams & Wilkins.1995; pp 808–885 8. Lee HS, Goh CL: Occupational dermatosis among
chrome platers. Contact Dermatitis 1988; 18 : 89–93 9. Tanaka T, Miyachi Y, Horio T: Ulcerative contact dermatitis caused by sodium silicate. Coexistence of primary irritant contact dermatitis and contact urticaria. Arch-Dermatol 1982; 118 : 518–520 10. Mochida K, Hisa T,Yasunaga C, et al: Skin ulcera-
tion due to povidone-iodine. Contact Dermatitis 1995; 33 : 61–62
11. Fisher AA: Unique reactions of scrotal skin to topi- cal agents. Cutis 1989; 44 : 445–447
12. Krafchik BR: Eczematous dermatitis. In: Schachner LA, Hansen RC (eds) Pediatric Dermatology, 2nd edn. New York: Churchill Livingstone. 1995;
13. Rijswijk LV: Epidemiology. In: Morison MJ: The prevention and treatment of pressure ulcers. 1st edn. Edinburgh: Mosby. 2001; pp 7–15
14. Kanj LF, Wilking SV, Phillips TJ: Pressure ulcers. J Am Acad Dermatol 1998; 38 : 517–536
15. Allman RM: Epidemiology of pressure sores in dif- ferent populations. Decubitus 1989; 2 : 30–33 16. Young JS, Burns PE, Bowen AM, et al: Spinal cord
injury statistics: experience of the regional spinal cord injury systems. National Spinal Cord Injury Data Research Center. Phoenix. 1982
17. Nixon J: The pathophysiology and aetiology of pressure ulcers. In: Morison MJ (ed) The preven- tion and treatment of pressure ulcers, 1st edn.
Edinburgh: Mosby. 2001; pp 17–36
18. Garfin SR, Pye SA, Hargens AR, Akeson WH: Sur- face pressure distribution of the human body in the recumbent position. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 1980; 61 : 409–413
19. Kosiak M: Etiology and pathology of ischemic ul- cers. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 1959; 40 : 62–69 20. Daniel RK, Priest DL, Wheatley DC: Etiologic fac-
tors in pressure sores: an experimental model.
Arch Phys Med Rehabil 1981; 62 : 492–498 21. Falanga V: Chronic wounds: pathophysiologic and
experimental considerations. J Invest Dermatol 1993; 100 : 721–725
22. Kosiak M: Etiology of decubitus ulcers. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 1961; 42 : 19–29
23. Dinsdale SM: Decubitus ulcers: role of pressure and friction in causation. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 1974; 55 : 147–152
24. Exton-Smith AN, Sherwin RW: The prevention of pressure sores: significance of spontaneous bodily movements. Lancet 1961; 2 : 1124–1126
25. Barbenel JC, Jordan MM, Nicol SM, et al: Incidence of pressure sores in the Greater Glasgow Health Board Area. Lancet 1977; 2 : 548–550
26. Reuler JB, Cooney TG: The pressure sore: pathoph- ysiology and principles of management. Ann Intern Med 1981; 94 : 661–666
27. Bennet L, Bok YL: Pressure versus shear in pressure sore causation. In: Lee BY: Chronic Ulcers of the Skin, 1st edn. New York: McGraw-Hill. 1986; pp 39–56 28. Bennett L, Kavner D, Lee BK, et al: Shear vs pres- sure as causative factors in skin blood flow occlu- sion. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 1979; 60: 309–314 29. Reichel SM: Shearing force as a factor in decubitus
ulcers in paraplegics. JAMA 1958; 166 : 762–763 30. Agris J, Spira M: Pressure ulcers: prevention and
treatment. Clin Symp 1979; 31 : 1–32
31. The National Pressure Ulcer Advisory Panel. Pres- sure ulcers prevalence, cost and risk assessment:
consensus development conference statement. De- cubitus 1989; 2 : 24–28
32. Crickx B: Erysipelas: evolution under treatment, complications. Ann Dermatol Venereol 2001; 128 : 358–362
33. Ahrenholz DH: Necrotizing soft-tissue infections.
Surg Clin North Am 1988; 68 : 199–214
34. Fustes-Morales A, Gutierrez-Castrellon P, Duran- Mckinster C et al: Necrotizing fasciitis: Report of 39 pediatric cases. Arch Dermatol 2002; 138 : 893–899 35. Stevens DL: The flesh-eating bacterium: What’s
next? J Infect Dis 1999; 179 [Suppl 2] : S366–S374 36. Bosshardt TL, Henderson VJ, Organ CH Jr: Necro-
tizing soft tissue infections. Arch Surg 1996; 131 : 846–852
37. Umbert IJ, Winkelmann RK, Oliver GF, et al: Necro- tizing fasciitis: a clinical, microbiologic, and histo- pathologic study of 14 patients. J Am Acad Derma- tol 1989; 20 : 774–781
38. Lee PK, Zipoli MT, Weinberg AN, Swartz MN, John- son RA: Pyodermas: staphylococcus aureus, strep- tococcus and other gram-positive bacteria. In:
Freedberg IM, Eisen AZ, Wolff K, Austen KF, Gold- smith LA, Katz SI (eds) Fitzpatrick’s Dermatology in General Medicine, 6th edn. New York: McGraw- Hill. 2003; pp 1856–1878
39. Sanchez MR: Syphilis. In: Freedberg IM, Eisen AZ, Wolff K, Austen KF, Goldsmith LA, Katz SI (eds) Fitzpatrick’s Dermatology in General Medicine, 6th edn. New York: McGraw-Hill. 2003; pp 2163–2188 40. Varela P, Alves R, Velho G, et al: Two recent cases of
tertiary syphilis. Eur J Dermatol 1999; 9 : 371–373 41. Merkert R: Generalized ulcers. Noduloulcerative
syphilis (malignant syphilis, lues maligna). Arch Dermatol 1997; 133 : 1027–1028, 1030–1031
42. Don PC, Rubinstein R, Christie S: Malignant syphi- lis (lues maligna) and concurrent infection with HIV. Int J Dermatol 1995; 34 : 403–407
43. Gawkrodger DJ: Mycobacterial infections. In:
Champion RH, Burton JL, Burns DA, Breathnach SM (eds) In: Rook/Wilkinson/Ebling Textbook of Dermatology, 6th edn. Oxford: Blackwell Scientific Publications. 1998; pp 1181–1214
44. Lantos G, Fisher BK, Contreras M: Tuberculous ul- cer of the skin. J Am Acad Dermatol 1988; 19 : 1067–1072
45. Marechal V, Maradeix S, Pouaha J, et al: Cas pour diagnostic: Ulceration atone de la cheville. Ann Dermatol Venereol 2002; 129 : 439–440
46. Rao PT, Jena SK: Surgical treatment of plantar ul- cers in leprosy. Int Orthop 1986; 10 : 75–78 47. Cross H, Kulkarni VN, Dey A, et al: Plantar ulcera-
tion in patients with leprosy. J Wound Care 1996; 5 : 406–411
48. Mitchell PD: The threshold for protective sensation that prevents neuropathic ulceration on the plantar aspect of the foot: a study of leprosy patients in a rural community in India. Lepr Rev 2001; 72 : 143–150
49. Boucher P, Sebille A: Frequency of the association of perforating plantar leprotic lesions and truncal involvement of the posterior tibial nerve. Acta Lep- rol 1983; 1 : 177–182
50. Feenstra W, Van de Vijver S, Benbow C, et al: Can people affected by leprosy at risk of developing plantar ulcers be identified? A field study from cen- tral Ethiopia. Lepr Rev 2001; 72 : 151–157
51. Morton RS: The treponematoses. In: Champion RH, Burton JL, Burns DA, Breathnach SM (eds) In:
Rook/Wilkinson/Ebling Textbook of Dermatology.
6th edn. Oxford: Blackwell Scientific Publications.
1998; pp 1237–1275
52. Ramesh V, Saxena U, Mukherjee A, et al: Multiple ulcers in an elderly man. Necrotizing erythema no- dosum leprosum (ENL) (necrotizing ENL). Arch Dermatol 1992; 128 : 1643, 1646
53. Bernadat JP, Faucher JF, Huerre M: Diffuse leprom- atous leprosy disclosed by cutaneous vasculitis.
The Lucio phenomenon. Ann Dermatol Venereol 1996; 123 : 21–23
54. Souza CS, Roselino AM, Figueiredo F, et al: Lucio’s phenomenon: clinical and therapeutic aspects. Int J Lepr Other Mycobact Dis 2000; 68 : 417–425 55. Barbarulo AM, Metha N, Bucalo B, et al: Recurrent
disseminated herpes zoster and cytomegalic peri- anal ulcer: a case report and review of the litera- ture. Cutis 2001; 67 : 43–46
56. Pariser RJ: Histologically specific skin lesions in disseminated cytomegalovirus infection. J Am Ac- ad Dermatol 1983; 9 : 937–946
57. Rodot S, Lacour JP, van Elslande L, et al: Ecthyma gangrenosum caused by Klebsiella pneumoniae.
Int J Dermatol 1995: 34 : 216–217
58. Cohen PR, Grossman ME: Recognizing skin lesions of systemic fungal infections in patients with AIDS. Am Fam Physician 1994; 49 : 1627–1634 59. Ginter G, Rieger E, Soyer HP, et al: Granulomatous
panniculitis caused by Candida albicans: a case presenting with multiple leg ulcers. J Am Acad Der- matol 1993; 28 : 315–317
60. Orem J, Mpanga L, Habyara E, et al: Disseminated aspergillus fumigatus infection: case report. East Afr Med J 1998; 75 : 436–438
61. Phillips TJ, Dover JS: Leg ulcers. J Am Acad Derma- tol 1991; 25 : 965–987
62. Nelzen O, Bergqvist D, Lindhagen A: Venous and non-venous leg ulcers: clinical history and appear- ance in a population study. Br J Surg 1994; 81 : 182–187
63. Baker SR, Stacey MC, Singh G, et al: Aetiology of chronic leg ulcers. Eur J Vasc Surg 1992; 6 : 245–251 64. Hafner J: Management of arterial leg ulcers and
combined (mixed) venous-arterial leg ulcers. Curr Probl Dermatol 1999; 27 : 211–219
65. Husni EA: Skin ulcers secondary to arterial and ve- nous disease. Lee BY: Chronic Ulcers of the Skin, 1st edn. New York: McGraw-Hill. 1986; pp 93–101 66. Junger M, Hahn M, Klyscz T, et al: Microangiopathy
in the pathogenesis of chronic venous leg ulcers in- sufficiency. Curr Probl Dermatol 1999; 27 : 124–129 67. Incandela L, Belcaro G, Cesarone MR, et al: Micro-
angiopathy and venous ulceration: Topical treat- ment with Essaven gel. A placebo-controlled, ran- domized study. Angiology 2001; 52 [Suppl 3] : S17–S21
68. Bollinger A, Leu AJ, Hoffmann U, et al: Microvascu- lar changes in venous disease: An update. Angiolo- gy 1997; 48 : 27–32
69. Nicolaides AN: Investigation of chronic venous insufficiency. A consensus statement. Circulation 2000; 102 : e126–e163
70. Bollinger A, Jager K, Geser A, et al: Transcapillary and interstitial diffusion of Na-fluorescein in chronic venous insufficiency with white atrophy.
Int J Microcirc Clin Exp 1982; 1 : 5–17
71. Partsch H: Pathogenesis of the venous leg ulcer.
Hautarzt 1985; 36 : 196–202
72. Junger M, Steins A, Hahn M, et al: Microcirculatory dysfunction in chronic venous insufficiency (CVI).
Microcirculation 2000; 7 : S3–S12
73. Fagrell B: Microcirculatory disturbances – The fi- nal cause for venous leg ulcers? Vasa 1982; 11 : 101–103
74. Leu AJ, Yanar A, Pfister G, et al: Microangiopathy in chronic venous insufficiency. Dtsch Med Wo- chenschr 1991; 116 : 447–453
75. Pierard-Franchimont C, Letawe C, Fumal I, et al:
Gravitational syndrome and tensile properties of skin in the elderly. Dermatology 1998; 197 : 317–320 76. Olszewski W: Pathophysiology and clinical obser- vations of obstructive lymphedema of the limbs.
In: Clodius L (ed) Lymphedema. Stuttgart: Georg Thieme Verlag. 1977; pp 79–102
77. Casley-Smith JR, Casley-Smith JR: Pathology of oe- dema – effect of oedema. In: Casley-Smith JR, Cas- ley-Smith JR (eds) Modern Treatment for Lym- phoedema, 5th revised edn. Adelaide: The Lym- phoedema Association of Australia, Inc. 1997;
78. Peschen M: Cytokines in progressing stages of chronic venous insufficiency. Curr Probl Dermatol 1999; 27 : 13–19
79. Hahn TL, Whitfield R, Salter J, et al: Evaluation of the role of intercellular adhesion molecule 1 in a ro- dent model of chronic venous hypertension. J Surg Res 2000; 88 : 150–154
80. Peschen M, Lahaye T, Hennig B, et al: Expression of the adhesion molecules ICAM-1, VCAM-1, LFA-1 and VLA-4 in the skin is modulated in progressing stages of chronic venous insufficiency. Acta Derm Venereol 1999; 79 : 27–32
81. Junger M, Steins A, Hahn M, et al: Microcirculatory dysfunction in chronic venous insufficiency. Mi- crocirculation 2000; 7 : S3–S12
82. Valencia IC, Falabella A, Kirsner RS, et al: Chronic venous insufficiency and venous leg ulceration. J Am Acad Dermatol 2001; 44 : 401–421
83. Coleridge-Smith PD, Thomas P, Scurr JH, et al:
Causes of venous ulceration: a new hypothesis? Br Med J 1988; 296 : 1726–1727
84. Thomas PR, Nash GB, Dormandy JA: White cell ac- cumulation in dependent legs of patients with ve- nous hypertension: a possible mechanism for trophic changes in the skin. Br Med J (Clin Res Ed) 1988; 296 : 1693–1695
85. Scott HJ, Coleridge Smith PD, Scurr JH: Histologi- cal study of white blood cells and their association with lipodermatosclerosis and venous ulceration.
Br J Surg 1991; 78: 210–211
86. Bradbury AW, Murie JA, Ruckley CV: Role of the leukocyte in the pathogenesis of vascular disease.
Br J Surg 1993; 80: 1503–1512
87. Browse NL, Burnand KG: The cause of venous ul- ceration. Lancet 1982; 2 : 243–245
88. Burnand KG,Whimster I, Naidoo A, et al: Pericapil- lary fibrin in the ulcer-bearing skin of the leg: the cause of lipodermatosclerosis and venous ulcera- tion. Br Med J 1982; 285 : 1071–1072
89. Neumann HA, van den Broek MJ, Boersma IH, et al: Transcutaneous oxygen tension in patients with and without pericapillary fibrin cuffs in chronic venous insufficiency, porphyria cutanea tarda and non-venous leg ulcers. Vasa 1996; 25 : 127–133 90. Falanga V, Eaglstein WH: The “trap” hypothesis of
venous ulceration. Lancet 1993; 341 : 1006–1008 91. Wienert V: Epidemiology of leg ulcers. Curr Probl
Dermatol 1999; 27 : 65–69
92. Dormandy JA, Rutherford RB: Management of pe- ripheral arterial disease (PAD). TASC Working Group. J Vasc Surg 2000; 31 [Suppl 1] : S1–S296 93. de Graaff JC, Ubbink DT, Legemate DA, et al: Eval-
uation of toe pressure and transcutaneous oxygen measurements in management of chronic critical leg ischemia: A diagnostic randomized clinical trial. J Vasc Surg 2003; 38 : 528–534
94. Martorell F: Las ulceras supramaleolares par arte- riolitis de los grandes hypertensos. Actas Inst Poli- clinico (Barcelona) 1945; 1 : 6–9
95. Hafner J, Schaad I, Schneider E, et al: Leg ulcers in peripheral arterial disease (arterial leg ulcers):
Impaired wound healing above the threshold of chronic critical limb ischemia. J Am Acad Derma- tol 2000; 43 : 1001–1008
96. Leu HJ: Hypertensive ischemic leg ulcer (Marto- rell’s ulcer): a specific disease entity? Int Angiol 1992; 11 : 132–136
97. Falanga V, Fine MJ, Kapoor WN: The cutaneous manifestations of cholesterol crystal embolization.
Arch Dermatol 1986; 122 : 1194–1198
98. Kalter DC, Rudolph A, McGavran M: Livedo reticu- laris due to multiple cholesterol emboli. J Am Acad Dermatol 1985; 13 : 235–242
99. Soter NA: Cutaneous necrotizing venulitis.In:
Freedberg IM, Eisen AZ, Wolff K, Austen KF, Gold- smith LA, Katz SI (eds) Fitzpatrick’s Dermatology in General Medicine, 6th edn. New York: McGraw- Hill. 2003; pp 1727–1735
100. Goslen JB: Autoimmune ulceration of the leg. Clin Dermatol 1990; 8 : 92–117
101. Rowell NR, Goodfield MJD: The’connective tissue diseases’. In: Champion RH, Burton JL, Burns DA, Breathnach SM (eds) Rook/Wilkinson/Ebling Text- book of Dermatology, 6th edn. Oxford: Blackwell Scientific Publications. 1998; pp 2437–2575 102. Ackerman AB, Chongchitnant N, sanchez Y, Guo Y,
Benin B, Reichel M, Randall MB (eds) Proceeding to specific diagnoses. Basic patterns and analysis of them. In: Histologic Diagnosis of Inflammatory Skin Diseases: An Algorithmic Method Based on
Pattern Analysis, 2nd edn. Baltimore: Williams &
Wilkins. 1997; pp 107–144
103. Bradbury AW, MacKenzie RK, Burns P, et al:
Thrombophilia and chronic venous ulceration. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg 2002; 24 : 97–104
104. MacKenzie RK, Ludlam CA, Ruckley CV, et al: The prevalence of thrombophilia in patients with chronic venous leg ulceration. J Vasc Surg 2002; 35 : 718–722
105. Barnhill RL, Busam KJ: Vascular diseases. In: Elder D, Elenitsas R, Jaworsky C, Johnson B (eds) Lever’s Histopathology of the Skin; 8th edn. Philadelphia:
Lippincott-Raven. 1997; pp 185–208
106. den Heijer M, Keijzer MB: Hyperhomocysteinemia as a risk factor for venous thrombosis. Clin Chem Lab Med 2001; 39 : 710–713
107. Schaper NC, Nabuurs-Franssen MH, Huijberts MS:
Peripheral vascular disease and type 2 diabetes mellitus. Diabetes Metab Res Rev 2000; 16 [Suppl 1] : S11–S15
108. Osmundson PJ, O’Fallon WM, Zimmerman BR, et al: Course of peripheral occlusive arterial disease in diabetes. Vascular laboratory assessment. Dia- betes Care 1990; 13 : 143–152
109. Beach KW, Bedford GR, Bergelin RO, et al: Progres- sion of lower-extremity arterial occlusive disease in type II diabetes mellitus. Diabetes Care 1988; 11 : 464–472
110. Zinnagl N: Conservative therapy of diabetic foot.
Curr Probl Dermatol 1999; 27 : 235–241
111. Krone W, Muller-Wieland D: Special problems of the diabetic patient. In: Dormandy JA, Stock G (eds) Critical leg ischemia: its pathophysiology and management. Berlin Heidelberg New York: Spring- er-Verlag. 1990; pp 145–157
112. Young MJ, Boulton AJM, MacLeod AF, et al: A mul- ticentre study of the prevalence of diabetic periph- eral neuropathy in the United Kingdom hospital clinic population. Diabetologia 1993; 36 : 150–154 113. Murray HJ, Boulton AJ: The pathophysiology of di-
abetic foot ulceration. Clin Podiatr Med and Surg 1995; 12 : 1–17
114. Boulton AJ: Peripheral neuropathy and the diabet- ic foot. Foot 1992; 2 : 67–72
115. Boulton AJ: The diabetic foot. Med Clin North Am 1988; 72 : 1513–1530
116. Boulton AJ, Scarpello JH, Ward JD: Venous oxygen- ation in the diabetic neuropathic foot: evidence of arteriovenous shunting? Diabetologia 1982; 22 : 6–8 117. Slater R, Ramot Y, Rapoport M: Diabetic foot ul- cers: Principles of assessment and treatment. Isr Med Assoc J 2001; 3 : 59–62
118. Sykes MT, Godsey JB: Vascular evaluation of the problem diabetic foot. Clin Podiatr Med Surg 1998;
15 : 49–83
119. Incandela L, Belcaro G, Cesarone MR, et al: Micro- vascular alterations in diabetic microangiopathy:
Topical treatment with Essaven gel. A placebo- controlled, randomized study. Angiology 2001; 52 [Suppl 3] : S35–S41
120. LoGerfo FW, Coffman JD: Vascular and microvas- cular disease of the foot in diabetes. N Engl J Med 1984; 311 : 1615–1619
121. Frykberg RG, Mendeszoon E: Management of the diabetic Charcot foot. Diabetes Metab Res Rev 2000; 16 [Suppl 1] : S59–S65
122. Delbridge L, Perry P, Marr S, et al: Limited joint mobility in the diabetic foot. Relationship to neu- ropathic ulceration. Diabet Med 1988; 5 : 333–337 123. Ehrlichman RJ, Seckel BR, Bryan DJ, et al: Com-
mon complications of wound healing: prevention and management. Surg Clin North Am 1991; 71 : 1323–1351
124. Barbul A, Purtill W: Nutrition in wound healing.
Clin Dermatol 1994; 12 : 133–140
125. Peachey RD: Leg ulceration and haemolytic anae- mia: an hypotheses. Br J Dermatol 1978; 98 : 245–
126. Gabuzda TG: Sickle cell leg ulcers: current patho- physiologic concepts. Int J Dermatol 1975; 14 : 322–325
127. Richards RS, Bowen CV, Glynn MF: Microsurgical free flap transfer in sickle cell disease. Ann Plast Surg 1992; 29 : 278–281
128. Daneshmend TK, Peachey RD: Leg ulcers in α-tha- lassaemia (haemoglobin H disease). Br J Dermatol 1978; 98 : 233–235
129. Lawrence P, Aronson I, Saxe N, et al: Leg ulcers in hereditary spherocytosis. Clin Exp Dermatol 1991;
16 : 28–30
130. Peretz E, Hallel-Halevy D, Grunwald M, Halevy S:
Hereditary spherocytosis with leg ulcers which healed after splenectomy. Eur J Dermatol 1997; 7 : 527–528
131. Gimmon Z, Wexler MR, Rachmilewitz EA: Juvenile leg ulceration in β-thalassemia major and interme- dia. Plast Reconst Surg 1982; 69 : 320–325
132. Palek J: Hereditary spherocytosis. In: Williams JW, Beutler E, Erslev AJ, et al (eds): Hematolgy, 4th edn.
New York: McGraw-Hill. 1990; pp 558–569 133. Hirschmann JV, Raugi GJ: Adult scurvy. J Am Acad
Dermatol 1999; 41 : 895–906
134. Boulinguez S, Bouyssou-Gauthier M, De-Vencay P, et al: Scurvy presenting with ecchymotic purpura and hemorrhagic ulcers of the lower limbs. Ann Dermatol Venereol 2000; 127 : 510–512