The ideology behind preventive medicine focuses on protecting, promoting and maintaining health and well-being. It also aims to prevent illness, disability and death individually, as well as on a large scale in communities and populations.
preventive health carecan save you money. It does it in two ways.
Preventive medicine is an important field of medicine. Not only does it keep patients and communities healthy, but it also helps reduce healthcare costs. Preventive medicine was established as a specialty to bring together physicians working in disease prevention and public health, to incorporate teaching on these topics into the curricula of medical schools, and to promote training opportunities in the specialty. Preventive medicine physicians have unique training in both clinical medicine and public health.
Have the necessary skills to understand and reduce the risks of illness, disability and death in individuals and population groups. The main disciplines of public health are biostatistics, epidemiology, health policy and administration, health behavior, and environmental health. Board certification can be obtained in public health and general preventive medicine or in the subspecialties of aerospace medicine, medical toxicology, or occupational medicine. There are also topics within this issue that are at the center of preventive medicine, such as firearm prevention.
For example, regular professional dental cleaning is intended to prevent tooth decay and gum disease, such as periodontitis, because a beautiful smile is also part of a healthy person. Some preventive medicine specialists focus on the health of people, such as astronauts or underwater divers, who spend extended periods of time in extreme weather environments. It is much less expensive to practice preventive care than to seek help only when there is a problem. As the authors point out in their respective articles, these results are important for the development of appropriate interventions for prevention and mitigation.
Because preventive medicine physicians are needed for a wide variety of health and wellness issues, they can have an enormous impact on the individual lives of patients, as well as the overall health of the community. Finally, one of the most important aspects of preventive medicine uses the field of epidemiology to help identify risk factors that can cause morbidity or mortality.
preventive health carecan be difficult to sell to people who feel completely healthy and don't need to spend money or time worrying about their health. As noted in both articles, the distribution of causes varies from region to region and will therefore require personalized preventive measures and a great need for increased research on firearm injuries to determine exactly which programs will work in reducing morbidity and mortality.
Full disclosure will require a broader discussion of preventive measures that can be taken, either before the disease begins or after it has arisen. But anyone who thinks that preventive medicine is synonymous with the general concept of preventive care is wrong. Given this approach to graduate medical education programs, it is discouraging to note that the number of residency programs in general preventive medicine and public health has been declining in recent years. Preventive medicine doctors also help ensure healthy pregnancies and safe work environments, treat depression, work on poison control, and administer vaccines to prevent diseases and viruses such as COVID-19, influenza, measles, meningitis, polio, pneumonia, or herpes zoster.
Calhoun addresses the concept of teaching “the historical and current foundations of racism in medical education as a way to prevent childhood trauma among black children” in his article Medical Education Must Begin Teaching About Racism. .