2018, Vol. 3 Issue 2, Part G
Historical sketch of women’s participation in sports: an overview
AUTHOR(S): Dr. Namarta Vadhera
Women’s sport history started back in the 19th century. By the end of the 19th century, horseback riding, archery, golf, tennis, skiing and skating were being enjoyed among women in upper social class. The first time for female athletes to participate in the modern Olympic Games was the second Olympic Games in 1900. Although the level of participation and performance still varies greatly by country and by sport, women's sports are widely accepted throughout the world today. In many sports women usually do not compete on equal terms against men. Although there has been a rise in participation by women in sports, a large disparity still remains. These disparities are prevalent globally and continue to hinder equality in sports. Many institutions and programs still remain conservative and do not contribute to gender equity in sports. The first international conference on women and sport, which brought together policy and decision makers in sport at both national and international level, took place in Brighton, UK from 5-8 May 1994. The International Working Group on Women and Sport (IWG) was established and it is an independent body of key governmental and non-governmental organizations which aims to empower women and improve their roles in sport. Despite growing participation of women in sport in recent years and increased opportunities for women to participate in domestic and international arenas, increased representation of women in decision making and leadership roles within sport has not followed. Women are significantly under-represented in management, coaching and officiating, particularly at the higher levels. Without women leaders, decision makers and role models within sport, equal opportunities for women and girls will not be achieved. Participation by women in sports increased dramatically after Title IX introduction, amid fears that this new law would jeopardize men's sports programs. Title IX has had a significant impact on athletics at the high school and collegiate level for female students. Muslim women are less likely to take part in sport than Western non-Muslims. There are many barriers for Muslim women in relation to sports participation. A significant barrier to Muslim women's sports participation is bans on the Islamic headscarf, commonly known as the hijab. At the same time, many Muslim female athletes have achieved significant success in athletic competitions. Black women athletes still are fighting for a change and equality for women athletes. This paper emphasize on historical participation of women in sports, the Brighton declaration with certain aims and principles so that women can stand at an equal position with males while participating in sports. This paper also highlights women’s participation in sports in different countries.
Pages: 417-422 | 715 Views 5 Downloads
How to cite this article:
Dr. Namarta Vadhera. Historical sketch of women’s participation in sports: an overview. Int J Yogic Hum Mov Sports Sciences 2018;3(2):417-422.