32% of computers in the world have malware and 57% have virus infections. Trojans affect more than 7% of computer users and unwanted software affects around 4% of computer users.
Over 70,000 new viruses are created every day. In 2014 alone, there was the creation of over 20 million malware strains. Spyware, viruses and other malware cost U.S. households more than $4 billion dollars every year.
The most prolific computer virus of all time is the Conficker. This virus has infected millions of computers all over the world. It takes advantage of flaws in the Windows operating system and it is very difficult to counter it.
A malware is a type of malicious software that disables or damages computer systems. Malware can leverage access to a computer system for the purposes of fraud. A virus is a type of malware that can copy itself and spread throughout the entire system.
To stop computer viruses, malware, Trojans, unwanted software, exploits, spyware, backdoors and other computer security threats, there is need to use any of the top 10 antiviruses.
Having an anti-virus program is not enough. You still need to carry out other computer security measures. The top 10 antiviruses will only work effectively if you carry out the steps listed below.
1. Regularly Update Your Software
Top 10 antiviruses do not help if there are computer programs not yet updated. New updates normally have the latest security patches that guarantee protection from the latest computer security threats.
You should turn on the automatic update feature of your windows operating system. By turning this feature on, your OS will automatically update itself. In addition, regularly update other programs such as media player, word processor, browser and instant messenger. Most programs will notify you if updates are available.
2. Scan Your Computer Regularly Using Your Antivirus Software
All the top 10 antiviruses have scanning features. You need to scan your computer regularly to remove new threats before they spread further and cause serious damage to your computer. You should set your antivirus program to run regular scans. Scanning your PC once a week is highly advisable.
It is difficult to use a computer when the scanning process is running. Thus, you should scan your PC at night when you are not using it.
3. Never Use Open Wi-Fi
Malicious individuals can easily access open Wi-Fi and steal your information if you are using open Wi-Fi. Never use free, non-encrypted, non-password protected Wi-Fi found at airports, library, local coffee shop, and other areas.
4. Secure Your Network
An unsecured network makes your computer and your personal information to be vulnerable to computer viruses. Computers use networks to connect to other devices and the internet. Make sure that all networks are protected using strong passwords. You should encrypt networks using WPA or WPA2 encryption. Never broadcast the SSID of your Wi-Fi network.
5. Do a Virus Scan Before Inserting Peripheral Devices
Memory cards, USB thumb drives, CDs, DVDs and MP3 players usually spread viruses. Thus, before you open these devices, you should scan them. You need to make sure that your antivirus program is up to date before you scan a peripheral device so that it can identify new virus definitions.
6. Be Wary of Links and Attachments
Think before you click. Open only links that you trust. Never click links in unsolicited emails. Never open an email attachment from a sender that you do not know. After you have downloaded a file from the internet, scan it before you open it.
7. Have Strong Passwords
Protect your online accounts with strong, hard to guess passwords. A strong password has symbols, numbers, upper case letters and lower case letters. Do not use the same password on more than one online account. A bank account or any other account that deals with finances needs to have a very strong password that you have not used elsewhere.
8. Backup Your Files
Backup your files so that in case the worst happens, your data is safe. You should backup your files to an external hard disk and to a remote storage such as the one offered by a file hosting service.
You should prioritize securing your computer. You need to read about the top 10 antiviruses and find the best on the list. A free version of an antivirus program will provide sufficient security for a personal computer. On top of using antivirus software, you should take other steps to keep your computer safe.