Interesting Facts About the Vaquita This incredibly rare little porpoise has been getting attention in the media due to its precarious population numbers. The vaquita can be confused with the harbor porpoise (Phocoena phocoena). The teeth are flattened and spade-shaped unlike the conical-shaped teeth of dolphins.
Vaquita have a dark coloring around the eyes and mouth. … The plight of cetaceans—whales, dolphins, and porpoises—as a whole is exemplified by the rapid decline of the vaquita in Mexico, with about 10 individuals remaining.
The vaquita is the world’s smallest and most endangered porpoise and it is literally on its last fins. The upper side of the body is medium to dark gray. 3. Shares. Vaquitas grow to almost 5 feet in length and about 110 pounds in weight, making them the smallest porpoise. Relatively little is known about it, simply because individuals are incredibly hard to find to conduct research. Facts About Porpoises. The vaquita is the smallest cetacean, and the most critically endangered marine mammal on the planet. Females are larger than males. The vaquita is the smallest marine cetacean. It has a rather large fin on its back for its size. Vaquita is Spanish for ‘small cow’ and apparently the word ‘porpoise’ comes from the Latin ‘porcopsicus’ meaning ‘fish pig’. The vaquita is a small cetacean that lives only in the Sea of Cortez, Mexico. Other articles where Vaquita is discussed: porpoise: The vaquita, or cochito (P. sinus), is listed as a critically endangered species by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN). The vaquita is the smallest marine cetacean. Its skin is dark grey on its back, gradually fading to lighter grey or white on its belly. fun facts The Vaquita was first named by scientist in 1958, and since then not much has been able to be uncovered about the species due to their mysterious nature There have only been 65 confirmed sightings of the marine mammal from 1958 to now, which is larger than the actual number of Vaquita… The Vaquita is the smallest type of porpoise in the world, growing up to … Interesting Vaquita Facts: Vaquita is very small animal. 11 Facts About the Vaquita, The World's Most Endangered Porpoise. Upper side of the body is grey in color. Its skin is dark grey on its back, gradually fading to lighter grey or white on its belly. It can reach 4.6 to 5 feet in length and up to 120 pounds of weight. Vaquitas are found only near the northern end of the Gulf of California.