Discover how to put a stop to bullying and learn to love and accept yourself for who you are!
No body looks exactly the same. There’s so many different shapes and sizes that are all meant to be celebrated. There is no room for bullying others based on how they look. Your differences are what make you unique no matter if you have freckles, scars, or if you’re small or tall.
Body positivity starts with loving and accepting yourself. It’s up to us to be encouraging and uplift others instead of tearing each other down with mean-spirited comments. Learn to grow empathy and spread kindness to yourself and others in this inspiring book about self-love and acceptance.
Discover the power of self-confidence and embrace our differences with Gasira the tall giraffe!
All of the other safari animals would tease Gasira for his beautiful differences that made him stand out, which made him feel insecure and unhappy. All he wanted was to be accepted and become friends with everyone in the animal kingdom.
One day, a storm floods their home and sweeps everything with it, but thanks to Gasira’s long neck, he saves Maya the monkey and she helps him to regain his self-esteem and eventually become friends with all of the other animals.
Follow along on this powerful, heartwarming safari adventure with Gasira and learn to be confident and hold our heads up high because our differences are what makes us all unique, beautiful beings!
Help your children understand their feelings!
We all have times where we feel uncomfortable about who we are...
Follow Fiona through her color-changing, feather-filled day as she learns to accept not only being a different color from the rest of her flamingo flock, but that it is also okay to have emotions you don't understand. It's okay to be scared, angry, and sad at times.
Our first book recommended by teachers and doctors to help children understand and manage their feelings.
Aloha! Teach kids about the power of self-love and positive affirmations to lead lives filled with happiness and love.
In "Aloha Affirmations", kids will learn to develop compassion, empathy, and self-love by learning about different kinds of affirmations, what they mean, and what daily activities kids can do to practice healthy affirmations.
"I am KIND", "I am SMART", "I am DETERMINED". These affirmation will grow your children into strong, confident kids. Best of all, learn how to say these words in Hawaiian: "ʻOluʻolu", "Akamai", "ʻOnipaʻa"!
Surround your kids with positive affirmations in two different languages and kick-start the first steps of their social emotional journey.
Inspire your child’s greatness - learn from a unicorn!
Reverie always had many talents, from styling hair to writing books, but being a unicorn it was not a simple task to achieve them! Everyone doubted her, didn't believe in her, and every time she tried something new, they'd say she'd never succeed...
She was about to give up on her dreams, but...
Then she decided to try and stop listening to those who did not believe in unicorns and started to believe in herself instead! She opened her hair salon, her bakery, her flower shop, her dance academy, and even wrote a book. She did everything she ever wanted with love and passion, and she succeeded every time!
Believe in yourself and your dreams, even when no one around believes in you, because with hard work and diligence, any dream can be achieved!
The world is a strange and beautiful place.
All People Are Beautiful is a joyfully illustrated and simply told lesson for little learners: that we live in a great, big world full of people who are so different from us, and that our differences are what make us beautiful.
Sometimes, unfamiliar faces and places can be scary to children (and adults!), so it’s crucial to teach them at a young age that differences are not to be feared, but to be celebrated. Not only will the lessons in this book help with early socialization, but children will learn that their own differences are nothing to be ashamed of.
This book will surely become a family favorite for its simple, heartwarming message, written by a father of two. As an added bonus, at the end of the story, there’s a fun exercise that helps children to implement their newly-learned lessons, while using their creativity and imagination.
Learning to love our differences is a must for any child growing up today, and this wonderful book makes it easy.
A beautiful and inclusive book about being accepted!
Mack the yak found it hard to fit in with the other yaks in his herd and always felt left out of their fun and games, all because he couldn't speak or hear. He also didn't know how to explain to others why he wasn't able to play with them, and that made him feel even more lonely and sad.
Then, one day, the herd came up with a creative solution... a silent language! From that day on, Mack was eager to "talk" and "hear," and became a happy and included member of the herd. With the help of his new friends, he learned that understanding and kindness can overcome any special needs!
This book teaches us to be inclusive, accepting, and kind to each other no matter how different we all may be. Whether your child has a special need or not, it is a perfect tool to get the conversation going about people with disabilities or impairments.
"Yackety Mack" also includes a page with the American Sign Language Alphabet so you and your child can practice using sign language with each other while learning the core values of acceptance!
Teach your child the importance and power of the words “Thank You” and “Gratitude.”
"Thank you, Thank you, Thank you" uncovers just how many wonderful things in life there are to be thankful for. From the air we breathe to the oceans and seas. From the hugs we give to the hard-working bees. Every little thing in life is actually quite big and deserves thanks.
This book will help your child focus on being positive and grateful for the things they have, rather than what they do not, and learn to see the world from a new perspective.
This is an excellent read for beginning and early readers. With it’s easy to comprehend words and charming illustrations, this book will surely add great value to your family's bookshelf.
How do you help a messy child understand the importance of good hygiene and manners?
…By learning from Scraggle Princess! Things like brushing her hair, taking baths, changing clothes, or cleaning her room were NOT what she liked to do… She would scream and cry and bawl instead of listening to her parents. There was, however, one thing that made Scraggle Princess realize that behaving this way was not an option, and your child can learn this too, all you need is the right perspective!
This hilarious storybook is guaranteed to teach even the most naughty child the importance of good manners and hygiene.
Is your child having a bad day?
Children are known for having days where everything is sunshine and rainbows, while others are rain and thunder clouds. Even when given their favorite meal or playing with a best friend, a sour mood can ruin it all...
Talking to your children about positive attitudes can be life-changing! Thanks to this clever book, they can see creative and silly illustrated examples of just how powerful optimism can be; and how it can turn a NO Day into a YES Day!
“Every day we have a choice between a YES and a NO,
even if it’s raining or our games don’t seem to flow.
So when you wake up to the day say, “YES, YES, YES”
to whatever life brings you, and your day will be the best!”
Have your child start every day right with these important lessons on positive mental attitude, gratitude, and perspective!
What ages is this book for?
Most of our premium children’s books are designed for readers ages 3 – 10. They also make a great gift for ages 1 – 2 as our authors deliver stories with vibrant, engaging illustrations that capture a child’s attention while being read to by caring parents and grandparents like you.
Where are your books printed?
All of our books are printed in the USA.
Our printers only deliver the highest quality books and are responsible for many books you already know from the largest publishers in the US.
We believe there is no reason for us to save a dollar on printing if we have the ability to deliver the very best print quality available.
Should I buy Hardcover or Paperback?
We generally suggest buying the Hardcover version when possible, particularly if a gift.
The hardcover format will take more wear-and-tear from little hands, making the book last longer as a keepsake.
The hardcover also uses slightly thicker paper and a more intricate printing process to make the illustrations pop of the page just that much more.
How do I track my order?
You can track your order by clicking here.
All you need is your tracking number or order number.
We automatically send you an email when:
- Order is Ready to Ship
- Order has Been Received by the Carrier
- Order is Out for Delivery
- Order has Been Delivered
What if I don’t like the book I ordered?
We hope all our customers love their books, but sometimes you might want to return a book.
We offer a 30 day money-back guarantee, so if you don’t like a book for any reason at all, we accept returns… No questions asked!
This guarantee means there is no risk if you buy today. Just message our customer service team here, and we will take it from there.
What if my book arrives damaged or something is missing?
We take pride in how your books are delivered, so if your order is damaged in any way at all, our customer service team will expedite a replacement.
The same is also true if a product is missing. We will immediately send the missing item with expedited shipping.
Can I buy your books in stores?
At this time, all of our books are only available online.
Can I order by phone?
At this time, we do not take orders by phone. However, if you contact our customer service team https://pdicbooks.aftership.com/, one of our friendly agents may give you a call if you request it.
Is it safe to enter my credit card on your site?
Yes, all of your payments are processed through SSL and PCI certified checkouts.
If you want an extra level of protection, we accept Paypal too. Paypal is a great way to safeguard any online transaction.
Are your books available on Amazon.com?
Yes, all of our books are available on Amazon, but our books are less expensive if you buy from us directly.
Since we don’t have to pay the Amazon vendor fee, we pass the savings on to you.
I still have a question…
If you still have a question, please email our customer service team here, and we will respond within 24 hours.
What are the benefits to buy directly from the publisher?
Check out why buying from us directly is better than buying our books on Amazon below.
|Choose Puppy Dogs & Ice Cream Books!|
|Thick Paper That Lasts|
|Premium Full Color Printing|
|Friendly & Fast Customer Serive|
|Printed in the USA|
Added to cart
Something went wrong!