English is considered the most favorable language among youngsters in this generation. People watch videos as well as learn some other language from different online courses. These online courses guarantee quick learning and fluency within a brief period. Unfortunately, learning English within a month or so is not possible. You can learn the language fast, but fluency will need time.
Learning a new language has multiple cognitive benefits. Some people are of the opinion that language proficiency is achieved only by staying or working in a country where the language is used for communication, which is not very false. Fluency in any language is achieved only if we have an environment of people conversing in the same language around us.
Reasons why Learning English and Becoming Fluent in it is not Possible within 30 days
When you are a kid and are learning your first words, you are learning both the concept of something as well as its label at the same time. For example, you learn the idea of having breakfast along with the word ‘ breakfast’.
The concept and label of words are stored separately in your brain and is joined by a link. When you are studying a foreign language, English in this case, you are adding a second label to the same concept. Because your brain already has a label or word for breakfast, it doesn’t think it requires another. In fact, we are slightly engineered to associate one word to one concept.
- The issue with the mother tongue
Learning a second language after a critical period of language learning has ended, is more difficult because, as we age, the longer we use our native language, it comes to dominating our linguistic map space.
An individual must work harder, and for a longer time to master a new language because the brain protects the authority of its native language. If you are thinking to overcome your mother tongue and learn a new language, a month is not enough. You have to give it time and let it grow on you.
The significant negative impact of using the mother tongue is in creating the dual language system is associated with cross-translation. Most of us, when learning English, subconscious revert to cross translation to and from their mother tongue. When you cross-translate, you think in your mother language while trying to speak English, which hinders fluency.
- Time and effort
People manage to form a direct connection between words of a foreign language & or concepts are capable of forming a new language speech centre in their brains. Unfortunately, only about five out of a hundred people are capable of doing it. The remaining, need to put in more efforts and time if they want to achieve the same success as these language capable people.
A beginner can learn English within a year. That is considered pretty fast, although not as fast as some of the crazy 30 days promise you online. Specifically, a year is an average amount of time it will take an adult to become fluent enough to work in English if he starts as a beginner, and studies at least 5 hours a day. This varies from individual to individual.
- Active training and passive training of English skills
When an instructor explains formal grammar in English, learners automatically translate the information into the native language because they don’t know English yet. However, most of this information is erased unless the use of repetition reinforces it. That is why courses that promise fluency in a particular language within a period as short as 30 days, can never help you achieve that level of fluency.
This is the reason why learning formal grammar is a waste of time sometimes. Millions of English learners, with excellent knowledge of formal grammar and high scores in various programs, can read or write in English, but very seldom can speak English fluently.
Anxiety during speaking in English is real, and it can jeopardise your ability to learn. If you are free to use your language skills, you miss valuable practice. If you miss valuable practice, you don’t progress as quickly. It is a vicious cycle. Studies suggest that anxiety can lead to anger and frustration, which are hardly beneficial to the learning process.
In this case, be aware of your own feelings and walked to build up your confidence. It is okay to be anxious, try to be mindful of your feelings and why you feel this way. Not only could this self-awareness reduce your overall stress, but it could also help you find ways to work around your anxiety.
You can also increase your confidence by affirmations to remind yourself of how capable you are. Do not worry about your pronunciation or speaking power, and interact with people around you. Give yourself time, and you will gain confidence that will improve your fluency.
Developing fluency in any language requires time
The goal of learning English within a span of 30 days seems too unrealistic to achieve. Although it is good to set up a time limit for your target, it is essential to be realistic. Extend your time and then try to learn English as it comes with a lot of exceptions and ambiguous topics.
Try not complicating your learning process by learning hard words just for the sake of it. Expanding your vocabulary is an easy task, and is a lifelong process. Even native English speakers don’t know every word present in the dictionary, just like you don’t know every word in your mother tongue.
You need to dissect the language into individual components like speaking, reading, grammar, and pronunciation separately. When this environment of passive training is turned into active training, and all language skills are prepared simultaneously, you will be able to learn any foreign language as effortlessly as children.
How to Speak English fluently
- To start with, people can learn a language fast when they read, write, hear and speak in that language. When working on living in a country where English is excessively used, pave the way for learning it quicker. Furthermore, listening to the native speakers, you can understand the accent and the usage of words.
- Next, language is not always the grammar and rules specified in textbooks. It is certainly something which needs to be learnt through talking. The more we used it in our daily life, the better there is a scope of becoming fluent in it. Language courses help in understanding the gist but do not give a practical understanding of the usage.
- There are two sorts of grammar, intuitive or natural grammar and formal grammar. Intuitive grammar it’s more like a feeling than a memorised set of rules. Adult brains have the capacity to find and record patterns in everything that we experience or do. Intuitive grammar is obtained subconsciously in the process of re-enacting comprehensible states exclusively in English. Intuitive grammar works instantaneously and does not require the learner to memorise and apply rules. The more you encounter the language, the better your brain understand the rule of integrative grammar, and the better you are able to speak in that language.
- Keeping all this in mind, you should remember to give yourself enough time. Regular daily practice in all English skills is a much better method. You will learn more, remember more and see a marked improvement over weeks, months and years. Slow and steady wins the race.
What happens to our brains when we learn a new language?
Specific brain areas increase in size and function, including Broca’s area, which is usually in the left hemisphere and involved in language production. When children grow up bilingual, both languages are processed in the same area. When an individual learns a second language, a separate area develops close to the first.
Some individuals learn quicker than others and studies have shown differences in the brain areas that changed. The hippocampus and the Broca’s area altered most in the first learners and the motor cortex in slow students. Some efforts depend on the person’s first language. For example, a native Japanese speaker cannot readily distinguish ‘r’ and ‘l’ when learning English because, in their brains, both the sounds activate the same area. However, to English speakers, the sound activates distinct areas.
Usually, learning a new language improve brain function, providing better memory, more mental flexibility and creativity and can even delay the onset of dementia.
Even though learning to read and write English within a short amount of time is possible, fluency, however, is not. We pronounce all sound in our native language automatically, and the same subconscious component in pronouncing words in a new language develops during a simultaneous repetition. Furthermore, simultaneous repetition improves visualisation and ability to form a direct link between symbols or concepts.
The English language is regarded as the most spoken language in the world. It is also required in other countries for students. When students want to go abroad for higher education, they have to pass the IELTS examination, which requires English proficiency. Many students prepare to do a diploma, under graduation, post-graduation so that they can get a job with the highest salary. Therefore, speaking English is vital for the job and to enter in the corporate industry as well.