What are some examples of esthetic restorative materials?
A basic understanding of the materials used for these artfully created restorations is necessary for their successful maintenance. The three basic materials used for esthetic restorations are porcelain, composites, and glass-ionomer cements.
What are different incremental techniques?
According to Nadig et al., incremental technique showed lower microleakage compared to bulk. Among the incremental techniques, split horizontal incremental technique showed least microleakage followed by centripetal technique and oblique placement technique at occlusal margin of Class II restoration.
How do you apply composite?
The steps of placing dental bonding (composite restorations):
- Preparing (trimming) the tooth (when needed).
- Acid etching the enamel (and dentin)
- Applying the bonding agent.
- Placing the dental composite.
- Curing the restoration.
- Final shaping and polishing.
- Aftercare. / Precautions.
What is C factor in dentistry?
C-factor refers to the ratio of bonded surfaces to free or unbonded surfaces. The higher the C-factor, the greater the stress from polymerization shrinkage (43). Restorations with C-factor higher than 3:1 are considered to be at risk for debonding and microleakage (170).
Why is composite placed in increments?
Most manufacturers recommend placing composite in increments of no more than 2.0 mm in order to eliminate the risk of increased stresses. An inadequate depth of cure can result in uncured composite, incomplete bonding, and a decrease in marginal seal of the restoration, resulting in compromised restorative longevity.
What is sandwich technique in composite?
The sandwich technique is a specific strategy in restorative dentistry used for fillings. In both open and closed sandwich techniques, the different materials of the composite resin is layered or “stacked” onto the tooth, similar to building the layers of a sandwich.
What is acid etching in dentistry?
Acid etching is the use of an acidic substance to prepare the tooth’s natural enamel for the application of an adhesive. The acid roughens the surface microscopically, increasing retention of resin sealant. Etching of dental enamel with acid removes the smear layer and opens enamel tubules.
What is the best approach for composite layering in dentistry?
Although more elaborate composite layering techniques exist and may be used in complex esthetic scenarios, a simplified approach combining two body shades and implementing basic dental anatomy concepts often will deliver highly acceptable esthetic results.
What are the different treatment modalities for esthetic rehabilitation?
Various treatment modalities for esthetic rehabilitation exist like microabrasion, direct composite resin restorations or combination of both, indirect composites, crowns, esthetic veneers, and so forth.
What are composite resin restorations?
Composite resin restorations have become an integral part of contemporary restorative dentistry and can be called “star of minimal invasion” due to its conservative concepts. The direct composite veneering allows restoring the tooth in a natural way and preservation of sound tooth structure when compared to indirect restorations.
Is multiple layering a breakthrough in composite restorations?
While anterior composite restorations are ubiquitous, breakthrough multiple layering techniques using a range of shades, opacities, and translucencies remains the domain of relatively few practitioners.