Keeping Your Child Healthy: 4 Tips
- October 10, 2022
- 5 minutes read
It’s important for you to keep your children healthy at all times, and this is something that every parent knows very well. While this may be common knowledge, the means by which to get it done may prove a bit difficult. If you’d like to get some ideas about how to take care of your child’s health, have a look at these four helpful tips.
1. Take Them For Oral Health Checkups
Oral health is an important part of overall health, and this is why you must take good care of your child’s oral health. Do this by teaching them proper oral care routines and encouraging them to keep up with them on a daily basis. Lead by example and they’re likely to follow suit if they see you taking good care of your oral health. Go for regular checkups at your dentist’s and take them to a pediatric dentist as well. When you do this, you’ll give them a good chance of avoiding a number of oral health issues. Note that 42% of children aged between two and 11 years have had cavities or dental carries in their primary teeth. This is something you should make an effort to ensure that you keep your children safe from.
2. Get Them Sunscreen
Children typically love nothing more than to spend time outdoors, playing and learning and just doing whatever else they can. The attraction is in spending time outdoors, so you should keep them safe by getting sunscreen for them. Check to see if you can find an organic and mild sunscreen that will be gentle on their young, growing skin while keeping them safe from the extremities of the sun. Remember that some pharmacy-brand creams lose up to 50% of their antioxidant capability at the six-month mark. This means that you need to check to make sure that the cream you use on your child’s skin is still fresh and will work as it’s intended to.
3. Keep Your Home Clean
A clean home is a great environment to raise your children in. This is because there’s a lower chance of having them pick up dirt and get infected, catching things like stomach flu. When your home is clean, you’ll also have an easier time keeping it organized so that it doesn’t pose risks such as accidents for your children. In a clean home, it will be easier to teach your children future healthy habits like cleaning up after themselves. Healthy habits like washing their hands frequently will also have a better impact. A clean home is also less likely to develop an infestation, as it will be easy to spot the early warning signs of one. This is a real risk since approximately six to 12 million lice infestations, according to the CDC, occur each year among children aged between three and 11 years in the United States.
4. Take Care of Their Mental Health
Finally, your children’s mental health also needs to be nurtured and taken good care of. When you do this, you’ll improve their overall body health. You can form a tighter bond with them in the process of taking care of their mental health. Provide an open and free environment for them so that they don’t have a hard time sharing issues that may be troubling them with you. When you do this, they’ll likely feel as though they have an ally in you and they’re not going through life all alone.
With these four tips, you can keep your child healthy and set them up for a successful future. It may take some effort but the payoff will be worth it. Start with an easily actionable tip and work your way to the harder ones. Soon enough, you’ll have a happy and healthy child who has a good chance of enjoying success and happiness as an adult.