NFT (Non Fungible Token) What is it and how does it work?
What are NFTs? Its meaning NFT corresponds to the acronym “non fungible token”, which we can translate as “non fungible token” or “non fungible asset”, or, what is the same, the meaning of NFT meansthat because it is a unique asset, it cannot be altered or replaced with a similar item of equal value because there wouldn't be a comparable asset. And these assets are also digital, that is, they have no correlation in the physical world (although sometimes they may).
The blockchain is everywhere: what do NFT and Web3 have in common?
We have been hearing about the benefits of blockchain for years. An encryption and authentication technology that serves a lot. But it has not been until a couple of years ago that there has been an explosion of projects based on blockchain development and that they intend to come to stay. First it was cryptocurrencies. Next came NFT assets . And now everyone is talking about the metaverse. Even Facebook changed its name to Meta .
Metaverse and blockchain, what is their relationship?
The science fiction that we see in the movies is no longer so far away, a buzzword, where the virtual reality and augmented reality metaverse interact, but also that territory that generates a lot of money, particularly with the speculation of virtual reality currencies.
How are NFTs used in music?
First of all, rapper Booba recently managed to sell 25,000 copies of the “TN” clip in the form of Non-Fungible Token (NFT). Yes, we can say it, the entire cultural sector has been turned upside down with the appearance of NFTs and it is not going to stop. In fact, NFTs are being used more and more around the world, as big names in the industry such as Eminem or The Weeknd are turning to this novelty. If you are new to NFTs, you are probably wondering what they are for. Will this new revolution have an impact on the art world? How to exploit it in music?
The intersection of e-commerce and NFTs: how NFT technology is changing DeFi
DeFi and fintech startups are putting financial tools in the hands of the average person. NFT technology takes this a step further by offering trustless transparency and programmable data.
NFT: what are non-fungible tokens?
An NFT is a “non-substitutable digitally protected object” and is considered title to unique digital items . Above all, digital art is sold with the help of non-fungible tokens. Blockchain technology is used for this: information about the work, the owner, the rights of use, etc., is stored and transferred tamper-proof.
What are NFTs and how to use them in an online marketing strategy
NFTs, cryptocurrencies and the relationship between the two concepts have become a recurring topic of conversation. It is, without a doubt, a complex issue on which there are many questions. Are we witnessing a change in the economic paradigm or is it just a passing fad?
16 Best Markets for Digital Art NFT or Non-Fungible Tokens
Over 12 years since Bitcoin emerged as the world's first virtual currency, designed by an enigmatic, freedom-loving hacker and currently used by underground geeks to buy and sell everything from servers to cell phone jammers.
Polygon vs Ethereum OpenSea: Which Should You Choose?
NFT are now more popular than ever. Non-converting companies are offered the best way to sell their works of art, videos, audio texts, 3D models and all types of digital products. NFT marketplaces, such as OpenSea, Axie and Rarible, are the best, as for blockchain IT companies that are immersed in the ocean, providing NFT marketing development services is a viable option.
NFTs and copyright: why for a lot of money invested the rights remain in the hands of the original creator
You have bought an NFT and you are wondering: What is it for? What rights do I have over the work? Do I have a license to create derivatives? . The acquisition of these 'Non-fungible tokens' generates many questions related to copyright and it is convenient to emphasize that the rights of the original author and those of the buyer must be differentiated. Here we are going to try to clarify what happens with NFTs and how the rights to the work on which they are based remain.