Mesa (480) 632-1577 | Gold Canyon (480) 543-1525 | Chandler (480) 895-0784 email@example.com
There are two types of Diabetes: Type 1 & Type 2
In Type 1 Diabetes, the body does not produce insulin. The body breaks down the carbohydrates you eat into blood sugar that it uses for energy—and insulin is a hormone that the body needs to get glucose from the bloodstream into the cells of the body. With the help of insulin therapy and other treatments, everyone can learn to manage their condition and live long healthy lives.
No matter how Type 1 Diabetes has shown up in your life, you can find success by balancing your medications, and sticking to your daily exercise routine and nutrition plan. But wherever you’re at with this challenge, you can always reach out for help of any kind—from your caregivers, your family, or other people who live with Type 1 Diabetes.
Type 2 Diabetes is the most common form of diabetes—and it means that your body doesn’t use insulin properly. And while some people can control their blood sugar levels with healthy eating and exercise, others may need medication or insulin to help manage it. Regardless, you have options—and tools, resources, and support to help you fight.
A key part of managing Type 2 Diabetes is maintaining a healthy diet. You need to eat something sustainable that helps you feel better and still makes you feel happy and fed. Remember, it’s a process. Work to find helpful tips and diet plans that best suit your lifestyle—and how you can make your nutritional intake work the hardest for you.
Fitness is another key to managing Type 2. And the good news is all you have to do is get moving. The key is to find activities you love and do them as often as you can. No matter how fit you are, a little activity every day can help fight Type 2 and put yourself in charge of your life.
Our staff at San Tan Cardiovascular will provide education and resource materials to help you understand this often misunderstood condition.
We provide the latest diabetic medications and treatments to help our patients achieve optimal health and wellness.
Contact San Tan Cardiovascular Center today to make an appointment with one of our healthcare providers.
At this appointment:
Our billing department will then contact your health insurance company to obtain prior authorization. Upon receiving insurance authorization, the treatments will be scheduled.