This is what writers can learn from storytelling
Storytelling, examples and personal stories help to involve your reader in your reasoning or story. Storytelling is not just for fiction books like thrillers or novels. It also makes non-fiction books such as business books and (auto)biographies much better.
Anyone can explain a certain lesson or theory. What makes your book so special is YOUR take on it, YOUR experiences, personal stories and examples.
So storytelling. But how? Here are five practical tips for better storytelling in your book.
1. Keep notes and use what you already have
If you’ve kept a journal, made social media posts, or regularly write blogs, emails, or letters, these are great resources for your storytelling. Here you have described that event, your emotions, exact statements and further details – at the time that something happened – which can now make your story much more alive.
2. Use the hero’s journey for your storyline and suspense
We’re used to Hollywood movies and bestselling books following a certain storyline, and for good reason. You will recognize ‘the hero’s journey’ in all good stories.
You don’t have to follow this structure exactly; the main thing is that the road to success isn’t a straight line. It has many ups and downs. Take your reader through all the stages.
3. Break the chronology
Richard Branson’s biography begins with a hot air balloon about to crash. You have no idea who Richard is or how he ended up in that hot air balloon, but you are immediately drawn into the story. The first chapter ends with a cliffhanger. In the next chapter we learn how he set up his ‘Virgin’ empire and how he eventually survives that balloon crash.
The first chapter of a successful biography never begins with “when I was born I was very young.” It usually hits the spot: the book starts the middle of a super exciting scene, which of course ends in a ‘cliffhanger’. The follow inge chapter is the perfect moment to tell the background and history of the main character. At a certain point, you will automatically end up in that exciting scene again, of which you now know the context, and you learn how it ends.
4. Take the reader into what you knew THEN
In fiction books (and autobiographies) it often happens that you describe your first meeting with a person, who later in the story turns out to be not so nice at all. For example, a business partner who cheated on you or a love partner who was not who they seemed.
When you describe that first meeting in your book, try not to immediately pour out all your doubts and resentments about that person. Let the reader sympathize with you, with what you knew and felt at that moment. So that guy who later caused that ugly divorce ,gave you butterflies in your stomach the first time you met. Focus on that and take the reader step by step through all the fun things that attracted you to him. After a while, the first doubt arises, but you cover it (together with the reader) with the mantle of love. Over time, more and more doubts or irritations arise, until at a certain point, together with the reader, you end up at a point of doubt: will this work or not? Balance on that point with your reader for a while, with all the ups and downs that come with it. Only then will you arrive at the point where you are now: with all the knowledge and experience and the complete picture. Many writers go too fast here: “I met Peter and immediately saw that he was a narcissist.” Oh yeah? If so, why did you marry him?
5. Process things that happened today
Have you just seen a movie, had a discussion, solved a client’s problem? That subject, which is still so vivid in your memory, has that fresh energy that can give the story a sparkle. Don’t wait until it ‘fits’ into your schedule; write it down right away. Catch that sparkle! Your readers will thank you for it.
Are you serious about writing your book?
Don’t reinvent the wheel, like I did. As the author and co-author of more than 30 books, writing coach for hundreds of people and organizer of 20 writing retreats, I have finally found the best system for writing a good book: the ‘Reverse Writing’ method. If you begin at the end and create a good structure before you start writing, you will be able to follow your energy, instead of the page numbers.
Learn all tips & tricks in the live online workshop
Everything you need to turn your idea into a bestseller: practical advise, examples and inspiration about writing, publishing and promoting your book. Check out the ‘from idea to book’ workshop.
Private writing coaching is a unique opportunity to work on your book with my personal guidance and support. Book a single strategy session or plan a series of 1-on-1 calls. Do you want the best for your book?
A writing retreat on an exotic location?
During the online writing [email protected] or an all-inclusive retreat on my favorite islands or in the French Alps, you will work with like-minded people and get 1-on-1 guidance. The daily workshops help to get started, followed by focused writing time, delicious food and personal guidance & feedback. Where will we go?
The book ‘Reverse Writing’
Learn my Reverse Writing method (start with the back cover) in my brand new, super-comprehensive book ‘Reverse Writing’ and the companion workbook. You will find a step-by-step explanation, lots of examples, inspiration and practical tips about writing, promotion and publishing your book.
Original ideas and proven formats for your next bestseller
A successful book starts with a good idea. Check out the 10 best ‘formulas’ I’ve found for successful non-fiction books. Each of these ten proven formats gives you a different perspective, inspiration and examples you can adapt for your own book. Subscribe to my ‘interested in writing’ list for book inspiration & tips and immediately receive the PDF with 10 ideas for a successful non-fiction book.