Have you been experiencing dental discomfort? If so, you might be wondering, what’s going on inside your tooth? Experiencing dental discomfort is not only unpleasant, it can also cause a lot of worry. An endodontist can help! Here’s how.
What Causes Dental Discomfort?
Many things can cause dental discomfort, from minor issues like a misaligned bite, to more serious issues like gum disease or tooth decay.
If you’re experiencing discomfort and wondering what’s going on inside your tooth, it’s important to see a dentist as soon as possible to find out the cause. If it’s something minor, they can usually help you resolve it quickly, and your discomfort can be over! Treating minor issues early can also help to prevent them from turning into major issues later on.
If it’s something more serious, it’s crucial to get it treated right away to minimize any complications that can occur such as dental loss or periodontitis, which is an advanced stage of gum disease.
What is an Endodontist?
Endodontists are specialist dentists who undergo extra training in order to focus on the care and treatment of the innermost part of the tooth.
If you’re wondering what’s going on inside your tooth, you’ve come to the right place! We’re fascinated by the inside of teeth and have chosen to dedicate our practice to keeping teeth healthy from the inside out.
How an Endodontist Can Help
When you visit an endodontist, you can be sure to receive specialized care. Since endodontists have chosen to focus their practice on a specific specialty, they typically have the best and most innovative tools and training for your needs in that area.
Since endodontists focus on the inside of the tooth where the nerves are located, they also specialize in the diagnosis and management of dental discomfort.
If you have a tooth that won’t stop hurting or you’re concerned about the health of a tooth at its root, call an endodontist right away to get the specialized care your tooth needs!
Call our Lee's Summit dental office to make an appointment with a dentist who may be able to help you find out more about this topic, and improve your oral health.