1. Use a Trough Planter 
A raised garden bed is a natural choice for a vegetable garden using containers. By using a trough planter, you have a raised or standing height that allows users to harvest and tends to their crops easily without needing to hunch over or kneel. As well as being a practical gardening solution, trough planters also offer a great visual benefit for adding height to your pot. 

2. Adding Potted Crops will Bring Productivity to any Patio 
Vegetable garden container ideas will give you the chance to increase your productivity on your patio. You can make use of your unused space and add a variety of crops such as tomatoes, beans, and pumpkins. And the great thing is you don't have to spend a lot of money on landscaping or dig up half your backyard for a fancy vegetable patch. Use your patio and seating space to add more symmetrical vibrance to your outdoor space. 

3. Grow Potatoes in a Bag 
Potatoes are one of the easiest and simplest vegetables to grow and they are best grown in containers. If they are grown in a border, potatoes will spread into all the available soil not just in a small section where they are planted. When potatoes are planted in the ground, it can be difficult to harvest all of the crops. Placing them in a bag or container, it makes it much easier to harvest everything so that nothing is wasted. 

4. Be Sure to Choose the Right Container 
Along with complementing your garden when using plant containers, you must get the right containers that are compatible with the plants you are growing. your containers should be 4 inches wider and deeper than the root ball of the plant. Shallow containers that are around 12 to 16 inches deep are great for shallow-rooted herbs and other annual vegetables. You can replenish the soil for each season when you replant them. If you are interested in growing larger plants such as aubergines or tomatoes, you would do your best by using one plant per container. 

5. Design Raised Garden Bed Containers to Suit Your Outdoor Space 
Raised garden beds can make great vegetable garden containers if you have a large enough space to work with. The benefit of this is that you can have these containers made to fit your landscaping, no matter how large or small they need to be. There are many great materials out there to use for raised beds. One expert suggests using Corten steel due to its durability and capacity to be bent or folded into an unusual shape. The deep rust shade of the material is also very attractive and will look great with other materials like buff-colored gravel.
