
“What a wonderful day!” Craig thought to himself, approaching the small cafe. Walking towards the door, he passed bikes parked out front without locks and could see into the window. “The cafe looks wonderful today,” he remarked. Through the untinted glass, Craig could see people quietly keeping to themselves. Some customers were working on laptops, some were writing in journals, and others were reading novels of various sizes. Craig had not lived in the area long, but he could certainly get accustomed to such a cozy environment.

Craig had just moved from Florida to Rome, and the vibe back home was much different. There was not a single locale in Tampa you could go to without being accosted by the thoughtlessness of the public loudly doing whatever they wanted wherever they wanted. It was different in Italy. With his bucket hat snug on his head, Craig entered the cafe. Better than the difference in the politeness of his neighbors was the quality of Italian sandwiches he could order here. Freshly-made sandwich in hand, Craig moved towards an open table when he noticed a baby. Usually, you could hear a Tampa baby from a mile away. He could not keep to himself how impressed he was by the baby’s ability to remain silent, so he was compelled to say something: “I cannot believe how quiet this baby is!”

The moment he began to speak, the two parents of the baby looked up from their books and shot a stare at Craig with each bringing a finger to their mouths—unfortunately, they were too late. Cooing awake, the baby opened its eyes and looked around. They were afraid for a moment, but it seemed they were safe. Craig quietly apologized and found his seat.

The Italian sandwich he ordered looked like it could be in a magazine. Craig imagined the publication’s title: ‘Best Sandwiches of Italy,’ with his sandwich on the cover. Raising the first half of his meaty sandwich, just before he could take a bite a shockwave startled the cafe. The previously silent baby was now in full panic mode, ruining the atmosphere for everyone inside the restaurant. It was all Craig’s fault, and everyone else knew it. Craig sunk low into his chair and pulled his bucket hat over his face, hoping his new neighbors might forgive him.
