Fuel Your Hair with these Yummy and Nutritious Foods

Like your body, your hair also needs fuel to function well and be healthy. Try out these yummy foods that will make your hair troubles go away:

1. Sweet Potatoes: No more lifeless hair with this delicious root vegetable that's loaded with beta-carotene – a nutrient that converts into vitamin A that helps keep your scalp moisturized and promotes hair growth.

2. Spinach: Don't tolerate dry tresses – add spinach to your diet! This yummy and leafy green is rich in iron and vitamins A and C. These are essential nutrients that keep hair healthy and prevent brittleness and hair loss.

3. Salmon: Get your shine on with this seafood! Salmon is packed with omega-3 fatty acids, which are anti-inflammatory and can reduce hair loss. Plus, it contains a hefty amount of protein that helps the body produce keratin, a key element of healthy and strong hair.

4. Lean Poultry: Tired of thin and limp hair? Make lean poultry a staple in your diet! Meats like chicken and turkey pack proteins that your hair is craving. They need it to grow and stay thick and healthy. It also contains B vitamins that can reduce hair loss.

5. Iron Up with Iron-Fortified Cereal to Stop Hair Fall: Start your day with a bowl of iron-fortified cereal to boost hemoglobin production in your body, and prevent hair loss caused by iron deficiency.
 
6. Go Bananas over Guava to Beat Breakage: This tropical fruit is high in vitamin C, which helps your body produce collagen that keeps your hair strong and prevents breakage. The next time you're in the mood for a snack, reach for juicy guava!

7. Pump it Up with Greek Yogurt: Greek yogurt is a protein powerhouse and contains vitamin B5. It's sure to improve blood flow to the scalp and prevents hair thinning. Swap your regular yogurt with a creamy bowl of Greek goodness for those crazy locks from within.

So, these are some of the foods that will give you more than just good hair days. Try these out and let us know about your experience.
