Good afternoon, graduates, faculty, and distinguished guests. I am Pluto, the dwarf planet formerly known as the 9th planet. I am honored to be here today as your guest speaker and to share with you a lesson that I have learned over my long and eventful life.

I want to congratulate every one of you for accomplishing this life-changing milestone. Graduating from college is an undertaking that requires years of hard work, dedication, and perseverance. You should all be proud of and celebrate all you have achieved.

As you may know, in 2006, the IAU decided to reclassify me as a dwarf planet. Honestly, this decision was an affront to my ego and attacked the core of my sense of identity. I always considered myself a full planet and was a proud member of the planetary community. Being the 9th planet of the solar system was important to my identity. To be kicked out of that community was a devastating blow that has taken years to recover from.

I share this because this struggle has taught me a lesson that I would like to focus on today. As a planet, I have seen many changes in the universe over the years. I have watched the birth and death of stars, and galaxies collide. The one thing that has remained constant is change. At times it seems as though we cannot survive all of the chaos and it rocks us to our core.

But here is where I urge you to remember this lesson. Sometimes, even oftentimes, the world will not see you as you see yourself. You may face hurdles that challenge your very sense of self-worth and identity. But it is not up to the universe, or scientists, to define who you are. It is up to you to define who you are and what you stand for. Just because someone tells you that you are not a full planet does not mean that you are any less important or valuable. You have the power to define your own identity, and to make a difference in the world. 

In closing, I want to congratulate you on your graduation and wish you all the best as you embark on the next phase of your journey. And remember, even if the world does not always see us as we see ourselves, we are still important and valuable. Thank you.
