The crack in the ceiling opens up. Two new faces fall into the fiery depths. Immediately, they become confused. Is this Hell? Neither of them recalled living that bad of a life. Sure, they weren’t perfect people, but Hell? That was a bit unexpected. Soon they turned and noticed each other. Because so much time had passed, it was hard for them to recognize each other.

“Rocky? Rocky Walker? Is that you?” One of the men spoke up.

“Yeah, that’s me,” said Rocky, “but who in the hell are you?” 

“It’s Johnny, from Belview highschool. Don’t you remember? You used to pick on me all the time when we were teenagers.” Johnny looked around, still confused. “I guess this is Hell? I can kind of understand why you would be here, no offense, but I think they’ve put me in the wrong place.”

“Hey, don’t act all high and mighty,” said Rocky. “What I did to you when we were younger was wrong, but I’m a changed man. I lived a long and happy life, violence-free.”

“Well, well, well,” said a deep, disgruntled voice that was emanating from a dark corner. “If it isn’t the 2:45 appointment, Rocky Walker and Johnny Strait. Do you both know why you are here?”

Still confused, but now filled with dread and a pinch of fear, the two shook their heads quietly. 

“Let’s see here,” the deep voice continued. “It seems as though in 1982, there was a fight between the two of you on the outdoor basketball courts of your high school. Do you remember? During this incident, Johnny savagely fought back against Rocky who had been bullying him for months. After kicking Rocky in the head, knocking him unconscious, Johnny cried out ‘See you in Hell, bastard!’, so naturally, I added your appointment to my ledger. Now that you are both deceased, it’s time for you to meet up.”

“Wait,” Johnny said, “So you mean to tell me that I’m here with this guy because I told him that I would meet him here?”

“Of course,” said the deep voice of Satan. “I don’t know what you were thinking, but we take invocations pretty seriously in the underworld. Now, you have a chance to sort out your differences before you move on.”
