Authorities are searching for a Tennessee woman who has been missing for weeks after allegedly setting off on a cross-country trip with her boyfriend, who was accused of punching her earlier this month, in a case that chillingly echoes a 2021 disappearance.

The woman was last seen on surveillance footage Saturday while she sold a phone at a cash machine in California, where she allegedly traveled with her boyfriend, according to information provided by the Cheatham County Sheriff's Office and District Attorney General Ray Crouch of Cheatham County, Tennessee.

She was captured on footage selling her phone at an EcoATM at a Walmart store in Redding, California, according to images provided by Crouch. She appears to be dressed in a red shirt while a man in a black hat and shirt stands nearby.

That came a little more than three weeks after a witness told investigators with the Torrance County Sheriff's Office in New Mexico of seeing her boyfriend punch the missing woman in the face, according to the incident report obtained by NBC News.

She told police that both she and her boyfriend were drinking and that he "started to hit her for no reason" while they were driving during the May 4 incident. The investigator — who encountered the pair at a rest stop — said he saw "red marks on her face and fingerprint marks on both arms," and wrote that the woman, "also stated that she had a bruise on her chest and her back." The investigator later determined that "the bruise on [the woman's] arms came from [her boyfriend] holding her down to avoid being hit."

The man told police that the now missing woman "hit him in the mouth for no reason" and continued hitting him as they were driving. He told the investigator he did not want her to go to jail, that both had been drinking and that the pair had been traveling to California.

Investigators determined “both parties were mutual combatants while traveling down the interstate.” Officials drove both of them away from the scene separately.

Both were drunk and neither would admit to driving the car, according to the incident report.

The woman originally told police that she wanted to press charges, but both she and her boyfriend later said they did not want to press charges.

A photo on the flyer shared by the Cheatham County Sheriff’s Office noting the woman's disappearance appears to feature her with a black eye. It is unclear when that image was taken.

The flyer also states that “due to history of domestic assault, we believe she is in danger."

Representatives from the Torrance County Sheriff’s Office and the Cheatham County Sheriff’s Office could not immediately be reached for additional comment.

After the alleged assault, officials with the sheriff's office dropped the woman off in the town of Moriarty, New Mexico, a town about 40 miles east of Albuquerque, where a family friend was supposed to pick her up, according to ABC affiliate WKRN of Nashville, citing her sister.

She said her sister called her after she had been dropped off, describing her as "crying and upset."

"Her eye was already turning black and you could tell she was beat up pretty bad,” her sister added.

Those details of the case, among others, echo the disappearance of another woman whose family reported her missing in 2021 after she left for a cross-country road trip with her fiancé. Her remains were found at a Wyoming campground that September and the manner of death was ruled a homicide, according to the FBI.

The fiancé's body was found in Florida a month after the missing woman's remains had been discovered. He died of a self-inflicted gunshot wound and left notes saying he was responsible for his fiancée's death, officials have said.

Less than a month before her family reported her missing, Utah police responded to a physical altercation between her and her fiancé. The officer wrote that the woman slapped her fiancé after an argument and that neither wanted to press charges. But a subsequent independent review determined that police misclassified the incident — which investigators should have ruled domestic violence, with the woman as the perpetrator — and left out details about injuries the woman appeared to have suffered.
