1.	Sasha stepped nervously onto the ship ramp with the wind threatening to whip her golden hair from its braid. She’d always known her duty as firstborn would be to serve the Kardille. They had changed her world forever when they showed up with their demands for help, and the treaties assured that every firstborn from the native families would serve in their war against a species even more alien that also wanted to steal the planet. Sasha gripped the railing with a delicate amber colored hand and stepped forward.

2.	Jennifer frowned as she surveyed the dishwater gray monstrosity of a building in front of her. The height of the doors was intimidating; they were designed for the tall Kardillean forms to fit through. At least she wouldn’t bump her head on any of the frames here. Jennifer was taller than most people she knew, something that had always embarrassed her, but maybe that was a good thing now that she had been called to duty as firstborn. She could never blend in with the aliens that had taken over the world and demanded the firstborn of every family in servitude against its endless war with another species that wanted to steal her planet. She did have pale, milky skin, though, closer to theirs than most of her people with their golden tans.

3.	Bree really didn’t understand the point of making a firstborn walk over three miles on foot to the Kardille intake center. It was bad enough that every family had to give up their oldest kid to the aliens who had taken over their world. Why not make it just a little easier to be ripped away from everyone she loved? She pushed black hair out of her eyes and sighed as she surveyed the road. She was strong and muscular so the exercise wouldn’t kill her. The road was pretty smooth at least. It was just too bad there wasn’t any traffic going in her direction. All she could do was just keep walking and try not to think about the fact that she was going to fight a war that wasn’t hers against some other alien species that might be worse than the one they already had.
