The streaming appearance of hyperspace outside the large skylights added to the dance club’s flashing lights. She could see why people liked this shipborne club. Ahsoka forced herself to relax just enough to feel the rhythm but not enough to let her guard down. 

Her mark was there, dancing near the edge of the floor. The tall man was well dressed but not excessively so. Ahsoka moved toward him only slowly. It had to look like happenstance. 

Ahsoka bumped into him, then turned to apologize, making it clear by her expression that it was an accident. Once he’d gotten a good look at her, she forced herself to bat her eyes demurely. She was more accustomed to using combat to get her way than beauty, but she understood the value of this approach. Eventually, he took the bait.

“I know a more exclusive party going on tonight,” he whispered conspiratorially. “It gets far more exciting than this place. Care to join me?”

“Lead the way.”

They made their way out of the nightclub slowly. His exclusive party had no view of hyperspace, but it did have live music, suited servants, and plenty of well-dressed gangsters milling about the pearlescent stateroom. 

And there, in the middle of all, stood the diminutive Bothan she’d been sent to extract.  

He saw her arrive but continued his conversation with the gaggle who surrounded him. 

Ahsoka begged off to visit the refresher for a moment. Once alone she tapped the code on her bracelet that would tell her droid where to find them. Then she extracted the tiny smoke bombs she’d concealed as necklace beads, readying them in one hand. With the other, she pulled her lightsaber from its thigh holster. 

“This is it.” Ahsoka took one more deep breath and dropped a smoke bomb in the restroom’s doorway. Running out as if frightened, she made a beeline for her target. Another smoke bomb sailed toward the main door and the others scattered about, sparking confusion from all directions. 

Small as they were, though, her smoky distractions wouldn’t last long. Ahsoka yanked the little Bothan onto her back and sprinted to the wall, cutting a quick hole in the thin polymer with her lightsaber. The airlock was a few short meters down the hallway. She just had to hope the droid had linked up to the right spot!
