It's overwhelming sometimes. 

"Don't be too strict." "Don't be too relaxed." "Don't do this." "Don't do that." 

I don't know about you, but I look at those words and think: That's enough of that. We hear enough about what we're NOT supposed to be as parents. Today, let's talk about some behavior we SHOULD model for our children. 

Here are some parenting wins that I strive for every day:

1. Being consistent.
How would you feel if the speed limit on the freeway changed every time you drove on it? But there were no signs - so you wouldn't know the limit had changed until you saw the flashing blue and red lights in the rearview mirror. Oof. I would be mad. I would be frustrated. I might even throw a temper tantrum when the cop tried to hand me a ticket. 
Our kids value consistency as much as we do — they just don't know how to ask for it. Setting clear limits and consequences helps your kids feel loved and safe. They can have confidence in their actions when they're behaving well, and they'll likely react with less anger when they're disciplined because they can understand why —  even if they don't agree with you. 

2. Being available.
There is absolutely no substitute for quality time. You might have noticed that a quick "Is there anything you want to talk about?" asked in a rush before school drop-off probably doesn't result in a whole lot of open discussions. Asking "How was school?" on the ride home might not get much of a response either. But taking an after-dinner stroll with no expectations? Eating breakfast together on the weekends with no distractions? Will open the door to relaxed, enjoyable conversations with your kids. And if they approach you wanting to talk, do your best to make time RIGHT THEN if it's at all possible. Show them they're important to you. And if you don't have time right at that moment, make a plan for when you'll talk more and then stick to it. Being available to your kids when they're young — even though the problems of a three-year-old may not seem life-changing — will start a healthy pattern of communication that will continue into their teen years.
