1. What year is mentioned in this piece of writing? 1986
2. What locations are mentioned by the writer? List them in order of their mentioning. 1. London 2. Books For Cooks (an emporium) 3. Notting Hill 4. The Mediterranean 5. London 6.  Apulia, southern Italy (in a farmhouse) 
3. What was the occupation of the person who wrote this piece? Cook.
4. What did the writer of this piece report to have more of than money? The writer claimed to have more enthusiasm than money.
5. Clarissa Dickson Wright said what to the writer of this piece in response to what? Clarissa Dickson Wright said, “Are you really going to buy all those?” in response to a pile of books in the writer's arms.
6. What was the physical response to Wright's question? The writer of this piece blushed furiously.
7. What was recommended by Wright as an alternative to the pile of books that the writer was holding? Honey From a Weed by Patience Gray was recommended.
8. As a result of this interaction what was the attitude toward Wright? This interaction resulted in loyalty and devotion.
9. What was Honey from a Weed about? It is the writings of a woman who followed her man, the sculptor Norman Mommens who moved them to the Mediterranean in search of marble.
10. Patience Gray did what? She turned her back on life in London as a journalist.
11. What had been Gray's occupation? She was the women’s page editor of the Observer.
12. Where did she finally settle? She settled in Apulia, southern Italy.
13. What is depicted on the cover of Gray's book? The kitchen from her farmhouse in Apulia is illustrated on the cover of Gray's book.
14. How is Honey From a Weed described? It is described as remarkably ahead of its time and scrupulous in its knowledge of local and seasonal cooking. It is also described as beautiful and humorous.
15. What are the key characteristics of Gray's lifestyle, mentioned her?  They never had a fridge, electricity or running water.
16. What recipes does the writer still cook from this book? A dish of rabbit and prunes and a green vegetable puree is mentioned.
