James and Patrick had a fairly friendly relationship and had little issues living with each other. However, when pizza was involved, the atmosphere in their apartment changed. There were no friendly ribs and remarks, and their eyes were not kind to each other. This wasn't about starvation; the apartment had plenty of good food available, from sandwiches to soups. But to both of them, this was about principle. They bought their weekly pizza and began to idly take slices, enjoying it immensely. But when it came down to the last slice, they crowded around the box and stared each other down.

"Thinking of taking the last slice, are we?" James said in an accusatory tone. He knowingly placed his hand close to the box, as if making clear his challenge.

"Yes, I was. We wouldn't want the pizza to go to waste, would we?" Patrick responded icily, as he responded by placing both hands on the table close to the box, one-upping James' gesture. 

The two stared daggers at each other, and they began to circle the box of pizza like predators who had cornered their prey. This would go on for at least ten minutes, and with each minute their stress and intensity grew, as they knew the pizza would not stay fresh and warm for too long. Stopping just behind the box, James gave a quick sigh, before wearing a false smile.

"Patrick. Certainly, you don't mind if I take the last slice? You did have more than I did, after all."

"If by the number of slices, sure. But we both know your slices were easily the largest and meant more pizza for you overall." retorted Patrick, who was unconvinced by James' smile. "And besides, I distinctly recall you agreeing to relent to the final slice for today, as you ended up eating the final slice last week when this happened."

"Interesting if true... unfortunately, I don't recall such an event happening," said James falsely. "And trust me, I would remember having such an easy victory."

Patrick snorted, "Well, isn't that convenient. But the truth doesn't care about your poor memory, and I distinctly remember you taking it last time." 

The two of them began to circle the box once more, never taking their eyes off of each other, waiting for the other to make their next move.
