Deep in the heart of an ancient forest lies a sun-streaked meadow filled with giant oaks and lush ferns. Just about in the center of this meadow, there is a massive willow tree, with branches gnarled and a trunk twisting up to the sky. Hanging from these branches are a myriad of curious slings and hammocks that appear to be woven from the bark of the willow, undoubtedly making this tree a popular rest area for many local creatures. The stoic willow gives off a serene sense of peace and wisdom, seeming to look over the meadow as a caring grandmother.

Spotted all around this clearing are bunches of vibrantly colored mushrooms  If you were to happen to walk past these particular mushrooms, you would be greeted in cheerful singsong voices. These mushrooms can be overheard gossiping about the local woodland drama and when that grows thin, the weather makes just as fine a subject.

Tucked back among the leaves beside the meadow, where you would probably never even notice, lies a dragon's verdant den. She often appears to sun herself and perhaps join in with some of the gossiping. One excellent afternoon, she is happened upon by a good-looking emerald dragon, who happens to be new to this area. It is not long before the pair find themselves trying not to get caught stealing shy looks from across the meadow.

With each "chance" encounter, the pair's friendship blossoms as they tell the tales that dragons tell, sitting beneath the willow. Their laughter can be heard echoing over the mushrooms' chatter. The emerald dragon's genuine personality and peculiar sense of humor win over the decidedly solitary female. His brazen good looks probably didn't hurt, either. 
 
In a tale as old as time, the two dragons realize they have fallen deeply and utterly in love. The beautiful meadow becomes perhaps even more divine and joyful than it already was. Basking in Grandmother Willow's serene aura, and serenaded by the colorful little mushrooms, the pair are content to pass their time as lovers do, happy as can be.
