Arrakis... Dune... Desert planet. Imperial Capital. A world of wonders.

Galactic Travel (A division of CHOAM) invites you to see the real Arrakis for yourself. Start off with first-class accommodations aboard a Spacing Guild Heighliner, where you will be whisked away in comfort by a Guild Navigator.

Once you arrive at Arrakis, we will start in the old Harkonnen headquarters at Carthag, where you can visit the Bazaar for exotic handbags and jewelry--or maybe a souvenir crysknife. We will also visit the Carthag Prison, where the tyrannical Baron Vladimir Harkonnen and his notorious family kept their political prisoners. The prison is now a museum documenting Harkonnen brutality and their vicious war against the Atreides.

After that, we'll move on to the new Imperial Capital of Arrakeen, where you can explore the lavish old Imperial Palace, home of Count and Lady Fenring. We will spend the next day at the Keep, a massive fortress that serves as the home base of the Imperial military, and the day after that we visit the Grand Palace of Arrakeen, home to the Imperial Court and 35 million high-ranking government officials and their families. The Grand Palace is the largest artificial structure in the universe, so prepare to be struck by awe!

From there, we'll move into the heart of Arrakis. Galactic Travel will pull out all the stops to give travelers a real desert experience, with two nights in an authentic Fremen Sietch! Feast on fremen delicacies and sample raw Spice fresh from the sands. On our first day, we'll fly you out over the desert in our well-equipped ornithopters to witness Spice mining and the massive sandworms. These monsters are some of the most terrifying creatures in the universe. An average sandworm is half a mile long, but worms longer than a mile and broader than a football field have been spotted. Despite their incredible size, they can be tamed, and on your second day you'll get to witness a demonstration of worm riding, with Fremen summoning a sandworm and then taking control of it using his massive hooks!

The sandworms will serve as a fitting climax to what will be an unforgettable visit to the strange world of Arrakis. You don't want to miss out on this. Schedule your Arrakis adventure today!
