Best Places to Go on Holiday in 2023
Here are some of the best places to visit in 2023, chosen by the experts! If you like theme parks, beaches, and pretty landscapes then there's bound to be something you'll like here.

1. FLORIDA, USA
Florida is a place full of sunshine and fun, with lots of different things to do. In a place called Orlando, there are theme parks galore, including Disney World and Universal Studios! If you'd prefer to bring your bucket and spade, Miami offers miles of beaches and lots of places to paddle in the sea. If you're more of an adventurer, then there's the Everglades - a large area of wetlands where you can ride airboats and might even see an alligator! If all of that doesn't sound like fun, then the Space Coast could be the place for you. On the Eastern shores of Florida, you'll find the Kennedy Space Centre where you can see real-life space rockets and learn all about the planets and the stars.

2. ANTALYA, TURKEY
Antalya is a fun place where lots of people like to go during the summer. It has a great mixture of things to do, including the kinds of beaches you might see on a postcard, ancient ruins, and bright and vibrant market towns! Antalya is in the South-West part of Turkey, which means there are lots of beaches to build sandcastles on and plenty of places to splash around in the ocean. It's a place with lots of old and lots of new - you'll be sure to find fun things to do!

3. MAJORCA, SPAIN
Majorca is the biggest of all the islands nearby, and it offers so many fun activities. The island has beautiful beaches and even a giant cathedral! You won't be stuck on the aeroplane very long because the flight only takes around two hours if you're travelling from the UK, so you'll be in the bright sunshine extra quickly. In Majorca's capital city, Palma, you can visit the ancient cathedral or even go out to the countryside on a magical wooden train! Sun, seaside, beaches and magic trains, there's something fun to do for everyone in Majorca.
