Ayurveda is an ancient healing system composed of natural medicines, spiritual reconnection, and rejuvenation of the body. It has been in practice for around 5000 years and was first introduced in the Vedas.
Why Ayurveda is so popular
The popularity of Ayurveda as an alternative means of medicine skyrocketed following the demand for more natural, non-invasive, and holistic methods of healing for the body. Conventional medicine focuses on a targeted area and only treats the ailment as an isolated illness.
Ayurveda looks at the body as being interconnected, with every disease having a connection to the body, spirit, and mind as a whole. It is through this holistic, all-rounded approach that Ayurvedic practitioners have for centuries treated their patients. And it is this approach that played a huge role in popularizing Ayurveda.
Ayurvedic medicine is natural, and most of the ingredients come from nature. As such, knowledge about these natural herbs and shrubs has been passed down for generations, and it is a time-tested and honed practice that has evolved with time.
Ayurveda and the Body
Ayurvedic practitioners have long said that diseases are caused by the body, spirit, and mind falling out of sync. Everybody is different, with different physical abilities, immune strength, and mental vitality. Thus, each person possesses a unique ‘Prakriti- a natural origin that was existent from the beginning of time.
It is the disharmony in a person’s Prakriti that causes diseases in the body. Disharmony can be caused by a variety of factors like
- Unhealthy diet
- Difficult personal relationships
- Failure at work or home
- Weather influence
All these factors play a role in contributing to an unhealthy lifestyle, which can lead to diseases like arthritis, back pain, joint pain, and so on.
Ayurvedic treatments range from natural herbal remedies, dietary changes, meditation, massage therapy, and more. These therapies have been shown to be effective in reducing symptoms of illnesses and rejuvenating the body to prevent it from developing further diseases.
For individuals afflicted with physical issues like back pain, neck pain, osteoporosis, rheumatoid arthritis, and others were able to get pain relief and reduced symptomatic arthritis with very few side effects.
Ayurvedic companies in India
Due to the growing demand for ayurvedic products around the world, ayurvedic pharma franchise company in India have seen unprecedented growth. The growing demand for natural alternative medicine like Ayurveda globally has led to a boom in India’s ayurvedic pcd pharma franchise. As a result, pharmaceutical companies have become better and more focused on providing high-quality products as the competition is high.
All types of ayurvedic pharma products are popular- ointments, creams, oils, and tablets. These are subject to high standards and checking as well.
Ayurvedic medicine has become one of the most profitable franchises in the world. Due to all ayurvedic pcd pharma franchise in India using quality materials in their manufacturing processes, these are rigorously tested before being sold. As a result, Ayurveda has become the trademark of India, and it is here to stay.