Unit 2 Assignment: Ethical Principles and Decision-Making
Due: Sunday by 11:59 pmEthical reasoning helps differentiate between right-thinking decision-making and actions that are wrong, hurtful, and harmful. In this writing assignment, you will consider your own decision-making processes and evaluate the application of those principles to other scenarios.
Choose one of the following three assignment options for your essay:
1. Select a corporate leader in the news who acted legally but immorally, and one who acted illegally but morally. Explain the differences in the actions and behaviors in each of the two examples. What lessons can be learned from the examples? Cite Weiss in your response and incorporate at least one other reference you locate in the Post University library or online source into your essay. Provide a clear introduction, an organized set of paragraphs, and a conclusion.
2. Read Case Study 1, “Bernard L. Madoff Investment Securities LLC: Wall Street Trading Firm,” and Case Study 3, “Ford’s Pinto Fires: The Retrospective View of Ford’s Field Recall Coordinator.” Compare and contrast the ethical decisionmaking principles applied or violated by Bernie Madoff and Dennis Gioia. Use the table on pages 56-57 to guide your thinking. Prepare your essay incorporating points from Weiss in your response in addition to one other reference source you locate in the Post University library or online source. Provide a clear introduction, organized body paragraphs, and a conclusion.
3. Read Case Study 4, “Jerome Kerviel: Rogue Trader or Misguided Employee: What Really Happened at the Societe Generale?” Write an essay in which you first provide a 200-250 word summary of the case study using your own words. Then respond to questions 2, 3, and 5 on page 105. Cite Weiss in your response and incorporate one other reference you locate in the Post University library or BUS340 – Business Ethics Ethical Principles and Decision-Making online source into your essay. Your submission should be written as an essay with an introduction, body paragraphs, and a conclusion. Do not include the questions in your response.
Why Hire a Professional Essay Writer from essayprohire
The quality of an essay is important
If you want to be successful in the essay writing world, it’s important to make sure that the quality of your work is high. A professional essay writer from us will be able to provide you with high-quality papers, and they will also have the experience necessary to write effective essays. This means that you won’t have to worry about any errors or problems with your essays – they will be perfect.
Our Customer service is top-notch
If you have a problem with your essay, or if you just need a little help writing it, then you should contact our customer service. Our customer service is always available to help you with whatever you need – from getting your essay correct to helping you with the grammar and punctuation. We’re here to help, so don’t hesitate to call us today!
Our offer on Unlimited Revisions
If you're looking for essaywriting help, then you should definitely consider getting help from a essaywritinghelpnow. However, if you're not sure what you need or whether you have the time or resources to do the research yourself, then you might want to consider getting unlimited revisions done by our team of experts. O
Our guarantee to Confidentiality
We understand the importance of confidentiality, and we will never share your personal information with anyone without your permission. That’s why we offer a one-year guarantee that your essays will remain confidential. If you decide that you no longer want us to write your essays, we will still respect your privacy and will destroy all the evidence that we had of your work.
We believe that it is important to have a reliable and trustworthy essaywriter. That’s why we offer a 100% satisfaction guarantee on all of our essays. We take the time to get to know our clients, and we will always make sure that our essays are of the highest quality. We understand that not everyone is happy with their first essay, so we want to make sure that you’re always satisfied with the results of our work.
Our punctuality and quality
At our company, we pride ourselves on our punctuality and quality. We understand that it can be difficult to get essays written on time, and we’re here to help you out! Our writers are always available to help you with your essay, and we guarantee that you’ll receive the best possible product. We also have a strict no-nonsense policy when it comes to plagiarism, so you can be sure that your essay will be of the highest quality.
Try it now!
How it works?
Follow these simple steps to get your paper done
Place your order
Fill in the order form and provide all details of your assignment.
Proceed with the payment
Choose the payment system that suits you most.
Receive the final file
Once your paper is ready, we will email it to you.
So much stress and so little time? Take care of yourself: let us help you with your tasks. We offer all kinds of writing services.
No matter what kind of academic paper you need and how urgent you need it, you are welcome to choose your academic level and the type of your paper at an affordable price. We take care of all your paper needs and give a 24/7 customer care support system.
Admission and Business Papers
An admission essay is an essay or other written statement by a candidate, often a potential student enrolling in a college, university, or graduate school. You can be rest assurred that through our service we will write the best admission essay for you.
Editing and Proofreading
Our academic writers and editors make the necessary changes to your paper so that it is polished. We also format your document by correctly quoting the sources and creating reference lists in the formats APA, Harvard, MLA, Chicago / Turabian.
If you think your paper could be improved, you can request a review. In this case, your paper will be checked by the writer or assigned to an editor. You can use this option as many times as you see fit. This is free because we want you to be completely satisfied with the service offered.