Peripheral neuropathy can result from traumatic injuries, infections, metabolic problems, hereditary causes, and exposure to toxins. One of the most common causes is diabetes. People with peripheral neuropathy usually describe pain as throbbing, burning, or tingling. There are many causes of neuropathy.
Diabetes is the number one cause in the United States. Other common causes include trauma, chemotherapy, alcoholism, and autoimmune diseases. Diabetes is the most common cause and causes about half of all cases of neuropathy. Even prediabetes is of concern to doctors because it often leads to diabetes.
Treating diabetes can slow the progression of neuropathy and also help people with other diabetes-related health problems, such as eye complications, kidney problems, strokes and heart attacks. Yes, excessive alcohol consumption can cause neuropathy. Alcohol consumption is the second leading cause of neuropathy, so eliminating alcohol is the best thing you can do on your own. If you abstain from alcohol, neuropathy should not get worse.
As long as you don't need the same chemotherapy again, neuropathy will be a unique situation and should not get worse. Many conditions can cause kidney failure; the most common are diabetes and high blood pressure. There is no easy solution to kidney failure, which means that neuropathy may get worse over time. Peripheral neuropathy has many different causes.
Some people inherit the disorder from their parents. Others develop it because of an injury or other disorder. Neuropathy can also be caused by other health conditions and certain medications. Diabetic neuropathy is the most common cause of peripheral neuropathy, with 60-70% of diabetics suffering from some form of the condition.
High blood sugar associated with diabetes damages the walls of blood vessels that feed the nerves in the hands, feet, eyes, kidneys, and heart. Consequently, diabetics lose sensitivity in the feet and hands and can suffer complications associated with the organs.