exist by itself
10 facts about the picture of Aivazovsky “The Ninth Wave”
We continue the project “The History of One Picture.” In it we tell about the most famous canvases from Petersburg museums. Today – “The Ninth Wave” by Ivan Aivazovsky.
Fact one. The author.
The great Russian artist Ivan Aivazovsky has Armenian roots. His ancestors bore the name Ayvazyan. He himself was recorded in the register as Hovhannes Ayvazyan. And his father signed the name “Gaivazovsky.” The same name when entering the art school and used the future painter. A few years later, he decided to drop the first letter – and became Aivazovsky.
Fact two. Official. Continue reading
Analysis of the work “The Birth of Venus” by Sandro Botticelli
The Renaissance is characterized by the intellectual and artistic flourishing of culture, which reached its peak in the 16th century. Medieval asceticism and contempt for all earthly things are now being replaced by an insatiable interest in the real world, in man, in the consciousness of the beauty and greatness of nature. One of the most important principles of perception of works of art becomes pleasure.  One of the most famous artists of the Renaissance was Sandro Botticelli, a representative of the Florentine school. The writing “The Birth of Venus” preceded the time when Botticelli was most passionate about antiquity. Continue reading
“The Last Supper”: the story of the famous fresco by Leonardo da Vinci
The Last Supper by Leonardo da Vinci is one of the most famous images of the last meal of Jesus Christ with his disciples. He began work on it in 1495 or 1496, and graduated in 1498. This masterpiece of the Renaissance has been praised, studied and replicated for over 500 years, and the fresco itself is still on the wall of the monastery of Santa Maria delle Grazie in Milan. The publication Business Insider talked about it with the historian and author of the book “Leonardo da Vinci and The Last Supper” Ross King.
At one time, the fresco was very popular.
A copy of the frescoes by Italian artist Dzhampetrino. Photo: Wikimedia Commons
Despite the fact that today Da Vinci is known as the author of various inventions, manuscripts, drawings and sketches, it was the Last Supper that ensured him fame during his lifetime. Continue reading