Camping is a great activity, but not everyone sees it this way. There are some stigmas associated with camping, such as the potential dangers that the wild may bring. There is no need to be fearful of camping, as long as you have enough knowledge. The following article contains useful camping advice.
If you are interested in camping, and you are new to the activity, then you should never start out alone. It can be quite dangerous if you don’t know what you are doing, so it is important to bring along an experienced friend to help you learn the ropes.
Bring supplies for ‘Smores. ‘Smores are an integral part of any camping trip. Simply pack graham crackers, chocolate, and marshmallows. Toast the marshmallows, then make it the filling to a graham cracker/chocolate sandwich. When you have a ‘Smore, you will want ‘some more’–bring enough for everyone to have at least two of them!
Attempt a “jungle breakfast” with the younger members of your camping party. Pack breakfasts of cereal, juice and fruit in bags and hide them somewhere on the campsite. Let younger children wake up and hunt for their breakfast. This will add some adventure and fun to their day.
Let people know where your group is headed. Just in case anything happens to any of you, you want to know that there are people who know where you are at. This is a good precautionary measure to take if something were to happen to your camping group, because help will be on the way soon.
If you are a novice at camping, don’t stray far from home. If you want to end your trip, you will be close to home. Maybe you will find out that there isn’t enough food or clean clothes to continue. Many issues can occur for new campers, so you should camp near home your first time.
Make sure you pack plenty of camping-friendly food. Depending upon how long your trip will last, you should have plenty of food that won’t spoil over the course of your trip. Food poisoning can ruin your trip in no time. Use proper food preparation techniques and make sure you are well-read regarding the precautions you should take.
Take along plenty of drinking water. You need to stay hydrated, and you will need the water to prepare your food. Depending on the nature of your camping trip, this water may also be needed for clean-up and washing of the hands. It is better to bring along more than you need than not enough.
A large number of camping related injuries are due directly to carelessness with fire, so be sure to use fire with caution. First, make sure that fires are permissible in the area of your camp site. Set a ring of stones around the fire to keep it contained. Never leave children unsupervised near an open fire.
Do not take anything that belongs in nature with you when you leave. Have fun and take pictures, but when you are loading up the car, make sure rocks, pinecones and other objects remain where they are. This is one of the unspoken rules of camping. Everyone should have the same opportunity to enjoy these things.
It is a good idea to pitch your tent on a piece of land that is level. This will ensure you sleep better, which means you will have more energy for the next day. If you have to sleep on an incline, make sure that your head is tilted uphill.
If your children are with you, establish a daily routine early on. This will help them adjust to their new surroundings and have a good time. Try to stick to a certain bedtime and eat your meals at about the same time each day. Your kids will be happier, and you will be as well.
Zip-lock bags can be very handy in a camper’s tool chest. Don’t worry about hauling mixing bowls in your gear. A gallon size zip-lock bag is great for mixing foods together and is much easier to carry in your pack. Just secure the top of the bag very carefully, then squeeze, knead or shake the ingredients together. Then discard for super-easy cleanup too!
If you are camping in an area that has loose or very sandy soil, you should make sure that you place large, heavy rocks on top of all the stakes of your tent. This will keep the stakes planted firmly in the ground and your tent from collapsing on its own.
After reading the camping advice in this article, no one should see camping in a negative light. Camping should be seen for the wonderful activity that it is, not as a potential danger. If you remember what you’ve read here, you should be able to camp safely without any problems.