As Fall approaches, we can’t help but notice the leaves changing! Trees by Sara Coleridge is a classic poem that helps bring beauty and goodness to a young readers mind!
This post may contain affiliate links.
Why Study Poetry With Young Children?
Simply put, young children are wired to memorize and recite. You can read more about that while discovering why a classical education might be best for your child. In the Spirit of the Lord, as stated by G.K. Chesterton, children are quick to say “Do it again, do it again!”. They never tire of the ordinary things that bring them joy. For this reason, we can sit with a poem with our children for a while and explore it more deeply!
Poetry is beautiful. It is a language used to its fullest where no stone is left unturned by the poet in the words they choose, how they are arranged, and how they play together. Poetry is art. Over in our Growing in Virtue through Christian Music post we discussed how we want to fill our minds with things that are beautiful and true. This is especially true for our children.
Enhancing vocabulary, thinking creatively, comparing and contrasting. These are all skills that are being nurtured when we read and teach poetry. Poetry is mastery over a language. The poet communicates ordinary concepts and ideas in ways that touch the heart. Good poetry is reasonable and emotional.
As we work our way up to the greatest of poets such as St. John of the Cross, we start with simple poems about beautiful things! Trees is a perfect place to start! Familiar enough, yet altogether new as our little ones explore the different varieties and they cycle of life.
Sarah Coleridge Trees Poetry Resources
Over the next few weeks leading into Fall I will add a tree pack from the poem until each tree in the poem has a wall art and coloring sheet. Today we start with the Oak!
Print a;; 3 of these images, color the sheet. and trace the letters as you and your little one explore God’s creation. Display the painting on your wall for some Montessori Inspired Wall Art!
Which tree from the poem Trees is your child’s favorite?! Let us know in the comments below!
Stella Maris, Ora Pro Nobis!