Preventing Workplace Bullying
How to Recognize and Respond to Bullies at Work
17 min | by CRM Learning, LP
Preventing Workplace Bullying - The Manager's Show--:--
Through a variety of compelling vignettes, this program clarifies what workplace bullying is while presenting practical steps people can take to effectively address these situations.
Select product format to see what's included with purchase.
50 percent of the U.S. workforce reports either being bullied at work or witnessing someone else being bullied at work. According to the Workplace Bullying Institute, bullying is four times more prevalent than illegal harassment. This is why workplace bullying training is essential. It's up to everyone in the organization to acknowledge that bullying is unacceptable, recognize bullying behavior, and work to prevent it.
The video depicts today's most common bullying situations in a manner that allows for rich discussion. The examples take place in office, education, healthcare and industrial settings. Through vignettes that illustrate bullying on the part of both leaders and co-workers, viewers learn keys to preventing workplace bullying.
The 4 keys to preventing workplace bullying presented are:
- Recognize Bullying Behavior - Know what behaviors cross the line and are considered bullying.
- Speak Up for Yourself - Stay calm. Be confident. Share facts and feelings.
- Stand Up for Others - State observations. Share concerns. Explain the impact of the behavior.
- Commit to Next Steps - Review company policies. Document actions and responses. Involve HR or Management. Formalize your complaint.
While the main program is appropriate for both managers and employees, a separate Manager's Module gives leaders additional instruction on bullying behaviors and the damage they cause. Leaders are taught to address bullying when they observe it and are given a checklist of items to think about that allow them to evaluate their own behaviors.
|Is Best Seller?||No|
|Program Length||17 min|
|Producer||CRM Learning, LP|