Periwinkle for Erosion Control
Periwinkle, otherwise known as vinca, comes in two forms. Greater periwinkle (Vinca major) is hardy in U.S. Department of Agriculture plant hardiness zones 7 through 9, while lesser periwinkle (Vinca minor) does well in USDA zones 4 through 8. As ground covers, both anchor soil and prevent erosion. Vinca major has invasive tendencies in some locations. Planting periwinkle is only the first step, however. You'll need to do a few other things to help the periwinkle do its job.
What Causes Erosion?
Erosion occurs when topsoil runs off a surface during heavy rains or blows away during an extended dry spell. Allowing water to consistently run over a surface encourages erosion, as does encouraging monoculture plantings or leaving soil bare to the elements. There is only a certain amount of soil in any given area, and replacing it is labor-intensive, so preventing erosion is an important step in successful gardening.
Why Periwinkle Works
Both types of periwinkle make excellent ground covers because they grow over their planting areas quickly, providing total coverage within a year when spaced 6 inches apart. Not only that, they root easily because their stems put roots into the soil wherever tips touch the ground. They are also attractive and do well in both sun and shade, which makes them versatile. Do not confuse vinca with Madagascar periwinkle (Catharanthus roseus), however. While this plant is beautiful, it is only winter-hardy in USDA zones 10 through 11 and is therefore grown as an annual in most gardens.
Providing Good Drainage
Once you’ve established a thick ground cover to anchor loose soil, you need to ensure that your periwinkle plants aren’t getting consistently battered by forceful rains or impromptu waterways. Installing a few select channels in your yard through which water can drain off a slope or meander through the garden will help keep the rest of your soil intact. The rains will still be able to water your plants; they just won’t build up to harmful levels when running off.
Other Erosion Control Measures
Instead of growing large areas with only one plant on them, try varying your plantings. This ensures that rain hits several plants of different heights on its way down, diminishing its impact once it finally hits the ground. Other control methods involve putting in retaining walls or boulders that can help keep soil in place, especially on slops. You can also mulch areas that aren’t carpeted with ground covers like periwinkle, or mix compost into sandy soil for structure and water retention.
Sarah Moore has been a writer, editor and blogger since 2006. She holds a master's degree in journalism.