Looking for the right words to describe 야채 (pronounced as yachae) or vegetables in Korean? If you are, then you landed on the right post, as this article will walk you through the basic translations for Korean vegetables. After all, the Korean people have a lot of unique dishes and snacks that are actually made of nutritious stuff like vegetables. So let’s dive right into it now!
Whenever one thinks of visiting Asian countries, what usually comes to mind is the idea of exploring some of the popular tourist destinations, eating your heart out, and learning about the unique recipes available. At the end of the day, every country is unique, and the same can be said when it comes to their cuisine. Unlike other Western countries, the Korean culture puts a premium on extremely healthy dishes where every serving will always have an assortment of common vegetables, fruits, and healthy dipping.
Korea took the world by storm to the point that almost everyone already knows a few recipes that are enjoyed by the locals. With all the K-pop and K-dramas available to us, there is no surprise why you know Kimchi, Bibimbap, Tteokbokki, Jjigae, and Samgyeopsal. In fact, there is a rise in the number of restaurants serving main courses that are purely Korean. And since you landed on this post, there’s a high chance you are planning to get tasteful of their food or simply wondering what the common healthy ingredients are added to their dishes.
Well, you are in luck! Today, I will present to you the vocabulary list related to vegetables so that you can express yourself better when talking about Korean food with the locals. For more information, let’s continue reading below.
Most Common Vegetables In Korean
In this section, we will cover the translations for the Korean names for vegetables as well as the pronunciation guide you can follow. Please do note that our focus here will be on the vegetables that are mainly popular in the country only. If you are up for that, then let the learning begin!
|Leek||골파 / 부추||Golpa / Buchu|
Korean Words For Other Vegetables
Now that we have an idea of the most common vocabulary list for vegetables, allow us to expand your knowledge further by adding more translations related to vegetables.
|Bok choy||청경채||Cheong gyeong chae|
Example Korean Dishes With Vegetables
Unsure what dishes incorporate all these vegetables we have discussed above? Check out these top food according to the locals.
- Kimbap – seaweed roll made of carrots, cucumber, egg, and cheese slices.
- Japchae – made of mushrooms, sweet potato, and carrots.
- Bibimbap – mixed veggis with rice and gochujang.
- Joomukbap- lightly seasoned rice balls.
- Mandu- veggie dumplings
- Pyogobusut tangsoo – sweet and sour shiitake mushroom
As we reach this part of the post, we hope that you were able to get a glimpse of the Korean culture through the food and the Korean words we shared with you today. Which of these vegetables is your favorite? Let us know in the comment section down below. If you enjoyed this post and felt a rush of excitement with the idea of learning other words, phrases, and sentences in the Korean language, then we recommend that you check out our previous posts like the common business words, country names, and disaster words.
Now if you want to learn the Korean language and access free lessons complete with exercises, then you will never go wrong when you try out Simya Solutions’ exclusive application. This special language learning tool has been downloaded by millions from across the globe and was even recognized in the AppStore. Interested to find out what it is? Read on below!
Interested To Master Ther Korean Alphabet and Language?
What does it mean when you say you are “learning” a new language? For some, learning means knowing about the different words you can use to express yourself better. On the other hand, there are people who believe that real learning means that you do not just recognize the meaning of words but also use it as a complete sentence.
If you want something that is holistic, then improving your language skills with the Ling App is a smart choice! The Ling App is a language learning tool developed to help you improve in the Korean language and 60+ other languages from across the globe – whether you are learning Mandarin Chinese, Malay, Tagalog, or Arabic, we are sure that you can find the best free lessons within the app. In addition, the Ling App is available on iOS and Android but you can also access it within this website too.
From the inside, you will get courses that are designed specifically for your needs as it was developed by real native speakers, educators, and language professionals. Aside from just providing you with vocabulary for real-life, the course will also cover lessons on how to pronounce certain words, the writing system, and you can also train your ear with the included audio files.
So, what are you waiting for? Save time and money by downloading and using the course in the Ling App.