This is a sponsored post on behalf of Botley from Learning Resources. All opinions are my own.
If you’re like me, you know how increasingly important it is for kids to learn STEM skills such as coding and starting the earlier the better. My son is always immersed in tech and computers, and every summer he attends a summer camp to learn more coding skills.
I had not really pushed the issue with my middle daughter. She’s 7 years old, and she is really into creativity and crafting. However, lately, she is now becoming more involved with tech. When I saw Botley, I thought this would be a fun way to introduce her to coding.
Did you know that a recent study from Learning Resources found that 70% of parents feel their kids should start learning basic coding skills by age 5! Only 15% of parents feel they have significant resources to help their kids learn coding.
Botley is a brand new hands on coding robot activity set. and he is STEM Approved™. He can teach coding skills to children as young as 5 years old. He’s fun and friendly (He even sneezes!), and your kids will have a blast learning to program him. Plus, it doesn’t require a smartphone or tablet to code with Botley.
My daughter absolutely loves playing with Botley and learning how to program him. Now that she’s learned how to use it and program the robot, she’s thinking up even more ways she can use him. Today we were discussing if he could follow lines she laid down on the floor other than the ones on the pieces that came with him.
Check out these features:
- Children as young as age 5 to take their first step into coding
- 100% screen free, with no tablet or phone required
- The only robot on the market that comes with a full activity set, allowing your child to create obstacle courses for endless hours of coding fun
- Ready to use right out of the box
- Makes fun, playful sounds, and has secret hidden features for your child to discover
- Grows with your child. They can start with basic coding commands, and as their skills grow they can try more advanced coding challenges
- Botley has many features to discover, including looping, black line following, and smart logic to detect objects – and avoid them!
Ages 5+. Botley the Coding Robot Activity Set MSRP: $79.99. Botley includes a full set of 77 accessories.
This is such a great way to introduce young kids to coding. We played with Botley and the kids really had a great time with it!!
This looks like such a neat little toy! I’m sure my kids would have a lot of fun with this, all while learning. I hadn’t heard of this, but my daughter’s birthday is coming up and I think it would make a cool gift.
I love this so much. My kids would freak out if we had one.
I love this, my daughter is 6 years old and Inwant to teach her STEM. We have a programmable robot but it’s for my teen so it’s more advanced.
Oh wow this game sounds so fun! My girls are all older now and have all learned to code in one way or another. This would have been a great thing to have when they were little!
This is awesome! We are all for STEM projects and products because they are awesome learning tools for kids. Plus as a homeschool family I am always looking at how to make the learning even more fun for my kids so they learn more.
What a fun way to learn how to code. Both my nephew and my niece will have a blast with Botley for sure.
Oh this sounds like something my grand nephew would really like. I’m going to look into it for him.
This looks like a fun way to begin learning coding. I think my kids would have enjoyed it.