1 She did not feel well physically but, forced by Melanie, she went to the store every day and tried to keep up a superficial interest in the mills.
2 Her relation with her aunt was as superficial as that of chance lodgers who pass on the stairs.
3 Mrs. Fisher's unconventionality was, after all, a merely superficial divergence from an inherited social creed, while the manners of the Gormer circle represented their first attempt to formulate such a creed for themselves.
4 But his dapper self-confidence seemed impenetrable to such hints, and she had a sense of something hard and self-contained behind the superficial warmth of his manner.
5 These were her superficial considerations; but under them lurked the secret dread that the obligation might not always remain intolerable.
6 It was the dominant animal failing to remember in the supreme moments the forceful causes of various superficial qualities.
7 One of the prisoners was nursing a superficial wound in the foot.
8 However, we will remark by the way, everything was not ridiculous and superficial in that curious epoch to which we are alluding, and which may be designated as the anarchy of baptismal names.
Les Misérables (V1) By Victor HugoContext Highlight In BOOK 4: CHAPTER II—FIRST SKETCH OF TWO UNPREPOSSESSING FIGURES
9 In his eyes, of course, the ecclesiastical authority was the chief of all; he was religious, superficial and correct on this point as on all others.
Les Misérables (V1) By Victor HugoContext Highlight In BOOK 8: CHAPTER V—A SUITABLE TOMB
10 His defects and his vices, for he had some, were all superficial; in short, his physiognomy was of the kind which succeeds with an observer.
Les Misérables (V2) By Victor HugoContext Highlight In BOOK 8: CHAPTER I—WHICH TREATS OF THE MANNER OF ENTERING A CONVEN...
11 He was superficial, rapid, easily angered.
Les Misérables (V3) By Victor HugoContext Highlight In BOOK 2: CHAPTER I—NINETY YEARS AND THIRTY-TWO TEETH
12 They generally succeed the bad ones, as day follows night, by virtue of that law of succession and of contrast which lies at the very foundation of nature, and which superficial minds call antithesis.
Les Misérables (V4) By Victor HugoContext Highlight In BOOK 15: CHAPTER I—A DRINKER IS A BABBLER
13 Let us not go too far, however; in what concerns Jean Valjean, this forgetfulness and obliteration were merely superficial.
Les Misérables (V5) By Victor HugoContext Highlight In BOOK 9: CHAPTER I—PITY FOR THE UNHAPPY, BUT INDULGENCE FOR THE HA...
14 Persons of superficial observation are apt to consider that a man clad in a different coat is quite a different person from what he used to be.
15 In spite of superficial, fantastic and sham notions of honour and dignity, all but very few of us positively grovelled before Zverkov, and the more so the more he swaggered.