These are some of the vocal practices used in Global Harmonies workshops.
Humming for Resonance, Warming Up the Voice and Self-Nurture
Filling the whole body with sound and vibration. Read about the amazing benefits of humming here
Toning is the elongation of a note, sound or tone, using breath and voice. Toning is a way of using the voice that transcends language and culture. There are no notes, words or rhythms, just pure vocal expression. Participants in Global Harmonies sessions are amazed by the power of this technique to ground, connect, bring to the present and relieve worries and stress.
Toning on Natural Sounds We can tone on natural sounds, e.g. laughing, groaning, sighing, wailing etc. This is a form of catharsis and emotional release.
Toning For Pain Release Experiment with various sounds, (e.g. vowel sounds, natural sounds) and various pitches till you feel a resonance between your pain (emotional or physical) and then keep toning, visualising the area or issue dissolving and returning to its natural state of vibration.
Toning on Vowels for Purification and Cleansing
U – Pelvis, hips, legs, feet, and lower body in general.
O – Lower trunk, abdomen area from solar plexus to groin.
A – Chest cavity, heart, and the body as a whole.
E – Throat, upper chest, and head regions. Back of the skull and head regions.
Mantras and Chants
A mantra is a single sound, word or phrase which is used to focus the mind or bring about a new state or situation (e.g. healing, attracting etc.). Mantras originated in the Vedic religion of India, using the language Sanskrit. The use of mantras is now widespread throughout various spiritual movements. Chanting is the process of repeating a mantra. This can be done silently (repeated in the mind during mediation) or chanted out loud. They are said to be effective because of their specific sound vibrations. Chants can be used to manifest, purify, affirm, bless, become inspired and more. At Global Harmonies session we bring in chants from the Taize tradition, some Buddhist and Hindu chants, some Sufi, Hebridean and many others.
Overtone chanting makes audible the natural harmonics of the voice so that more than one tone can be heard at a time. This is a form of chanting traditionally found in Central Asia – in Mongolia, Tuva and Tibet. In Mongolia and Tuva (Siberia), it is called khöömii (khoomei, höömii or xöömii) which means throat singing. Other cultures use overtoning, such as some South African tribes. As more area of the body is being resonated it is considered to be a very healing practice.
Singing and Group Improvised Singing
Singing is one of the most physiologically and emotionally beneficially activities we can do, and one which coordinates the right and left hemispheres of the brain. Improvised singing gives us the chance to express our own truth and state while listening to and harmonizing with those around us.