Biogas purification is an essential process in biogas project, so we can get high purity methane, which will be more convenient and healthy for our use. Biogas purification technology mainly comes from the decarbonization technology of natural gas and synthetic ammonia conversion gas. Since the consumption of biogas is far less than that of natural gas or synthetic ammonia conversion gas, attention should be paid to miniaturization and energy saving in the selection of decarbonization technology. So what are the economic benefits related to?
1. It is related to the methane content of feed gas and finished product.
Untreated biogas has high methane content and low purification cost. This is mainly due to the increase in energy production, and the total cost is related to higher energy levels. The cost can be reduced by improving efficiency (reducing energy consumption per unit output) and using raw biogas with high calorific value to reduce actual energy consumption.
2. Operability and rated load.
The rated operation load of biogas purification depends not only on the high stability of the purification station itself, but also on the reliability of the original biogas flow and subsequent devices (such as charging station and gas station).
3. The equipment runs well.
Under the condition of rated load and sufficient feed gas, the equipment can operate normally and continuously, which is the standard of high efficiency and availability of biogas purification station. Fast response time is very important, so it is very important for technology providers to provide good network services. In addition, remote monitoring can also be used. When the operation is interrupted, technicians can directly find the fault and take necessary remedial measures immediately according to the type of fault to avoid time delay. It does not require long-distance travel service technicians to solve the problem on site.
In recent years, biogas purification is the main trend of new energy development. It can reduce energy consumption, improve recovery rate, reduce methane emissions, reduce product gas pressure, reduce power consumption, and promote the rapid development of new energy applications.