Panic disorder is characterized by brief outbursts of anxiety that can last from a few minutes to a few hours. Some of its characteristics are as follows:
Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD)
PTSD frequently occurs in those who have witnessed traumatic events such as accidents, natural disasters, war, assault, etc. PTSD symptoms include the following:
Selective mutism is a type of anxiety disorder that children and young people often encounter. With this issue, they cannot speak in settings or surroundings that remind them of the distressing event. Although the afflicted individual may have strong social skills, selective mutism may cause odd responses in them, including:
Agoraphobia is an intense dread of circumstances, locations, or occurrences that may make the person feel imprisoned or make it difficult for them to seek help. People with agoraphobia are likely to exhibit symptoms in crowded, open, or isolated environments. Agoraphobia is distinguished by:
Social Anxiety Disorder
In a social context, Social Anxiety Disorder emerges as a dread of negative assessments from those nearby. Withdrawal from a location or person that provides security can sometimes trigger social anxiety disorder. The following symptoms might describe this:
Generalized Anxiety Disorder (GAD)
Generalized Anxiety Disorder (GAD) is defined by persistent and uncontrolled concern and tension. It usually interferes with the affected person's day-to-day activity. Other frequent symptoms are as follows:
Although anxiety is part of life, never let it control you.
— Paulo Coelho
We encourage you to talk about your anxiety issues so that we can help you navigate them better.
Find A Counselor
Check Your Insurance
Book Your Online/In-person Therapy Session
Get matched with a qualified counselor or therapist to get a personalized care plan to fit your needs. Our anxiety experts work to identify the causes fueling your anxiety disorder issue and assist you in recovery.
Delve into online anxiety counseling from the comfort of your home. Our professional anxiety counselors provide quality holistic support for enabling you to overcome anxiety.Speak with a Anxiety Therapist
Our counsellor | Insurance Coverage | Services Offered | Privacy
Anxiety is an insinuation of fear, terror, and angst. It could be a normal stress response. It could lead to sweat, uneasiness, stress, and increased heartbeats. For instance, one can feel uneasy when faced with a complex situation at work or before making a crucial decision.
Everyone experiences anxiety at times throughout their life. To be precise, some anxiety is a normal and biologically helpful response to certain types of stress. Anxiety is not always bad; besides providing what can sometimes be a constructive motivating force (for example, worrying about providing for a family motivates a head of household to work hard and get a promotion), it can also keep our loved ones and us safe from danger. Understanding the difference between commonly occurring anxiety and a diagnosable anxiety disorder that is disruptive to daily life and requires professional intervention is essential.
Anxiety can get triggered due to habits, life experiences, and troubles that feel out of control. It can cause people to feel tense and uncomfortable, with racing thoughts, uneasiness, irritation, and difficulty concentrating.
The causes of anxiety may include:
If you have been experiencing any of these anxiety causing factors, we suggest you seek help. You can reach out to Lifebulb using our 24x7 active helpline, or you can search for us online, simply use ‘anxiety counseling near me,’ ‘anxiety counselor near me,’ ‘anxiety therapist near me,’ ‘anxiety counselors near me,’ or ‘anxiety therapy near me.’
Anxiety feels different depending on the person encountering it. Emotions can vary from a racing heart to having butterflies in the stomach. You may feel out of control like there's a detachment between your mind and body.
You may have a general sense of fear and worry, or you may fear a specific place or event. In some cases, you may undergo a panic attack.
Symptoms of anxiety can include:
Your anxiety signs might be different from someone else's. That's why it's essential to know how anxiety can show itself.
Here is a list of five main categories of anxiety disorders:
Disorder of Generalized Anxiety - Generalized Anxiety Disorder (GAD) is characterized by persistent anxiety, increased worry, and tension, even without a trigger.
Disorder of compulsive behavior (OCD) - Recurrent, unwanted thoughts (obsessions), and repetitive activities are hallmarks of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), an anxiety disorder (compulsions). People frequently conduct repetitive actions like hand washing, counting, checking, or cleaning to stop or eliminate obsessive thoughts. However, engaging in these so-called "rituals" only temporarily reduces anxiety, while abstaining significantly raises it.
Panic Disorder - Anxiety disorders like panic disorder are sporadic, acute episodes of fear followed by physical symptoms like shortness of breath, heart palpitations, chest pain, nausea, and stomach discomfort.
Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) - Anxiety disorders such as PTSD or post-traumatic stress disorder can appear after exposure to a terrible experience in which severe bodily injury happened or was threatened. Brutal assaults on individuals, natural or human-caused disasters, accidents, and military combat are a few traumatic events that might trigger PTSD.
Social Phobia (or Social Anxiety Disorder) - Extreme self-consciousness and overpowering anxiety in everyday social situations are symptoms of social phobia, commonly known as a social anxiety disorder. While social anxiety is at its worst, people may constantly feel symptoms with others. Examples of situations where social phobia may be restricted include fear of speaking in formal or informal settings, eating or drinking in public, and speaking in front of others.
If you are experiencing an emergency right now, please call 911 right away.
While Lifebulb is not a crisis center and Lifebulb therapists and counselors are not emergency services, we understand that urgent matters can and will pop up from time to time. You will have direct email and phone access to your therapist, who will make their best effort to be available to you when you reach out. Depending on your specific anxiety disorder treatment plan, your therapist may provide you with resources to use or contact when situations occur beyond the scope of your online anxiety therapy or offline anxiety therapy work together.
We use a HIPAA-compliant video counseling service integrated into our Electronic Health Records System to provide a smooth process for our clients to engage in online therapy sessions. Booking a session with us is easy. Simply call our office or request a specific session time from our website, and a team member can book you with the best possible fit as a therapist or confirm your online session details. We'll review insurance information and a few simple policies and email you a confirmation of your session date and time, whether in-person or virtual therapy.
Booking a session with us is easy and flexible, with several options. You can call our office, and a team member can book you with the best fit-in therapist. We'll review insurance information and a few simple policies and email you a confirmation of your session date and time, whether in-person or virtual. Or you can select your ideal therapist from our website, select a session time that works for you, and we'll reach out to you to confirm your appointment details.
At Lifebulb, our biggest difference lies in our therapists. Many practices, large and small, often put growing businesses before growing people. It may sound simple, but at Lifebulb, we treat our therapists like valuable people that provide a valuable service. What does that mean for our clients? While we believe therapists and counselors, regardless of where they work, do their best for their clients, we've found that therapists who genuinely enjoy where they work are able to provide higher-quality services and ideal anxiety counseling treatment to those they help. To that end, our primary goal at Lifebulb is to provide our therapists with the best possible environment in which to operate. In doing so, we believe Lifebulb clients are best positioned to accomplish their therapy goals through in-person counseling or virtual therapy.
Lifebulb has several locations for providing in-person anxiety counseling and is adding more regularly. We also provide telehealth or online therapy session services for those who may live distant from our offices. You can reach out to Lifebulb using our 24x7 active helpline or you can search for us online, simply use ‘counseling for anxiety near me’, ‘find an anxiety counselor’, ‘therapy for anxiety near me’ or ‘find an anxiety therapist.’
See our comprehensive list of carefully curated resources to learn more about anxiety disorders.