Composition and surface pressure
Carbon dioxide constitutes 95.3 percent of the atmosphere by weight, nine times the quantity now in Earth’s much more massive atmosphere. Much of Earth’s carbon dioxide, however, is chemically locked in sedimentary rocks; the amount in the Martian atmosphere is less than a thousandth of the terrestrial total. The balance of the Martian atmosphere consists of molecular nitrogen, water vapour, and noble gases (argon, neon, krypton, and xenon). There are also trace amounts of gases that have been produced from the primary constituents by photochemical reactions, generally high in the atmosphere; these include molecular oxygen, carbon monoxide, nitric oxide, and small amounts of ozone.
Composition of the Martian atmosphere
|carbon dioxide (CO2) ||95.32 |
|molecular nitrogen (N2) ||2.7 |
|argon (Ar) ||1.6 |
|molecular oxygen (O2) ||0.13 |
|carbon monoxide (CO) ||0.07 |
|water vapour (H2O) ||0.03 |
|neon (Ne) ||0.00025 |
|krypton (Kr) ||0.00003 |
|xenon (Xe) ||0.000008 |
The lower atmosphere supplies gas to the planet’s ionosphere, where densities are low, temperatures are high, and components separate by diffusion according to their masses. Various constituents in the top of the atmosphere are lost to space, which affects the isotopic composition of the remaining gases. For example, because hydrogen is lost preferentially over its heavier isotope deuterium, Mars’s atmosphere contains five times more deuterium than Earth’s.
Although water is only a minor constituent of the Martian atmosphere (a few molecules per 10,000 at most), primarily because of low atmospheric and surface temperatures, it plays an important role in atmospheric chemistry and meteorology. The Martian atmosphere is effectively saturated with water vapour, yet there is no liquid water present on the surface. The temperature and pressure of the planet are so low that water molecules can exist only as ice or as vapour. Little water is exchanged daily with the surface despite the very cold nighttime surface temperatures.
Water vapour is mixed uniformly up to altitudes of 10–15 km (6–9 miles) and shows strong latitudinal gradients that depend on the season. The largest changes occur in the northern hemisphere. During summer in the north, the complete disappearance of the carbon dioxide cap leaves behind a water-ice cap. Sublimation of water from the residual cap results in a strong north-to-south concentration gradient of water vapour in the atmosphere. In the south, where a small carbon dioxide cap remains in summer and only a small amount of water ice has been detected, a strong water vapour gradient does not normally develop in the atmosphere.
The atmospheric water vapour is believed to be in contact with a much larger reservoir in the Martian soil. Subsurface layers of ice seem to be ubiquitous on Mars at latitudes poleward of 40°; the very low subsurface temperatures would prevent the ice from subliming. The 2001 Mars Odyssey spacecraft confirmed that ice is present within a metre of the surface at latitudes higher than 60°, and the Phoenix lander found ice below the surface at 68° N, but it is not known how deep the ice layer extends. Images taken by the Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter showed new impact craters at latitudes between 40° N and 60° N that had exposed the subsurface water ice up to a depth of 74 cm (29 inches). In contrast, at low latitudes ice is unstable, and any ice present in the ground would tend to sublime into the atmosphere.
Isotopic measurements suggest that larger amounts of carbon dioxide, nitrogen, and argon were present in the atmosphere in the past and that Mars may have lost much of its inventory of volatile substances early in its history, either to space or to the ground (i.e., locked up chemically in rocks). Mars may once have had a much thicker atmosphere that was lost to the surface through chemical reactions, which formed carbonates, and to space through large asteroid impacts, which blew off atmospheric gases.
Test Your Knowledge
Methane is also present in Mars’s atmosphere. Since methane is destroyed by sunlight, it must be continuously replenished to account for the amounts present. Volcanoes and meteorites have been ruled out as origins for the methane, which leaves chemical reactions between rock and water or metabolism by possible Martian microorganisms as possible sources.
The vertical structure of the Martian atmosphere—that is, the relation of temperature and pressure to altitude—is determined partly by a complicated balance of several energy-transport mechanisms and partly by the way energy from the Sun is introduced into the atmosphere and lost by radiation to space.
Two factors control the vertical structure of the lower atmosphere—its composition of almost pure carbon dioxide and its content of large quantities of suspended dust. Because carbon dioxide radiates energy efficiently at Martian temperatures, the atmosphere can respond rapidly to changes in the amount of solar radiation received. The suspended dust absorbs large quantities of heat directly from sunlight and provides a distributed source of energy throughout the lower atmosphere.
Surface temperatures depend on latitude and fluctuate over a wide range from day to night. At the Viking 1 and Pathfinder landing sites (both about 20° N latitude), the temperatures at roughly human height above the surface regularly varied from a low near 189 K (−119 °F, −84 °C) just before sunrise to a high of 240 K (−28 °F, −33 °C) in the early afternoon. This temperature swing is much larger than that which occurs in desert regions on Earth. The variation is greatest very close to the ground and occurs because the thin, dry atmosphere allows the surface to radiate its heat quickly during the night. During dust storms this ability is impaired, and the temperature swing is reduced. Above altitudes of a few kilometres, the daily variation is damped out, but other oscillations appear throughout the atmosphere as a result of the direct input of solar energy. These temperature and pressure oscillations, sometimes called tides because they are regular, periodic, and synchronized with the position of the Sun, give the Martian atmosphere a very complex vertical structure.
The cooling of the atmosphere with altitude at a rate of 1.5 K per km continues upward to about 40 km (25 miles), at which level (called the tropopause) the temperature becomes a roughly constant 140 K (−210 °F, −130 °C). This rate, measured by the Viking (and later Pathfinder) spacecraft as they descended through the atmosphere, was unexpectedly low; scientists had anticipated it to be near 5 K per km. This rate is significantly lower than that expected for clear air because of the large amount of suspended dust.
Above 100 km (60 miles), the structure of the atmosphere is determined by the tendency of the heavier molecules to concentrate below the lighter ones. This diffusive separation process overcomes the tendency of turbulence to mix all the constituents together. At these high altitudes, absorption of ultraviolet light from the Sun dissociates and ionizes the gases and leads to complex sequences of chemical reactions. The top of the atmosphere has an average temperature of about 300 K (80 °F, 27 °C).
Meteorology and atmospheric dynamics
The global pattern of atmospheric circulation on Mars shows many superficial similarities to that of Earth, but the root causes are very different. Among these differences are the atmosphere’s ability to adjust rapidly to local conditions of solar heat input; the lack of oceans, which on Earth have a large resistance to temperature changes; the great range in altitude of the surface (see below Character of the surface); the strong internal heating of the atmosphere because of suspended dust; and the seasonal deposition and release of a large part of the Martian atmosphere at the poles.
Near-surface winds at the Viking and Pathfinder landing sites were usually regular in behaviour and generally light. Average speeds were typically less than 2 metres per second (4.5 miles per hour), although gusts up to 40 metres per second (90 miles per hour) were recorded. Other observations, including streaks of windblown dust and patterns in dune fields and in the many varieties of clouds, have provided additional clues about surface winds.
Global circulation models, which incorporate all the factors understood to influence the behaviour of the atmosphere, predict a strong dependence of winds on the Martian seasons because of the large horizontal temperature gradients associated with the edge of the polar caps in the fall and winter. Strong jet streams with eastward velocities above 100 metres per second (225 miles per hour) form at high latitudes in winter. Circulation is less dramatic in spring and fall, when light winds predominate everywhere. On Mars, unlike on Earth, there is also a relatively strong north-south circulation that transports the atmosphere to and from the winter and summer poles. The general circulation pattern is occasionally unstable and exhibits large-scale wave motions and instabilities: a regular series of rotating high- and low-pressure systems was clearly seen in the pressure and wind records at the Viking lander sites.
Smaller-scale motions and oscillations, driven both by the Sun and by surface topography, are ubiquitous. For example, at the Viking and Pathfinder landing sites, the winds change in direction and speed throughout the day in response to the position of the Sun and the local slope of the land.
Turbulence is an important factor in raising and maintaining the large quantity of dust found in the Martian atmosphere. Dust storms tend to begin at preferred locations in the southern hemisphere during the southern spring and summer. Activity is at first local and vigorous (for reasons yet to be understood), and large amounts of dust are thrown high into the atmosphere. If the amount of dust reaches a critical quantity, the storm rapidly intensifies, and dust is carried by high winds to all parts of the planet. In a few days the storm has obscured the entire surface, and visibility has been reduced to less than 5 percent of normal. The intensification process is evidently short-lived, as atmospheric clarity begins to return almost immediately, becoming normal typically in a few weeks.
Character of the surface
The character of the Martian terrain has been well established from spacecraft photography and altimetry. Almost the entire planet has been photographed from orbit at a resolution of 20 metres (66 feet) and selected areas at resolutions as high as 20 cm (8 inches). In addition, the laser altimeter on Mars Global Surveyor measured surface elevations for the entire planet, averaged over a circle 300 metres (1,000 feet) across to a vertical accuracy of 1 metre (3.3 feet).
Many maps have been made to illustrate topography, geology, temperature, mineral distributions, and a variety of other data. After Mariner 9 the prime meridian on Mars—the equivalent of the Greenwich meridian on Earth—was defined as passing through a small crater named Airy-0 within the larger crater Airy. Longitude was measured in degrees that increase to the west of this meridian completely around the planet. Later some scientists expressed a preference for a coordinate system with longitude that increases to the east of the prime meridian. Consequently, maps of Mars were published with either or both of these systems.
Despite its small size, Mars has significantly more relief than Earth. The lowest point on the planet, within the Hellas impact basin, is 8 km (5 miles) below the reference level. The highest point, at the summit of the volcano Olympus Mons, is 21 km (13 miles) above the reference level. The elevation range is thus 29 km (18 miles), compared with about 20 km (12.4 miles) on Earth—i.e., from the bottom of the Mariana Trench to the top of Mount Everest. Because Mars has no oceans, a reference level for elevations had to be defined in terms other than sea level. In the early 1970s the elevation at which the atmospheric pressure is 6.l millibars (about 0.006 of the sea-level pressure on Earth) was set as the reference. When Mars Global Surveyor acquired more-accurate elevation data, a better reference was needed, and the planet’s mean radius of 3,389.51 km (2,106.14 miles) was chosen.
One of the most striking aspects of the Martian surface is the contrast between the southern and northern hemispheres. Most of the southern hemisphere is high-standing and heavily cratered, resembling the battered highlands of the Moon. Most of the northern hemisphere is low-lying and sparsely cratered. The difference in mean elevation between the two hemispheres is roughly 6 km (3.7 miles). The topographic boundary between the hemispheres is not parallel to the equator but roughly follows a great circle inclined to it by about 30°. In some places the boundary is broad and irregular; in other places there are steep cliffs. Some of the most intensely eroded areas on Mars occur along the boundary. Landforms there include outflow channels, areas of collapse called chaotic terrain, and an enigmatic mix of valleys and ridges known as fretted terrain. Straddling the boundary in the western hemisphere is the Tharsis rise, a vast volcanic pile 4,000 km (2,500 miles) across and 8 km (5 miles) above the reference level at its centre. It stands 12 km (7.5 miles) above the northern plains and more than 2 km (1.2 miles) above the surrounding cratered southern highlands. On or near the Tharsis rise are the planet’s largest volcanoes (see below Tharsis and Elysium). Conspicuously absent in either hemisphere are the types of landforms that on Earth result from plate tectonics—for example, long linear mountain chains similar to the Andes, oceanic trenches, or a global system of interconnected ridges.
The hemispheric dichotomy most likely formed when a large asteroid collided with Mars very early in its history. The resulting northern hemisphere impact crater measures roughly 8,500 by 10,700 km (5,300 by 6,600 miles) across; the object that crashed into Mars would have been more than 2,000 km (1,200 miles) across. Gravity data acquired by Mars Global Surveyor suggest that the Martian crust is much thicker under the southern highlands than under the northern plains (see below The interior).