Get rid of the problem today Call 1300 577 777
Of the three main causes of damp within the home, all of which can be prevented and remedied through careful planning, the most common cause is condensation dampness.
Excess moisture building up on walls and ceilings in your home can lead to the growth of moulds, fungi and bacteria, exposure to which can be clinically associated with respiratory symptoms, allergies and asthma.
Condensation damp can, however, be easy to resolve and eliminate once Homevent has identified the problem areas within the home.
Damp can affect any home no matter how large or small. If left untreated it can be a very real threat to health. It could lead to the appearance of mould and structural damage (depending on the type of damp)
However, prompt action will save you time, money and safeguard your health.
There are three main types of damp:
Rising damp only happens at ground floor levels as the moisture drawn up the wall comes from the soil in the ground. Decaying skirting boards, crumbling plaster and tide marks on walls all identify a possible problem with rising damp.
Penetrating damp is caused by water entering through walls, floors and ceilings, causing external construction damage to guttering, rendering and wall joints. It could be the result of a burst pipe or a problem with plumbing. Damage to plastering, decaying timber and watermarks on masonry all indicate a potential problem with penetrating damp.
The signs of condensation in your home include streaming windows and walls, the discolouration of window panes and eventually the growth of black mould.
As in so many other cases, prevention is better than cure. In order to prevent damp it pays to maintain your home, by quickly responding to any damage such as leaks, issues with guttering or external pipes.
If you neglect to repair something small you can prevent having to incur huge expenses in repairing large problems.
Rising damp can be difficult to prevent. Although it is normally found in older properties, as homes built from 1875 onwards have been built with Damp Proofing Course. it can however occur in modern homes.
The following will help prevent rising damp:
Check the moisture levels in the walls every six months using an electronic moisture meter that can be obtained from most DIY shops. Dig away any soil that is resting directly against the property to leave a gap and prevent moisture build-up.
Rising damp is easy to spot but it is often confused with condensation damp. Condensation damp is easier to remedy and not as expensive to fix.
Poor or inadequate ventilation is the main cause of condensation damp. Prolonged condensation damp can lead to the unsightly appearance of black mould on walls, doors, ceilings and around window frames.
Preventing condensation dampness
To prevent condensation damp you can ensure that your home is correctly ventilated. If the ventilation inside the property is prohibited or restricted, your home could become vulnerable to condensation and mould. Check all of your extractor fans to see that they are in working order and not clogged up and are working efficiently.
Another way to prevent condensation damp is to have a condensation control unit fitted. These units deliver fresh, filtered air into the home from a central position and have also been specially designed for apartments.
If your home suffers from a Damp problem, give Homevent a call to assess your problem and find a solution for it.