LECTURE 20 Synesthesia 06.pdf
theory does not answer why only some
people retain such vivid sensory memories, however. You might think of cold
when you look at a picture of an ice
cube, but you probably do not feel cold,
no matter how many encounters you
may have had with ice and snow during
Another prevalent idea is that synesthetes are merely being metaphorical
when they describe the note C sharp as
“red” or say that chicken tastes “pointy”— just as you and I might speak of a
“loud” shirt or “sharp” cheddar cheese.
Our ordinary language is replete with
such sense-related metaphors, and perhaps synesthetes are just especially gifted in this regard.
To determine whether an effect is
truly perceptual, psychologists often
use a simple test called pop-out or segregation. If you look at a set of tilted
lines scattered amid a forest of vertical
lines, the tilted lines stand out. Indeed,
you can instantly segregate them from
the background and group them mentally to form, for example, a separate
triangular shape. Similarly, if most of a
background’s elements were green dots
and you were told to look for red targets, the red ones would pop out. On
the other hand, a set of black 2’s scattered among 5’s of the same color almost blend in [see box on page 81]. It is
hard to discern the 2’s without engaging in an item-by-item inspection of
Unlike normal subjects, synesthetes
correctly reported the shape formed by
groups of numbers up to 90 percent of
the time (exactly as nonsynesthetes do
when the numbers actually have different colors). This result proves that the
induced colors are genuinely sensory
and that synesthetes are not just making things up. It is impossible for them
to fake their success.
V isual P r oce s sing
c o n f i r m a t io n that synesthesia is
real brings up the question, Why do
some people experience this weird phenomenon? Our experiments lead us to
favor the idea that synesthetes are experiencing the result of some kind of cross
Confirmation that synesthesia is real
brings up the question,
Why do some people experience it?
We began trying to find out whether
synesthesia is a genuine sensory experience in 1999. This deceptively simple
question had plagued researchers in the
field for decades. One natural approach
is to start by asking the subjects outright: “Is this just a memory, or do you
actually see the color as if it were right
in front of you?” When we asked this
question, we did not get very far. Some
subjects did respond, “Oh, I see it perfectly clearly.” But a more frequent reaction was, “I kind of see it, kind of
don’t” or “No, it is not like a memory.
I see the number as being clearly red,
but I also know it isn’t; it’s black. So it
must be a memory, I guess.”
numbers, even though any individual
number is just as clearly different from
its neighbors as a tilted line is from a
straight line. We thus may conclude
that only certain primitive, or elementary, features, such as color and line
orientation, can provide a basis for
grouping. More complex perceptual tokens, such as numbers, cannot.
We wondered what would happen if
we showed the mixed numbers to synesthetes who experience, for instance,
red when they see a 5 and green with a
2. We arranged the 2’s so that they
formed a triangle.
When we conducted these tests with
volunteers, the answer was crystal clear.
Synesthesia (from the Greek roots syn, meaning “together,” and aisthesis,
or “perception”) is a condition in which people experience the blending
of two or more senses.
Perhaps it occurs because of cross activation, in which two normally
separate areas of the brain elicit activity in each other.
As scientists explore the mechanisms involved in synesthesia, they are also
learning about how the brain in general processes sensory information and
uses it to make abstract connections between seemingly unrelated inputs.
SCIENTIFIC A MERIC A N
wiring in the brain. This basic concept
was initially proposed about 100 years
ago, but we have now identified where
and how such cross wiring might occur.
An understanding of the neurobiological factors at work requires some
familiarity with how the brain processes visual information. After light reflected from a scene hits the cones (color receptors) in the eye, neural signals
from the retina travel to area 17, in the
occipital lobe at the back of the brain.
There the image is processed further
within local clusters, or blobs, into such
simple attributes as color, motion, form
and depth. Afterward, information
about these separate features is sent
forward and distributed to several farflung regions in the temporal and parietal lobes. In the case of color, the information goes to area V4 in the fusiform gyrus of the temporal lobe. From
there it travels to areas that lie farther
up in the hierarchy of color centers, including a region near a patch of cortex
called the TPO (for the junction of the
temporal, parietal and occipital lobes).
These higher areas may be concerned
with more sophisticated aspects of colSECRE T S OF THE SENSE S