A dental sealant is often recommended for children with baby teeth, even when they do not yet have any permanent teeth. I believe that sealants are not necessary until adult teeth are fully developed, as well as that of several other parents. Even when it comes to baby teeth, some parents question if dental sealants must be placed. To better understand why dental sealants are so advantageous for both baby and adult teeth, we at Childrens Dentistry Las Vegas would like to provide you with additional information regarding their function and advantages.
Why do Dental Sealants need to be applied?
The molars of teeth are sealed with dental sealants to prevent decay. Sealant is applied to the molars using a small brush and thin liquid resin. The sealant can either be white or clear. A second LED light is often used to speed up the drying process as the sealant bonds to the tooth as it dries. Applying a thin layer of enamel to the back of the molars you are helping to protect them from tooth decay and cavities. There is a greater risk of cavities in the molars than in the other teeth, as they are the primary chewing teeth. It is even more challenging to clean out molars because of their grooves. Having your molars sealed is highly recommended in cases where they are more challenging to clean and prone to tooth decay.
Sealing baby teeth is necessary?
Parents with kids often do not need to seal their baby teeth or molars since their son or daughter will eventually lose them anyway, but the adult teeth should be sealed when they come in. The molars of children do not fall out until about twelve and until the age of adolescence. Dentists have seen severe molar decay in young children due to kids not caring for their teeth as they grow up. It is essential to take good care of your child’s molars in the early years of their life until they lose their baby molars. Flossing, rinsing, and brushing are all essential parts of molar care. Preventing cavities is often not enough to ensure your child’s health. Dental sealants should therefore be applied.
Read More: Preventing Tooth Decay In Children’s, 4 Ways To Assist Your Child In Avoiding Cavities
Can cavities occur in teeth with Sealants?
Sealants can be applied within minutes, and the procedure does not involve a lot of time or effort. During the next few hours following the sealant’s application, the child must avoid certain foods or beverages, such as hot drinks or alcoholic beverages, until the sealant has finished curing. Moreover, dental sealants last for about ten years, so your child could go for extended periods before applying a dental sealant. In the future, when your child begins to develop adult molars, they will also require sealing those molars. It is essential to remember that even though the teeth are sealed, they could still develop cavities if the child isn’t taking proper care of their teeth. If the child has dental sealants on their teeth, they should brush their teeth twice a day, floss their teeth, and rinse their mouth twice daily to protect the teeth and strengthen the sealants.
Even adults should consider dental sealants as a preventive measure. Ask your dentist about dental sealants when scheduling your child’s dental appointment. Dental sealants can be applied to your children’s teeth if they have not had their molars sealed. By following this simple procedure, you can prevent cavities and tooth decay. Contact The Kids Dentist of Las Vegas today to schedule your child’s dental appointment.