Coronavirus Social Story for Students with Cortical Visual Impairment
With so much uncertainty surrounding school right now one thing that we know beyond doubt is that we want our students to be as prepared and comfortable as possible. I wrote this FREE social story primarily for students with cortical visual impairment (CVI). However, other students can also benefit from this coronavirus social story.
What is included in this coronavirus social story pack?
There are three levels of the COVID-19 social story included.
Level 1: This level utilizes brightly colored images on a black/red/yellow background without words (the small text appears in the bottom right corner for instructors to utilize). For students on the lower range of the CVI assessment, words on the page can be visually overwhelming. For this reason, this level contains only images on its pages. You can see an example of this level below.
Level 2: This level utilizes brightly colored images on a black/red/yellow background with 1-2 simple sentences, written in yellow/red.
Level 3: In this level, as with the previous levels, brightly colored images are presented on a black/red/yellow background with 1-2 simple sentences. However, at this level, there are also interactive pieces. Students are required to match the identical interactive pieces with the corresponding page.
Vocabulary cards are also included. These can be used for matching when reading the book. This can be especially helpful if the images in level 3 are too small for students to use. These cards can also be used for identical matching, tacting, playing a memory game, identifying, and so much more!
To help make this resource accessible to the largest amount of students possible, I included “alternative” images for some pages. You can see such options illustrated below. For example, I included a page with only one image, a thermometer, as well as a page with multiple images, containing both a thermometer and a student. Additionally, both pages include the following text: “The nurse might take my temperature at school”. Depending on your student’s CVI phase, as well as other factors, individual students will be able to benefit from different images.
To download this FREE coronavirus social story, fill out the form below. If you are interested in my other CVI resources, click here to check them out!