Rashes that can be passed from dogs to humans are called zoonotic rashes. Most of the time folliculitis in dogs -- or simply irritation of the skin and hair follicles -- is a symptom of an allergen, parasite or infection. While the majority of these rashes are harmless, they can be irritating to both people and pets and are contagious because some dog skin diseases can be transmitted to humans. It is best to identify the cause of the rash as soon as possible to prevent further spread of the problem. And, don't forget to seek medical treatment for both you and your canine companion if you are both affected.
Rashes caused by ringworm
One of the most common dog skin diseases that can be transmitted to humans and cause folliculitis in dogs is tinea corporis, also known as ringworm. Rashes caused by ringworm begin as small, raised patches of skin. The patches may be red and itchy. If left untreated, the middle of the patch clears up, leaving the telltale ring on the skin. The rash is actually caused by a fungus and is contagious, according to the Dr. Greene website. Ringworm is treated with over-the-counter medicines that contain clotrimazole or miconazole.
Video of the Day
Dog mites on humans
Scabies, or sarcoptic mange, is caused by microscopic mites living under the surface of the skin that can cause folliculitis in dogs. You might find yourself with dog mites on humans because it is another one of the dog skin diseases that can be transmitted to humans, according to the Dog Owner's Guide. On a dog, the rash appears as bumpy, raised, and extremely itchy patches of skin.
When humans contract scabies, the rash appears on the chest and stomach areas in the form of tiny, red spots. Effective treatment for scabies can be prescribed by a veterinarian in the form of a dip, injection, or pill for your dog. See your doctor if you suspect there are dog mites on humans in your home to determine a course of treatment for you and your family.
Rashes caused by hookworm
Rashes caused by hookworms appear as a long, slender line on the skin that resembles a tunnel. Hookworms are also easily treated by your veterinarian once identified. People who suspect that they may have hookworms should visit their doctor so the parasites can be properly identified and a treatment plan can begin.
Rashes caused by plant irritants
Should your pet roam into a green patch of poison ivy, oak or sumac, you will certainly be susceptible to catching a case of it. The plant oils can be carried on the dog's fur or under his nails and passed on to you through direct contact. Giving your dog a thorough bath if you discover he has been exposed to any of the plants should keep you from being exposed to the plant irritants that cause the rash. And it will help folliculitis in dogs by getting the irritant off of the skin.
Rashes caused by staph bacteria
A skin rash caused by staph bacteria can be transmitted to people through direct contact with a dog who has a staph infection. The bacteria enter the person's skin through a scratch or open sore, and the rash that follows can be inflamed and painful. Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococcus Aureus (MRSA) is a type of staph bacteria that can cause rashes and sores. This is an extremely dangerous type of staph, warns VetInfo.
Impetigo is a skin disease usually seen in young puppies or in very young children. The disease is zoonotic, and mildly contagious. The rash caused by impetigo appears on the stomach and consists of raised bumps on the skin that become filled with fluid. Puppies with impetigo recover on their own, but keeping the rash clean with hydrogen peroxide or a topical antibiotic ointment helps it to heal faster, according to PetCoach. People that contract impetigo, especially children, should keep the rash as clean as possible to prevent infection, and have your physician prescribe a topical antibiotic.
Always check with your veterinarian before changing your pet’s diet, medication, or physical activity routines. This information is not a substitute for a vet’s opinion.