Racism: (Merriam Webster) A belief that race is the primary determination of human traits and capacities and that racial difference produce an inherent superiority of a particular race. The poor treatment of or violence against people because of their race.
(Urban Dictionary) An excuse given by one race of people to abuse another person’s rights. Usually created by blind ignorance.
Race has become a HUGE issue in this country over the last couple of years. Racism has been an issue in the country since the birth of this nation, but recently it has been at the forefront of conversation in this country because of so many negative issues pertaining to it. For example, police brutality, the 2016 election, and job opportunities have all played a part in the conversation regarding race.
I remember the first time I was ever called the N-word. I was about seven-years-old and was backstage during one of my ice-skating shows. Growing up in Chicago I knew racism existed. I spent a lot of time with my grandparents who were both from New Orleans. They would tell me stories about how things were in the Jim Crow era. I never expected to experience that living in Chicago, but I did. And the most shocking thing about the first time that I was called the N-word was that the girl who said it was also only seven-years-old. I think the altercation that ensued after the name calling rattled me up way more than being called the N-word, probably because I wasn’t quit old enough to fully comprehend the complicated history of the word.
Call me old fashioned, but I prefer my racism obvious and direct. I find myself getting way more offended when people say things to me like, “You’re so articulate.” Or, “You people do such fascinating things with your hair!” Spare me. I think today’s society is so concerned about being PC and not offending anyone without actually addressing and resolving issues such as racism and other prejudices. This leads to people being passive aggressive and saying things, (like the examples I just gave) without them even knowing or understanding how what they said is wrong and offensive. It still makes you sound like a bigot no matter how many layers of sugar you put on it.
This year’s presidential election seems like it is bringing out racist from all corners of the country. Some of the things they show on television are extremely scary. As a minority in this country, I wish things were different, but sometimes feel discouraged by the lack of progress this country shows. The main reasons racism exist are fear and ignorance.
As a person of faith, I pray that this county gets its shit together. But to all of the people out there who choose to remain ignorant and hate people of color, I have this one hope for you. I hope that you have children that grow up to be beautiful, respectful, and intelligent adults. I hope that one day your children go out into the world and meet people who look nothing like them. People who come from a completely different walk of life. I hope that they find someone with skin darker than the night sky and that they fall madly, and deeply in love. I hope they get married and have a shitload of babies and come over to your house on EVERY holiday, especially Kwanzaa, Ramadan, and Yom Kipper (because y’all still love to hate on Jews too). And I hope that those little multicultural grandchildren of yours tell you everyday how much they love you. #DeportRacism2016