The United States is most commonly listed in the country with the cold weather. But by the increasing global warming, the planet Earth is getting hotter day by day. This is somehow alarming stage but if we see the other side of the mirror, the increasing temperature makes the climate of the United States more comfortable. The next century will set a new parameter as many of the cities in the United States will face a great climate change. Nowadays some cities in the United States are facing high migration rate as people are moving towards the hot cities, some of the trend-setting cities with hot climate are below. In other words, here is the list of the hottest cities in the USA.
To create the list and make it worth considering, we have assembled 15 cities that are having the largest population rate and average high temperature. The dew point, nighttime low temperature, and the relative humidity at high and low temperatures are the other factors that count a lot. The Sperling heat index covers all these factors, along with the extremely hot days between now and 2100. The explanation of extremely hot days varies from the baseline for each city. If we see the example of it, the temperature for Boston is about 90 degrees as compared to that of Albuquerque having 100-degrees temperature.
|Serial No||City||State||Population Increase in 2015-17||Heat Index||Estimated Increase in Hot Days|
The Top Hottest Cities in the United States
7. San Diego in California
The population increase in San Diego is about 15,715 between the years 2015-16. The Sperling Heat Index is about 80.3 and according to an estimation, the ratio of extremely hot days will increase up to 10 days per year.
6. Washington in Washington D.C.
The Sperling Heat Index of Washington DC is 84.4 and the increase in the extremely hot days up to 2100 is estimated to be 23 per year. The population increase in the city due to the hot climate between 2015-16 is about 10,793. Sweltering summers are not bad, but at the same time not enough to blow anyone’s mind in the country’s capital, however, they are ready to increase throughout the year.
See Also Which is the Hottest States in the USA?
5. Denver in Colorado
Having the second lowest heat index in Denver is one of the hottest cities in the USA. The city is another victim of the dramatic climate change. The number of the extremely hot days is forecasted to raise about 32 days per year. The people that migrated towards Denver between 2015-16 is about 13,028. The heat index of Denver is about 74.1.
US Climate Data showed that Denver is dealing with the hot climate, with no snowfall and little precipitation. The average temperature of June 2015 was recorded to range between 70.0 to 93.9.
4. Seattle in Washington
Due to the favorable change in the climate, around 20,847 people joined the city between 2015-16. Although it has the lowest heat index in our list that is 70.3, it is expected to gain 18 more days per year that will be extremely hot. Due to the most feasible climate, people are moving towards the city. Thus the city is hitting at number five in all aspects in the list of the hottest cities in the USA.
3. Miami in Florida
The heat index of Florida is about 92 and the hot days are expected to increase tremendously in this city as compared to the other one in our list. According to a rough estimate, nearly 105 days per year will be added to city’s context having 90-degree temperature. The population increase in the city due to the climate is 12,715 during the 2 years. Additionally, Miami is the city of beaches and the best spot to make your vacation more refreshing thus it is the most demanding city in the list of the hottest cities in the USA.
2. San Antonio in Texas
A good news for everyone else as well as for the paleta vendors, that is the expected 96 days in the city having 100 degrees temperature from the year 2100. As the city is among the hottest cities in the USA, about 24,473 people migrated towards the city. The heat index of the city is 92.1 and it is the top hottest city of Texas. The weather of San Antonio is feasible for holidays throughout the year.
1. Phoenix in Arizona
Topping the list of the hottest cities in the USA in Phoenix, leading in all the parameters. If you think the city is hot enough now, then wait! This is not such easy to top the list as in the coming years the city will be enough hot for charming vacations. The heat index of the city is 97.7, with a population increase in 32,113. It is forecasted that in 2100, there will be an increase of 85 extremely hot days every year in the city. This will although attract the visitors to the city to spend their vacations but in my opinion, it will be too hot.
Heat Index: The Heat Index sometimes referred to as the apparent temperature, is a measure of how hot it really feels when relative humidity is factored with the actual air temperature.