H2S Gas Sensor
H2S gas sensor based on the principle of electrochemical detection to identify the chemical parameters of hydrogen sulfide gas and conduction system connected gas sensor. H2S gas sensor is mainly used to detect the concentration of hydrogen sulfide gas in the air. Electrochemical hydrogen sulfide sensors can be used effectively in a variety of demanding applications, including chemical industry, steel industry, etc. Hydrogen sulfide sensor has the characteristics of low power consumption, high precision, high sensitivity, wide linear range and strong anti-interference ability.
Hydrogen sulfide gas detector
Hydrogen sulfide gas detector is the use of high-quality electrochemical H2S gas sensor, used to detect the concentration of H2S gas in the environment of toxic and harmful gas sensor. Fixed hydrogen sulfide gas detector can carry out continuous 24 hours of toxic and harmful gas online detection and sound and light alarm, can work in harsh environment, with stable signal, high precision, good repeatability and so on.
Portable H2S Gas Detector
Portable H2S gas detector is a gas detector used to detect hydrogen sulfide gas leakage and timely alarm. Portable hydrogen sulfide gas detector adopts humanized design, lightweight body, easy to carry and operate, built-in high sensitivity hydrogen sulfide sensor probe, quick response, sensitive response, accurate measurement, with multiple alarm function over limit.
Multi Gas detector
Fixed multi-gas detector, dual-channel, supports the detection of Hydrogen sulfide and combustible gases, O2 and combustible gases, O2 and H2S and other gas combinations, multi-gas detector is both on-site buzzer indicator sound, on-site flashing indicator lights and other functions, And real-time display the detector that monitors the gas concentration on site.
Frequently Asked Questions
What is hydrogen sulfide gas?
Hydrogen sulfide, an inorganic compound with a chemical formula of H2S and a molecular weight of 34.076, is a flammable acid gas under standard conditions and is colorless.
What kinds of H2S detector are there?
H2S gas detector according to the different occasions, is also divided into different types, mainly divided into portable hydrogen sulfide detector, pump type hydrogen sulfide detector and online type hydrogen sulfide detection alarm.
What is an H2S sensor?
H2S sensor is suitable for various environments and special environments of volatile organic hydrogen sulfide gas concentration and leakage, online detection and on-site sound and light alarm, the safety of dangerous field operations play an early warning role, with stable signal, high precision, good repeatability and other advantages.
How to export the stored data of the H2S detector?
The data stored in the ozone detector can be exported to the computer through USB data cable installed in the detector’s suitcase.
221, Huoju Road, High-tech district, Weihai,Shandong,China
+86 178 6109 8993