Old MacDonald will still have a farm, but we need to rewrite the lyrics — before it’s too late. According to a new study by some of the biggest food and farming firms, the industry must immediately get to work improving global agriculture methods or risk destroying the planet.
Since animal agriculture is a significant contributor to the climate catastrophe — and especially since the world’s human population just hit the 8 billion mark — we must stop growing colossal amounts of food for animals on factory farms. Instead, let’s consume crops directly. By becoming a vegan society, we could slash greenhouse gas emissions, repopulate forests, feed more people and prevent animals from suffering. And importantly, farmers wouldn’t be out of a job — they could lead the way.
Raising animals for food takes up nearly 80% of global agricultural land but produces a meager 20% of our calories. So growing plants for humans to eat is a much better use of our limited resources. And vegan food production is a viable business opportunity for farmers, according to the president of the German Farmers Association, Joachim Rukwied, who pointed out that farmers grow the raw materials, like chickpeas and soy, used to make vegan meat. Capitalizing on animal-free foods is a smart financial strategy now and for the future. Data show that 57% of households now purchase vegan foods, and the global vegan meat market is projected to grow to $450 billion by 2040.
Farmers understand how important weather is to their livelihoods, so they ought to be particularly concerned about the threats posed by the climate catastrophe. Droughts, heatwaves and floods now occur more frequently and are more intense due to warmer temperatures. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration notes that “cold seasons are warming faster than the warmer seasons,” which damages some crops. Raising animals for food is like digging our own grave. According to the Environmental Protection Agency, animal agriculture is the primary source of methane emissions in the U.S. Animals on factory farms also contribute to deadly carbon dioxide and tons of excrement that pollutes waterways.
Experts advise that we drop meat, eggs and dairy, and we should heed their guidance. A global phase-out of animal agriculture over the next 15 years combined with a parallel global switch to vegan eating would successfully halt the surge of atmospheric greenhouse gases for 30 years, giving us more time to replace fossil fuels, according to a new study by scientists from Stanford University and the University of California, Berkeley.
Changing our food system is possible — in fact, it has already begun. In Japan, for example, scientists were able to replicate a cut of Wagyu beef using a 3D printer, duplicating the cut’s exact arrangement of muscle, fat and blood vessels. In the U.S., a food technology company makes cultivated meat from animal cells, creating cruelty-free chicken breasts and beef. Its factory is the largest cultivated-meat factory in the world, and the company hopes its products will be available for purchase soon. And the U.S. Food and Drug Administration found no safety concerns in its recent initial pre-market review of food created from animal cells.
A global shift toward vegan eating would benefit every sentient being, including by allowing farmland to return to its natural state and slashing greenhouse gas emissions. The vegan revolution has already begun — let’s embrace it, for the planet’s sake.
Rebecca Libauskas is a climate research specialist with the PETA Foundation, 501 Front St., Norfolk, VA 23510; www.PETA.org. This column was proved by Tribune News Service.