Lentils and other legumes are very high in protein
One of the challenges of switching to a vegetarian diet involves replacing animal protein sources with vegetarian alternatives. However, it is difficult to obtain adequate amounts of protein on a vegetarian diet. Many non-animal foods contain high concentrations of protein, including grains, legumes, nuts, seeds, dairy products and eggs. By eating a variety of these foods, you can easily meet the recommended daily protein intake of 46 grams for women and 56 grams for men.
Wheat and Grains
Wheat and other grain products are surprisingly good sources of protein. For example, 2 slices of whole-wheat bread provide 5 grams of protein, 1 cup of cooked spaghetti noodles provides 8 grams, 1 cup of cooked brown rice provides 5 grams and 1 cup of cooked quinoa provides 9 grams. Seitan, or isolated wheat gluten, is much higher in protein, with 31 grams of protein in a 3-ounce serving. As a single serving of these foods can account for approximately 9 to 67 percent of your daily intake, wheat and grains are excellent vegetarian protein sources.
Legumes include some of the most common protein sources in the vegetarian diet, such as soy, lentils, black beans, chickpeas, peanuts and peanut butter. These foods are much higher in protein than most grains, with a single serving providing between approximately 14 and 89 percent of your daily intake. For example, 1 cup of cooked lentils contains 18 grams of protein, 1 cup of chickpeas contains 12 grams and 2 tablespoons of peanut butter provide 8 grams of protein. Soy products, which provide all essential amino acids, vary in their protein content. For example, 1 cup of cooked soybeans contains 29 grams, while 1 cup of tempeh contains 41 grams of protein.
Nuts and Seeds
The 2010 Dietary Guidelines for Americans includes nuts and seeds among the recommended protein sources for vegetarians. Examples of nuts that are high in protein include almonds, with 8 grams in 1/4 cup, and cashews, with 5 grams of protein in 1/4 cup. Although they contain less protein than legumes, seeds contain similar amounts of protein as nuts. A 1-ounce serving of roasted pumpkin or squash seeds contains about 9 grams, 1 ounce of roasted sesame seeds contains 5 grams and 1 ounce of dried chia seeds contains 5 grams of protein. Using these values, a serving of nuts or seeds can provide approximately between 8 and 19 percent of your daily protein intake.
Dairy and Eggs
Unlike vegans, vegetarians typically include dairy products and eggs in their diets. These foods are naturally high in protein, with a single serving providing between approximately 6 and 26 percent of your daily intake. Examples of dairy products include 1 cup of 1 percent milk, with 8 grams, 1 ounce of whole milk mozzarella cheese, with 6 grams, and an 8-ounce container of plain, low-fat yogurt, with 12 grams of protein. Similar to this variation in dairy products, different bird's eggs contain different amounts of protein. For example, 1 large, white chicken egg contains 4 grams of protein, while 1 duck egg contains 9 grams of protein.