Eating celery every day can reduce artery-clogging cholesterol known as LDL or bad cholesterol. The phthalides present in this herb also help to stimulate the secretion of bile juices, which work to reduce cholesterol levels. Less cholesterol means less plaque on artery walls and a general improvement in heart health. Furthermore, the fiber that is found in it also works to scrape the cholesterol out of the bloodstream and eliminate it from the body in regular bowel movements, further boosting cardiovascular health.
2. Reduces Blood Pressure
Phthalides can help to lower the levels of stress hormones in your blood. This allows your blood vessels to expand, giving your blood more space to move, thereby decreasing your blood pressure. Celery also contains potassium, which is a vasodilator, meaning it also helps to reduce blood pressure. When blood pressure is reduced, it puts less stress on the entire cardiovascular system and decreases the chances of you developing atherosclerosis or suffering from a stroke or heart attack.
Celery is great for those who suffer from arthritis, gout, and rheumatism. It has anti-inflammatory properties that help to reduce swelling and pain around the joints. It also acts as a diuretic, which helps remove uric acid crystals that build up around the body’s joints that can cause pain and discomfort.
4. Prevents Urinary Tract Infections
Due to its diuretics properties, celery seeds help in the elimination of uric acid. Therefore, celery is good for those with kidney problems, bladder disorders, cystitis, and other similar conditions.
Celery contains flavonoids, phthalides, and polyacetylenes, which are all cancer-fighting components. It also contains coumarins, which enhance the activity of certain white blood cells that can stave off cancer as well. These antioxidant components seek out free radicals and neutralize them before they can cause cancer.
6. Boosts the Immune System
Celery, due to the fact that it’s rich in vitamin C and antioxidants, greatly boosts the immune system and makes it more active and efficient. Eating this vitamin C rich vegetable can reduce your risk of catching a cold, as well as protect you against a number of other diseases.
The presence of coumarins can provide relief from migraines. The exact reason why isn’t completely understood, but it’s thought that it helps to suppress the release of nitric oxide from the brain, which causes headaches and migraines.
8. Prevents Cataracts
Dripping celery tea drops on your eyelids is great for certain ophthalmological conditions and can improve your eye health, reducing your chances of developing cataracts and protecting against macular degeneration.
Drinking celery juice regularly before meals can help you lose weight. It’s very low in calories and it’s also filling due to its high fiber content. Therefore, it can help to reduce the tendency to overeat and help you keep your weight down.
10. Regulates Fluid Balance
Celery is full of the minerals sodium and potassium, both of which help to regulate the fluid balance in the body.
Word of caution: The seeds of this vegetable contain flavonoids, volatile oils, coumarins, and linoleic acid, and therefore not suitable for pregnant women as they may cause contractions in the uterus.