Physical therapy is a medical treatment that helps a person to regain physical function following an injury or surgery involving a joint, limb or muscle.
If you ask anyone about what comes to their mind when they hear the term “physical therapy”, a significant proportion of them will tell you that what the term means to them is simply rehabilitation therapy for patients that have lost mobility to a sports injury or injuries ranging from an accident. They may also think it applies to other patients that need rehabilitation therapy for various sicknesses related to musculoskeletal problems and needs to be hospitalized for these problems.
Physical therapy can also be referred to as physiotherapy and can be called “PT” as the shortened form of physical therapy. It is a branch of physical medicine and rehabilitation specialty that utilizes mechanical force and movements to promote functions, mobility, and quality of life as well as remediating impairments through diagnosis, examination, prognosis, and physical intervention. Physical therapy is a professional career that cuts around various spheres of specialties which include sports, musculoskeletal, neurology, orthopedics, wound care, cardiopulmonary, EMG, women’s health, geriatrics, and pediatrics. Physical therapy can be practiced in various settings such as private-owned physical therapy rehabilitation centers, health and wellness clinics, outpatient clinics or offices rehabilitation hospitals facilities, extended care facilities, skilled nursing facilities, education and research centers schools, private homes, hospices, fitness centers industrial workplaces or other occupational environments, and sports training facilities.
Physical therapy requires various processes which involve the manipulation of different parts of the body to improve mobility and function, decrease pain, and improve bodily strength to help the person undergoing the therapy enjoy a better quality of life. Physical therapy also includes helping individuals to improve energy levels and prevent injuries by staying physically fit. Although physical therapy includes the evaluation of a person to come up with a plan for treatment, the plan may be related to an injury or illness or it may be a plan for an ongoing health program which will boost your energy level and make you enjoy a better quality of life. If by chance you are experiencing difficulties coming up with a long-term health plan, one of the best options you can go for is physical therapy and it will be of immense benefit due to the fact that it will be personalized to help you meet your fitness and health goals.
Frequently Asked Questions
During the first meeting with a physical therapist, you should expect an in-depth diagnosis and synopsis of an illness and beginner activities to lessen or alleviate the illness. After multiple appointments, you should be expected to start a steady regimen of stretches, exercises, and other activities aimed at targeting and treating the condition. A large number of these activities can be done in your home without the need for multiple meetings with the physical therapist. The physical therapist may ask the patient to practice the stretches after their appointment, but rehabilitation centers are always equipped with various tools and machines to assist in the treatment.
A physical therapist is a licensed and highly educated specialist that has been trained to help people achieve their fitness and health goals. However, many people think of physical therapists as just physicians that are trained to help you in overcoming an illness or injury. Although, this is true to some extent, you can also consult with a physical therapist in order to come up with a program that is personalized to help you improve and maintain your health and evade injury over the long term.
Regardless of the fact that maybe you are carrying an injury or illness, or you simply want to bolster your chances of continued longevity and good health, a physical therapist will do a full evaluation and this includes reviewing the status of skeletal, muscular, neurological, pulmonary, cardiovascular, and lymphatic systems as well as any other health issues. The physical therapist will then determine what needs to be done to improve your longevity and health by working closely with you.
A physical therapist can also assist you in learning the salient aspects of your health you need to focus on and what some of your personal goals should be for achieving wellness and good health. This saves you a lot of time due to the fact that the aspects you need to focus on are personally designed in a program that particularly suits your needs. This gives you certainty over coming up with a program you may think will benefit your health but you do not know for sure. For instance, if you have shoulder problems, a plan may be designed by the physical therapist in order to make you gain more use of your shoulder through rehabilitation therapy without risking any injury. If you have an ailment such as arthritis, your physical therapist can come up with a plan for treating the region of your body which is particularly affected by the disorder.
In basic terms, a physical therapist can assist you in gaining control over your health without using drugs. The physical therapist will address your problem, get to the bottom of the problem and then work out a treatment plan for you until you achieve your goals of overcoming the actual health problem. If there is any health issue that needs the attention of a physician, then you will be referred by the physical therapist will now refer you to the appropriate health personnel. So, there is a lot more involved in physical therapy than rehabilitation therapy and can help you tremendously to maintain your well-being and overall good health for the long term.
Rehabilitation centers are designed to restore patients’ confidence and help them in regaining their original place in the society. For patients with an acute history of illness, they may be required to use inpatient physical therapy rehabilitation centers. Physical therapy rehabilitation centers are well equipped with well-trained nurses. They perform different therapies to help patients in order to regain their skills such as mobility and speech. Communication skills can be learned by patients undergoing therapy. Patients undergoing physical therapy are taught various exercises in order to improve their mobility. The treatment is aimed at helping the patients carry out normal daily activities such as grooming, bathing, and dressing. Also, these centers provide treatment which enables patients to improve their muscle function. These centers help in increasing the ability of the patient to remain independent, cope and adjust to their lifestyle.
Physical therapy rehabilitation centers can be found all over in the United States. If by chance you are in need of a physical therapy rehabilitation center, don’t settle for just any rehabilitation center — you have a choice.
Physical therapists can work in varieties of places. Some can work within physical therapy rehabilitation centers or hospitals while others work as contractors working independently of a facility. The kind of kind of ailment or illness you are addressing will determine the type of physical therapist you work with in order to solve your problem.
Orthopedic Therapist: These are therapists that deal with diseases or injuries of the musculoskeletal system. By utilizing physical therapy equipment, a therapist may re-tutor a client on the basics of walking after multiple leg fractures or make them regain the ability to utilize their hands after invasive surgeries. For sprains or mild fractures, basic physical training supplies such as hot-cold compresses may be used.
Geriatric/Pediatric Therapist: These are physical therapists that work with elderly people while pediatric physical therapist works with children and babies. Both are specialists that are familiar with ailments that afflict their specific group and they are trained to help target problems related to those illnesses. For instance, a pediatric therapist may help a kid having a curved spine to learn how to walk with a brace while a geriatric therapist helps the elderly ones cope with aggravations from several replacement surgeries or arthritis.
Neurological Therapist: The expertise of a physical therapist is always relied on by neurological patients to tackle issues related to neurological damage. Spinal cord or brain injury and in-born issues such as Parkinson’s disease are often dealt with by physical therapists. Most times, they work with individuals that have been paralyzed and cannot walk. To keep the muscles from atrophying and stimulate blood flow, physical therapy supplies such as electronic muscle stimulators may be utilized by these therapists to solve their problems.
Leave Your Phone Number,
Our Experts Will Call You
Las Cruces Comprehensive Rehabilitation & Home Care was designed to provide functionality in order to help you return to healthy daily living.