“But Noah found grace in the eyes of the Lord” (Gen 6:8).
“By faith Noah, being divinely warned of things not yet seen, moved with godly fear, prepared an ark for the saving of his household, by which he condemned the world and became heir of the righteousness which is according to faith” (Heb 11:7)
The story of Noah is a wonderful story, 4500 years old. All people, including the children, love it. The most important thing said about Noah is that he “found Grace in the eyes of the Lord”. This is the first time in the Bible that the word ‘Grace’ appears. Grace is the unmerited free and full favor of God. It is the first time that Grace has found her voice among men. The word ‘found’ means to meet, to encounter Grace. ‘In the eyes of the Lord’ means in the presence of the Lord. Let us follow the story and see how Grace saves this man and his family.
At that time, the people were extremely wicked, in their thoughts, imaginations and actions. God said that He was ‘grieved’ that He made man. He decided to destroy all people with a flood. This is a type of the last judgment when God shall judge and destroy sin. In the midst of this tragedy only one man found ‘grace’ with God. This man is called ‘Noah’. In Hebrew, his name means ‘rest or comfort’. God told him about the evil in the world and that He will destroy the world with water. Grace takes man into his counsel. God told Noah that only he, his wife, their sons, and their wives, shall be saved. Grace gives hope for the future showing you the door of escape in trials. Noah responds with faith. Grace needs faith to manifest. By faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, we and our household shall be saved. God gives Noah the plan of salvation. Noah must build an ark that will float on top of the waters of judgment. The only other place the word ‘ark’ appears is in the Book of Exodus. Moses’ mother made a little ark to save her son’s life (Ex 2:3-5). Both Noah and Moses were types of saviors. They are ambassadors of Christ! Thru Noah, God saved humanity. Thru Moses, God saved Israel.
Noah’s ark had a special design. God gave Noah the revelation in detail. During this time, it is only God who decides and speaks. Noah was to listen, trust and obey God. The ark was extremely big in size. Its length is five hundred feet; its width is seventy-five feet, and its height is thirty feet. To give you a better idea, the ark will be one and a half size of a football stadium. It can accommodate 120,000 sheep. It will be like three stories building floating on water. Until the 19th century, no man has ever built a ship of this size. The ark will not be a ship for the bottom is flat like a badge. It shall have no steering wheel, no engine, no compass or nautical instruments, and no sails. There shall be no captain. There shall be no port of destination. Grace shall be the captain. Grace shall lead the ark to nowhere (better said to where God wants it to go). The only function of the ark is to rise on top of the waters of judgment. Grace is King! Grace kills and Grace makes alive whom He wishes. Grace is the greatest Lifter when we fall into sin. Noah was to build according to specifications. He will build and he will preach. That is all. Grace gives strength for you to work and to do ministry. Noah will use wood to build the ark. The wood will be made waterproof by smearing ‘pitch’ on it, inside and outside. The word ‘pitch’ is the same as the word ‘atonement’ (Leviticus 16). In other words, Noah will make the ark safe from the judgment by applying the blood of Jesus, inside and outside. Grace is sure salvation! Grace is released to men because Jesus shed His Blood on the Cross of Calvary!
There shall be only one window for light and ventilation at the top of the ark. There shall be only one door. Jesus said: “I am the Door” (Jn 10:9). God told Noah that when he will finish building the ark, He will send animals, male and female. They will willingly come and enter the ark. Noah was to gather food for all of them. At that time, all men and animals were vegetarian. Grace provides all that we need to survive! The animals will survive with Noah and his family. The building of the ark took about 120 years. During this time, Noah built and preached the Gospel (2 Pet 2:5). None of them who heard him believed the Word of God. Noah may have been a frustrated preacher but what matters is that Grace located him and saved him.
Looking at all these details, nobody but God could have this idea of building an ark to float on the waters. After the last nail was set in position, Noah, his family and all the animals entered the ark. And God shut the door. Then the rain started. It flooded the earth. As the waters were rising, the ark was lifted above them. Grace always lifts above sin, above trials and temptations. Grace is the greatest Lifter out of sorrow! The nonstop rain stopped after 40 days. Apart the sea creatures, all living beings, men and animals perished in the flood. After the screaming and pleadings of the desperate dying people, the silence of death came over the land. Noah stayed in the ark for 375 days. He came out and offered animal sacrifice to God for sparing their lives. He recognized that salvation is by Grace alone! God was pleased and promised never to destroy the world by water. Out of that flood, eight people came on earth. It was a new beginning. Grace has the power to give you a new beginning! The promised Seed that will bruise the serpent’s head (Gen 3:15) continued its journey among men. One of the descendants of Noah, Jesus Christ, came to earth as a Man full of Grace and Truth (Jn 1:14). The Ark is a symbol of Christ! There is salvation, safety, and satisfaction in Christ alone! King Grace expects faith and worship as the proper response to His royal help! Noah entered as the owner of the ark. After about one year, he came out as the owner of the world! To God be all the glory! Grace is King! Worship the Lord!