Teacher – SEN
To deliver lessons that inspire students to succeed to achieve the best possible outcomes.
Roles and responsibilities include:
Teamwork and collaboration
To be a good communicator at all levels.
Be committed to developing positive relationships with all members of the school community.
Working alongside fellow teachers to plan engaging lessons that meet the requirements of the curriculum.
Liaising with colleagues and working flexibly.
Working with parents to ensure the happiness and best academic outcomes for all children.
Working cooperatively with curriculum support staff (where applicable) to support children’s development.
Teaching and learning:
Clear understanding of the Curriculum.
Organising the classroom provision and learning resources and creating displays to encourage a positive and engaging learning environment.
Planning, preparing, and presenting sessions that cater to the needs of the whole ability range within the class.
Motivating pupils with enthusiastic, imaginative teaching.
Observing and assessing children in line with school assessments.
Being reflective of the classroom provision, sessions taught, progress made, and adjusting environment, planning and curriculum to reflect this.
Meeting with other professionals such as speech and language therapists, occupational therapists, and educational psychologists, if required.
Assessment and data:
Taking responsibility for the progress of a class.
Meeting requirements for the assessment and recording of student’s development using Target Tracker.
Using data provided by assessments to influence further planning, provision, and intervention.
Providing feedback to parents and carers on a student’s progress at Parent Teacher Conferences and other meetings
Behavior management and duties:
Follow the school’s behavior policy.
Manage classes effectively, using approaches that are appropriate to students’ needs to inspire, motivate and challenge pupils.
Maintain good relationships with pupils, exercise appropriate authority, and act decisively when necessary within the school’s behavioral policy.
Be a positive role model and demonstrate consistently the positive attitudes, values, and behavior, which are expected of pupils.
Have high expectations of behavior, promoting self-control and independence of all learners.
Carry out duties as directed and within the school’s policy
To work as part of a curriculum action group, supporting planning, assessment, resources, and special events linked to that team.
Support the organizing and taking part in school events, outings, and activities that may take place at weekends or in the evening.
Communicate effectively with parents/carers about students’ achievements and well-being using school systems/processes such as CPOMS as appropriate.
Make a positive contribution to the wider life and ethos of the school
Run a weekly ECA each term.
Bachelor’s Degree in Special Education related discipline, with additional qualifications relating to Special education needs.
IELTS score of minimum 7.0 in ‘General’.
Minimum 1- 2 years of Teaching experience
To apply for this job please visit ae.indeed.com.