This form of painting did not have an official name during ancient times but was generally referred to as "Dan Qing". In terms of content and artistic creation, traditional Chinese painting reflects the ancients' understanding of nature and society and the related politics, philosophy, religion, literature and art that comes with it. It forms one of the four ancient Chinese artistic practices, including music, chess and calligraphy.Read more...
It has been said that before humans innovate language, they use gestures to express their thoughts and develop their dances.
The dance itself is a language. An elegant or awkward dance instead of a thousand words. We are honored to invite professional dancers to share with us the journey of their dance career and let us appreciate the artistic beauty of dance from different angles.Read more...
Music can cultivate temperament and make people feel relaxed.
With advances in technology, even older music can be easily accessed through apps or online. In the 1970s and 1980s, pop music entered the most glorious era. Many of today's green people grew up with the radio when they were young. They still remember the music of that era. We have collected articles from some senior musicians talking about the Hong Kong music in everyone's heart.Read more...
Cantonese opera, a long-standing traditional culture and art, accompanying many green people to grow up.
With the completion of the new performance venue, Cantonese opera has re-emerged in recent years. Even some young people who are not particularly fond of Cantonese opera in their youth have begun to appreciate the singing and mastering of famous artists.Read more...
Art comes from life, and "Photography" is a kind of visual art. Record the moment that is about to become a memory forever. For photography enthusiasts, this is a satisfying pursuit. On the journey of honing photography skills, the process is as sweet as the result.Read more...
Please enter your email address below. You will receive a link to reset your password.
If there is an account associated with firstname.lastname@example.org you will receive an email with a link to reset your password.OK
Our forum is a platform for you to share different interests and life experience with others of similar age or background. To become a member, please fill in the following form for registration and click the "Register New Membership" button. The information you send to us will be protected by law. Upon successful registration, you will be directed to a new page showing "Registration Succeed", and you can logon immediately.
Please contact us if there are any questions.
For first time logon, please register below: