|The Survivor Tree, Summer 2016|
The March 2010 nor'easter impacted the Northeastern part of United States resulting in at least nine deaths. Winds of up to 70 miles per hour snapped power lines and trees . Among these trees was the Callery pear tree form 9-11 site. The tree was uprooted in powerful storm. Again, the tree survived, and caretakers righted the tree, examined roots, pruned branches and secured it with cables. December 2010 it was restored to Ground Zero.
“The presence of the Survivor Tree on the Memorial Plaza will symbolize New York City’s and this nation’s resilience after the attacks,” said Mayor Bloomberg. “Like the thousands of courageous stories of survival that arose from the ashes of the World Trade Center, the story of this tree also will live on and inspire many.”
In late August 2011 hurricane Irene hit New York. Throughout its path, Irene caused widespread destruction and at least 56 deaths.
“The Memorial has weathered tropical storm Irene, and it remains as strong as the hundreds of men and women dedicated to building it,” 9/11 Memorial President Joe Daniels said in a statement. “And true to its name, the Survivor Tree is standing tall at the Memorial.”
The National September 11 Memorial and Museum was among the many New York cultural institutions that suffered severe damage from Hurricane Sandy. River surges caused serious flooding at the foundation level of the World Trade Center. Inside the visitor center and a private entrance room for victims' families, about 4 feet of water ruined the lower sections of the sheet-rock walls , In the unfinished museum, the water rose as high as 8 feet. It had taken about a week to drain the floodwaters — as high as 10 feet in some places — from the 16-acre site.
And the “Survivor Tree” continues to live up to its name and stands tall among the oak trees at the Memorial .
Aside from the Callery pear Survivor Tree, there are six other survivor of the 9/11 attack, all of which are now planted near New York City Hall and the Brooklyn Bridge.