Most people have heard the term ‘masonry.’ However, it is frequently misunderstood. In its simplest definition, masonry is the art of stonework. A mason builds structures from individual units of stone, brick, concrete block, or another material, which is often laid in a specific pattern and bound together by mortar. Mortar is a cement paste that acts as the glue that holds the structure together once it hardens.
Masonry is a highly customizable and durable form of construction. However, the strength of the structure will depend on the quality of the materials and craftsmanship. The pattern in which the individual units are laid can also have a significant impact on the overall construction.
With this in mind, it’s important that masonry projects are completed by an experienced hand. Dating back to ancient civilizations, masonry is a traditional, time-honored trade. If you want masonry work that will stand the test of time, give us a call at Greenway of Nashville. Our masonry contractors are skilled professionals dedicated to creating long-lasting exterior structures that look and function the way they should.
The two main types of masonry work are veneer and solid
Understanding your options will ensure you make the most informed decision for your next masonry project. When in doubt, our team is here to explain the differences and advise you on what will best achieve your specific goals.
This type of masonry work involves pasting materials to the outside of a structure that, essentially, acts as the base. Veneer masonry is usually used for decorative purposes rather than structural.
Solid masonry, on the other hand, is an independent structure that is built from the ground up. In other words, the individual units aren’t installed to an existing structure.
Masonry materials can be man-made or naturally-occurring. Here is a brief overview of some of the best materials used for masonry projects and their varying characteristics:
Durable and stylish, brick is a classic material that makes a great choice for masonry work. Bricks come in an assortment of textures and colors, ranging from traditional to modern. There are many advantages to brick masonry, such as fire and wind resistance and moisture control. Bricks are also naturally energy efficient and can be constructed into a veneer. However, keep in mind that bricks are heavy material that can place stress on your structure. Brickwork can also be difficult to match since it comes in such a diverse array of colors.
Similar to brick, stone masonry is durable and can last for many years if well-constructed. Stone is also a popular choice among homeowners because it is an attractive, low-maintenance material that is available in a variety of natural colors. Many upscale homes incorporate stone masonry construction into the design for its organic appearance. Stone masonry includes two types of stones: dressed and undressed. Dressed stones come in similar sizes and patterns, giving your structure a more uniform look. Undressed, or rough, stone, is laid in an irregular pattern known as ‘rubble masonry.’ This style provides the most customized and natural appearance that will fit with both traditional and modern homes.
Concrete masonry blocks are a popular building material because they tend to be more affordable and take less time to lay than brick and stone. What’s more, concrete blocks come in a variety of sizes and shapes, allowing you to customize the look of your structure. The design versatility of concrete makes it a great option for residential masonry structures. Brick, stone, and concrete are all durable and visually appealing materials that will last. How do you know which material is right for you? Our masonry contractors at Greenway of Nashville will personally take you through the selection process to ensure you choose the best masonry material for your style, needs, and the planned location of your structure.
When done right, it’s hard to beat the style and longevity of masonry. However, the work is hard and incredibly tedious, as the materials are laid by hand, one unit at a time. Masonry construction methods will vary depending on the type of structure you want to build and the material you choose. A skilled craftsman with intricate knowledge of the design and installation process is required to ensure the best results.
At Greenway of Nashville, we work with the finest tradesmen in the area who are trained to use only the best construction practices and methods. When it comes to meticulous masonry work, the reward is in the finished product. Our difference is that we treat every project as if it were our own and are committed to delivering quality results for the investment you’ve made in your masonry structure.
With any construction project, you need a team that you can count on to do the job right. Greenway of Nashville is that team. For over ten years, we have been a trustworthy partner for homeowners across Nashville.
Dedicated to superior standards, our goal is to make difficult projects, like masonry, effortless for our clients. If you need help designing, installing, or repairing a masonry structure, give Greenway of Nashville a call at (615) 238-4574.
6644 Clearbrook Dr, Nashville, TN 37205
09:00 am – 05:00 pm