Since the 1960’s, premarital sex has increased in popularity and the average marriage age increased as well. People started having sex earlier and getting married later, and that gap continues to grow as time goes on (Source A). Source G confirms that about 47% of American high schoolers are already having sex. This statistic, no matter how much it rises or falls, proves that there will always be sexually active students that require information on how to do so safely. Conservative sources will emphasize the fact that the majority of high schoolers are still virgins, but this majority is made up by a thin margin, and in reality this fact means nearly half of the US student population is sexually active. The likelihood of an effective abstinence only sex ed is statistically improbable in this day and age, given the fact that more than 80% of 19 year olds have already become sexually active (Source A). This statistic can be paired with the fact that the average marriage age is 26.5 years old for women and nearly 30 years old for men. Abstinence only policies may have seemed like a strong idea many years ago, when the concept of sex ed was just being formed, but now society’s morals have shifted. Years ago, when a girl became pregnant out of marriage, she had no other option than to get married, give up on her dreams, and raise her child. Now, there are many options for unwanted pregnancy, including adoption, abortion, or simply working hard and keeping the baby. There are also organizations like planned parenthood that exist to help mothers in need. The idea of a single parent is now generally accepted as well, and women are able to work and and be independent while caring for themselves along with their babies. Additionally, birth control is easier to access and has grown more effective over time by scientific advancement. Sexually active females can now
Abstinence-only programs are a form of sexual education that encourages and teaches not having sex outside of marriage. There has been a great deal of debate over if abstinence programs work amongst children and adolescents. Each of my three articles examined a different abstinence-only program that was administrated to children and adolescents. Through the L.I Teen Freedom program, the adolescents increased in indicators such as pro-abstinence attitudes, self efficacy to remain abstinent and interventions and behaviors to practice abstinence (Rue et al., 2012). Through the program, Family Action Model for Empowerment the participants decreased in the risky sexual behavior (Abel et al., 2008). Through the abstinence Reasons of Heart program,
Using their views on the accessibility of birth control, Planned Parenthood has been educating teens in schools about being sexually active and the different Sexually Transmitted Infections (STIs) that students could put themselves at risk for (Who We Are, 2014). Teaching kids about sex in school as a mandatory course has some mixed reviews. Some parents think that is not ethical to bring intercourse to the thoughts of their children when they should be learning more from their core curriculums. On the other hand, teenagers are known to have sex regardless if it is to their parents knowledge or not and the parents find it okay to enlighten the child about this type of
Abstinence is not an effective method of birth control. According to a study from Advocates for Youth, 95% of Americans have had premarital sex and teens who pledged to wait until marriage and 60% broke their promise after six years. In addition, the study also found that people who pledged virginity were more likely to engage in oral or anal sex than non-pledging virgin teens and less likely to use condoms once they become sexually active. Also, people who pledged were much less likely than non-pledgers to use contraception the first time they had sex and were less likely to know their STI status. Abstinence only education provides a false sense of security the first time people are having sex. They may think that they are safe when having sex for the first time not using contraception, but they are not. For example, condoms are effective 98% of the time. If students are led to believe that they are less effective, they won’t use protection during the first time they engage in sexual activity, leading to a higher risk of contracting an STD or becoming pregnant.
Parents worry that if little Jimmy hears about sex during his class, by dinner that night he will have done it; however, the argument that children are better off with abstinence-only sex education has no supporting statistics. The opposite is true, districts with abstinence-only sex ed have higher teeny pregnancy rates and have not affected teens choice on having sex. Teens that were taught the abstinence-only method were polled, and of those who took a pledge of abstinence, less than half kept it, (NPR.) A high percentage ended up pregnant or otherwise ailed because of lack of
Many parents do not like the idea of this but, “46% of teens are sexually active and by the time they are seniors 62% are sexually active.” (kurt) This fact is alarming and birth control for teens is a very controversial topic. Should Teens be able to get birth control without consent of parents? We will discuss the positive and negative effects of birth control for teens using the need for birth control, effects of birth control, and the teen mom dropouts to show how necessary birth control is.
However, the perception of being too young and too innocent does not prevent students in grade 9 and grade 10 from having sex. This can lead to teenage pregnancies and or STIs. A situation like this would send the chills down a parent. Simply allowing students to get the education they need can help prevent such an unfortunate future. Furthermore, culture and religion plays a major part in why parents do not support the new sex Ed curriculum. Would it benefit a child to remain ignorant to sex just because of culture or religious beliefs? Is culture or religion going to be there when a child finds him/herself in danger of being assaulted? Of course, these beliefs are important in understanding their self worth and respecting their body, but being educated will not take this away, it will only make them more
I find that just preaching abstinence, as the only way to go is not effective sexual education. It’s key that we teach about birth control and Sexually Transmitted Infections as our society is becoming more sexually active so it’s important that they learn how to have safe sex. Planned Parenthood encourages its patients to make informed decisions and provide an environment where they feel comfortable to ask any questions. If people don’t practice safe sex, they are at risk of getting a Sexually Transmitted Infection (STIs). Through Planned Parenthood, they are able to come and receive STI testing at affordable prices and if needed, treatment. A perfect example is when a sexually active female college student feels as if she’s at risk for a STI, she is able to get tested at Planned Parenthood and receive treatment. College students are unable to afford healthcare so Planned Parenthood provides them with a clinic that they are able to afford and receive the care they need. Through the organization, they are also able to become further educated on safe sex and will take the necessary precautions in the future. College students will also see Planed Parenthood as a place where they can get their questions about sex
Emma Elliott, a writer for the Concerned Women for America organization, compiled a pamphlet in 2005 in support of an abstinence-only based sexual education system. Elliott establishes her argument in a unique countering organization. She presents a popular claim about sexual education and then refutes it with a reason supporting abstinence. In general, she includes eight mainstream beliefs. The first one is rather general where she refutes that “Abstinence education doesn't work”, and she continues to say that is does and backs up her argument with multiple studies, such as the program “Best Friends” caused 80% less possibility of sexual activity. (Elliott). The second claim is that abstinence leads to teen pregnancy and sexually transmitted
What is exactly birth control? Birth-control is the act of preventing pregnancy. Matters including medications procedures devices and behaviors. Another word for birth control is contraception. There are some frequent debates should teenage girls be allowed to get birth control without permission from the parents? In my opinion, birth control or contraceptives have a lot of serious side effects like mood changes, headaches, nausea, weight gaining etc. Teenage girls should not be allowed to get birth control without permission from their parents.
Thesis Statement: Research has shown that comprehensive sexual education is the best way to educate and help teenagers about topics like sex, sexuality, gender and much more, unlike other biased and inaccurate methods like abstinence-only education.
Restatement of the thesis statement: Providing sex education in schools is essential and will be significant in reducing teen reproductive indicators such as pregnancy, abortion, and HIV rates because the knowledge that is imparted shall enhance awareness and responsibility among the adolescents
One of the reasons why teenagers are already aware with this topic is because of media. They get a higher knowledge to sex from the magazines, TV shows, internet, movies and other
Teenage pregnancy is the pregnancy of a young woman, usually between the age of 13 and 19 years. The rate of teenage pregnancy is among the highest in the world. Teenage pregnancy is a major problem in South African rural areas and townships that may impact the future of a young woman. Children as young as 12 years fall pregnant due to social problems in townships. Social problems include parental guidance, access to government grant, peer pressure, substance abuse, poverty, job marketing and education. Most teenagers do not have enough information on sexuality and contraceptives. Teenagers engaging in unprotected sexual intercourse lead to unwanted teenage pregnancy which is a serious social and health problem. About half of all South African teenagers aged between 15 and 19 reported having had sex. Teenage pregnancy is considered as one major distraction to the success of many girls’ education. Teenage pregnancy is a social problem with biological and physical consequences. Sexual education is now part of the learning area ‘Life Skills” in schools, but teenagers still fall pregnant because they are not open and lack transparency when discussing sexual matters. Teenage pregnancy has always been a medical problem no matter how many young girls are educated about sexual intercourse, condoms, contraceptives and HIV/AIDS.
Sex is an essential aspect of human life. It is a natural phenomenon and without applying it the cycle of the human being cannot move ahead or cannot assume. Sex as being such an important part of our life, it is necessary for all to move detail knowledge and information about sex education. Regarding sex education everyone has their one perception. But, what exactly sex education is? Sex education is the process of developing in young people’s skill so that they can have a clear idea and can make their own choice based on the knowledge they have gained about the sex. Sex education is the process of obtaining information and forming attitudes and intimacy.