After School and Saturday and Sunday Classes • 50 min. program
At one of our locations or virtually in our VLP™ Program
Early Reading: Phonics, Language & Early Guided Reading
(PreK3-4 years/50 min class) Learn oral language, print awareness, build on letter recognition, letter stroke, phonological awareness, alphabetic principle, rhyme time & word play. Advanced concepts will include blending sounds to form words, vowels and consonants, high-frequency word recognition. Daily guided reading and oral language with comprehension through shared reading.
Multi-Sensory Language Enrichment K: Phonics, Word Play & Early Guided Reading
(Kindergarten/50 min class) Learn oral language, print awareness, letter recognition, letter stroke, phonological awareness, alphabetic principle, high-frequency word recognition and early guided reading.
Multi-Sensory Language Enrichment I: Phonics, Spelling & Guided Reading
1st grader/50 min class) Learn basic phonetic rules, decode words, linking and spelling program with letter stroke directionality and grammar. Guided reading, vocabulary enrichment and early fluency building with comprehension.
Multi-Sensory Language Enrichment II: Phonics, Spelling & Fluency Building
(2nd grade/50 min class) Learn advanced phonetic rules, letter stroke, decode words, spelling program which encompass the structure of the English language including sound/symbol relationships, prefix/suffix and syllable rules. Guided reading, vocabulary enrichment and fluency building with comprehension. *(beneficial to students with dyslexic tendencies).
Intervention Reading/Fluency Program
(3rd – 6th grade/50 min class) Designed for older, struggling students who are reading below grade level. Our RR intervention reading program is an intensive, therapeutic curriculum effective for students who are not quite reading at-level or a fluent/independent reader. Learn advanced phonetic and spelling rules, and decode words for proper word pronunciation. Also included, fluency building using high-interest level books in guided reading with vocabulary enrichment and fluency activities using interactive reading by modeling pace and expression.
(2nd – 6th grade/50 min class) Using passages, learn to summarize and synthesize as you read. Using critical thinking methods, review story development, prologue, character analysis, sequence, problem or irony in story, identifying piqué/turning points, vocabulary enhancement, authors purpose, tone, intent and story closure. Q & A test prep is included.
Intervention Spelling & Vocabulary Enhancement
(3rd- 6th grade/50 min class) Learn spelling while demonstrating a love of words! Created for fluent readers, but weak spellers that need to learn why a word is spelled the way it is. Sequential spelling lessons using explicit spelling instruction paired with phonology, sound production and sentence dictation. Grammar & Editing lessons with improving vocabulary, word usage and alphabetizing lessons.
Writing Lab: Handwriting, Guided Writing & Grammar
(PreK – 1st grade/50 min class) Our early handwriting program includes improving handwriting strokes and legibility with stroke formation using Manuscript. Guided Writing topics based from storybook literature reflections. Sentence development is encouraged while building emergent paragraphs & introduction to grammar.
Writing Lab: Written Expression
(2nd – 6th grade/50 min class) Explore a variety of writing topics through interactive writing (with a writing coach) while building paragraphs to emerging essays with enhanced vocabulary and descriptive details. Spelling rules, punctuation, grammar usage and legibility is included in our writing program.
Critical Thinking: Analysis & Reasoning
(5th-6th grade/50 min class) An in-depth approach to mastering comprehension, exploring analysis, reflection, argument and reasoned decision making using a logic-based approach. Broaden vocabulary with word study, connotations and analysis of topic sentences. Excellent combination to package with writing lab!