In order to understand the Steam evaluation system, it is necessary to include it in the general Vision and Mission, since it is one of the aspects interconnected with the teaching method.
The goal is to highlight the skills that the Steam student is able to progressively develop through the study of disciplinary content, experimentation in laboratory activities, the proactive attitude and problem solving put in place especially in the challenges of Action Learning Labs.
Hence the need to evaluate by areas of disciplinary groups:Science, Technology & Engineering, Arts / Humanities e Maths.
There are four main evaluation moments during each quarter:
Interim evaluations: formative monitoring evaluations conducted by each teacher during the Core Lessons of the various subjects.
Examination Week: a week, at the end of the quarter, which focuses on summative tests in all subjects. The grades obtained in these tests generally have a higher weight in the calculation of the quarterly average.
Project Work : final evaluation of the project developed during the two weeks dedicated to the Action Learning Lab. The grade takes into account the skills demonstrated in three key areas: process, product and presentation.
Personal Challenge (Expert test): a case study to highlight the meta-skills gained through the Action Learning Lab.
At the end of each quarter, the area grade is obtained by combining the grades of the various types of tests in appropriate proportions:
Subject grade:s obtained from the average of the grades of the formative and summative tests, weighted by the annual number of hours.
Action Learning Lab grade: is attributed to each work group and associated with the areas involved in the project.
Expert Test and Crash Courses grade:is attributed to individual students on the basis of the results obtained in the Personal Challenge and in the Crash Courses reports in which they participated and associated with the areas involved.
Special attention is paid to the monitoring and periodic evaluation of habits, through the 5 pillars of the Code of Honour:
Responsibility:motivation and sense of belonging
Cooperation:teamwork and solidarity
Autonomy:self-discipline and persistence
Initiative:initiative and decision-making ability
Organization:method and time management