2023 District Of Columbia Permit Test 19
The following questions are from real DMV written tests. These are some of the actual permit questions you will face in District Of Columbia. Each permit practice test question has three answer choices. Select one answer for each question and select "grade this section." You can find this button at the bottom of the drivers license quiz. For a complete list of questions and answers for District Of Columbia please visit https://cheat-sheets.dmv-written-test.com/en/district-of-columbia/car.
Number of Tests
Number of Question
1. You must stop for a school bus:
You must stop when approaching a school bus that is displaying flashing red lights while stopped to pick up or drop off children. On a two-lane road, traffic moving in both directions must stop and remain stopped as long as the red lights near the top of the bus are flashing and/or the stop arm on the left side of the bus is extended.
2. When making a right turn, you must:
When making a right turn at an intersection, you must yield to pedestrians in the intersecting crosswalk. Check for and yield to any bicyclists between you and the side of the road. Be alert to other vehicles that are also turning right.
3. This road sign means:
This sign prohibits drivers from making a U-turn. You cannot turn around to go in the opposite direction at an intersection where this sign is posted.
4. When you see or hear an emergency vehicle coming, you should:
When driving on a two-lane roadway or undivided highway, you must yield to an emergency vehicle using its lights and/or siren, regardless of the direction from which it is approaching. Immediately drive as near as possible to the right side of the road and stop, taking care not to stop within an intersection.
5. Excessive speed:
Excessive speed is one of the most common contributing factors to vehicle crashes. Excessive speed does not save time and often leads to high-risk decision-making.
6. Stopping distances and the severity of collisions:
Excessive vehicle speed can have disastrous effects. As a vehicle's speed increases, the potential impact of a collision also increases, elevating the possibility of serious injury and death. Increase your following distance as your speed increases to ensure that you will be able to stop safely if needed.
7. When driving at night on a dimly lit street, you should:
You should drive more slowly at night than during the day because it is not possible to see as far ahead at night. You should make sure that you can stop within the area illuminated by your headlights.
8. Highway pavement will be particularly treacherous and most slippery: