Developing Teamwork at Summer Camp
written on Dec 03, 2017
Playing sports during the school year goes a long way toward helping your child develop the ability to work as part of a team.
Canadian Adventure Camp offers a unique set of opportunities for your child to develop an appreciation for the beauty of teamwork.
Recognizing and Learning to Use Individual Differences
Kids come to summer camp with unique personalities and skill sets that all contribute to the team.
However, it takes time and experience for kids to learn how to view individual differences as a benefit for their team activities.
As kids practice and play sports together, they learn how to identify each person’s individual strengths.
Then, they begin to practice applying what they learned by encouraging each person to use their strengths to help meet team goals.
Since every kid has something special to contribute, everyone can stand out while still maintaining a team mindset.
Providing Opportunities to Develop Confidence and Leadership
Being part of a team means working with others. Yet, it takes true confidence to know how to stand back and let someone else shine for the sake of the team.
Every team also needs a leader who can help draw out each person’s abilities.
Summer camp programs allow every child to have an opportunity to lead the group, whether they are hiking or planning a strategy to reach the top of a rope course.
As kids participate in these types of team challenges, they also develop the confidence to continue striving toward improving their ability to reach goals with the other campers.
Practicing Teamwork in Challenging Situations
It is not easy being on a team. At times, conflicts arise that younger campers may not know how to handle.
This is the reason every team activity at camp includes support from a staff member or older camper. They can help kids develop problem-solving skills.
Whether two members of a team disagree about how to proceed during a soccer game, or the whole group is confused about how to navigate around a difficult whitewater rafting course, it is only through working out these challenges that kids can develop even stronger abilities to work with other kids.
Enjoying the Benefits of Learning to Work as a Team
Working as a team means sharing the load of responsibility. It also allows kids to learn from each other.
For instance, playing on a basketball team can help a kid refine their individual skills at shooting a basket by watching what the other members of their group do.
Teamwork also teaches kids positive communication skills, and having the support of their teammates encourages kids to strive toward higher achievements.
At Canadian Adventure Camp, kids are always encouraged to adopt a team mindset. This allows them to thrive as individuals while also learning how to work together with others.
Whether competing in a sports competition with a rival camp or gathering around the campfire to sing songs, learning how to work with others in their group is just another perk of spending the summer at camp.
Canadian Adventure Camp is a North Ontario coed sleepover summer camp for kids located on a beautiful private island in the wilderness lakes region of Temagami. Founded in 1975, it provides acclaimed programs to children from around the world!