The design of hammer breaker
Hammermill is a section of crusher that directly crushes materials with a particle size of 600-1800 mm to 25 or less. Hammermill mainly uses the impact action to complete the crushing operation. When the hammer crusher works, the motor drives the rotor to rotate at a high speed, and the material enters the crusher cavity uniformly.
The high-speed rotating hammerhead impacts, shears, and tears the material, which causes the material to be broken. At the same time, the gravity of the material makes the material rushing from the high-speed rotating hammerhead into the baffle and sieve bar in the frame. Materials larger than the size of the sieve are retained on the plate and continue to be hit and ground by the hammer until they are crushed to the required output size and finally discharged out of the machine through the sieve plate.
How many series of hammer mills?
In general, there are two kinds of hammer mills: the heavy hammer mill and small hammer mill
|PCZ heavy hammer mill||Feed||Output|
|PCZ heavy hammer mill||≤1200mm||≤80-3000t / h|
|PCX shaping hammer mil||≤300mm||≤40-1200t / h|
|Small hammer mill||≤350mm||≤5-5500t / h|
- Generally speaking, the crushers that can process the glass and coal are mostly hammer mill
- The heavy hammer mill has the castor while other hammer crushers don’t have.
- Hammer usually don’t reduce the construction waste
Small hammer mill:
Application: this kind of crusher is suitable for crushing medium hardness and brittle materials in mining, cement, coal, metallurgy, building materials, highway, and other industries.
Working principle: The motor drives the rotor to rotate at high speed in the crushing cavity. The material is fed into the machine from the upper feeding port and is crushed by a high-speed moving hammer. In the lower part of the rotor, there is a sieve plate, and the particle size smaller than the sieve size of the crushed material is discharged through the sieve plate. The coarse grain size larger than the sieve size is retained on the sieve plate and continues to be hit and ground by the hammer.
small hammer mill can process material with no more than 150Mpa
(1) Unique design, compact structure
The seal structure of the body solves the problems of dust pollution and ash leakage in the crushing workshop.
(2) Adjustable granularity
The required granularity can be adjusted according to customer requirements
(3) Abrasion and impact resistance
The hammer is cast with a new process, with fewer wearing parts and convenient maintenance.
Observe the gap between the rotor head and the sieve plate of the rotor, adjust it appropriately, and test the machine after installation.
Abrasion and impact resistance hammerhead is cast with a new process, with fewer wearing parts and convenient maintenance.
Heavy hammer crusher
PCZ hammer mill can reduce all kinds of stones
Heavy hammer crusher can be divided into two categories: PCZ heavy hammer mill and PCX shaping hammer mill. The heavy hammer mill has the characteristics of simple structure, large crushing ratio, and high production efficiency.
Application: Heavy hammer crusher is especially suitable for crushing limestone and stone with a medium hardness of less than 200Mpa.
PCX hammer mill can make fine sized material
1.reduce cost, low energy consumption
2. it is widely used for crushing all kinds of stones
The heavy hammer crusher uses a big hammerhead, dual power, and strong crushing strength. The heavy hammer crusher is used in the sand and stone production line to produce the desired material with only one crushing, which greatly improved the crushing efficiency.
|Catalog||Heavy hammer mill (PCZ)||Heavy hammer breaking (PCX)|
|dual motor||90-1250 kW||110-220 kW|
Particle size of the hammer mill grinder
As we all know that different models of hammer mill have different granularity and different uses. Let’s take the 600×400 hammer mill as an example. It is the smallest one among the hammer mills, so what is the granularity of the hammer crusher?
|model||feeding size(mm)||discharging size(mm)||capacity((m³/h))||power (kW)||size(mm)|
People should also know that the granularity is also impacted by the size of the raw material which means that if the grain size of the raw material is large, the product with the elongated and flaky particles is much less.
How to choose the best industrial hammer?
High Manganese Steel Hammer Head
The matrix structure of the high manganese steel hammerhead is austenite, which has better toughness. This hammerhead has good wear resistance and weaker impact resistance. It is more suitable for the initial breaking of large particle sizes and the price is slightly cheaper. Commonly used materials are ZGMn13 which is the most widely used in crushing machinery.
High chromium alloy hammer
The high chromium alloy hammerhead is slightly inferior in wear resistance but has good impact resistance. It is more suitable for secondary crushing, but the price is slightly more expensive.
This three kinds of the hammer have different characteristics
High wear-resistant double alloy hammerhead
The service life of the high-wear-resistant dual-alloy hammerhead can reach more than 5 times that of high-manganese steel. The casting process is centrifugal pressure casting, which avoids the problem of inlaying and easy to fall off and non-wearing but the price is the highest. In general, high-manganese steel hammerheads are more popular both in price and service life.
How to do the small parts replacement?
- Clean the materials in the cavity first, and then adjust the rotor to a suitable position;
- Use related equipment to remove the bulge caused by the abrasion on both sides of the hammerhead of the hammer crusher;
- Place the removed hammerhead, pin, fixing sleeve and bolts in a place that will not affect the construction;
- Lift the new hammerhead to the mouth of the crusher to prevent it from shifting; install a pipe from the bed to the rotor, hold the hammerhead to the appropriate position, and pay attention to the head of the hammerhead facing downwards; then Pins and bolts.
- Observe the gap between the rotor head and the sieve plate of the rotor, adjust it appropriately, and test the machine after installation.
simple steps to change the hammer head
Remind you that when replacing the hammer mill head, you should carefully check the weight of each hammerhead to ensure the balance of the rotor as much as possible. After installation, you need to check the rotation. Pay attention to all bolts to be fixed by welding. Clean up the site in time, test the machine after all the personnel have withdrawn, and observe the current and vibration.