(SD; Adductor Laryngeal Breathing Dystonia (ABLD); Adductor Spasmodic Dysphonia; Abductor Spasmodic Dysphonia; Dysphonia, Episodic Laryngeal Dyskinesia; Laryngeal Dystonia; Spastic Dysphonia)
How to Say It: dis-FOH-nee-ah
by Cynthia M. Johnson, MA
Spasmodic dysphonia (SD) is a voice disorder. The muscles of the throat freeze or go into spasms. This makes it hard to speak.
The main types of SD are:
SD is caused by a problem with the central nervous system. The areas of the brain that control these muscle movements are deep within the brain.
SD is more common in women and people who are between 30 and 50 years of age.
Other things that may raise the risk are:
Problems may be:
The doctor will ask about your symptoms and health history. A physical exam will be done.
Images may be taken. This can be done with:
You may be referred to a team of specialists, such as:
There is no cure. The goal of treatment is to manage symptoms. Choices are:
People who are not helped by other methods may need surgery to cut or remove a nerve that is connected to the vocal cords.
There are no current guidelines to prevent SD.
American Speech-Language-Hearing Association
National Spasmodic Dysphonia Association
Ontario Association of Speech-Language Pathologists and Audiologists
Speech-Language and Audiology Canada
Hintze JM, Ludlow CL, et al. Spasmodic dysphonia: A revie. Part 1: Pathogenic factors. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2017;157(4):551-557.
Hintze JM, Ludlow CL, et al. Spasmodic dysphonia: A revie. Part 2:Characterization of pathophysiology. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2017;157(4):558-564.
Spasmodic dysphonia. American Speech-Language-Hearing Association website. Available at: https://www.asha.org/public/speech/disorders/spasmodic-dysphonia. Accessed January 26, 2021.
Spasmodic dysphonia. National Institute on Deafness and Other Communicative Disorders website. Available at:
...(Click grey area to select URL)
Accessed January 26, 2021.
Spasmodic dysphonia. National Spasmodic Dysphonia Association website. Available at: https://dysphonia.org/voice-conditions/spasmodic-dysphonia. Accessed January 26, 2021.
Last reviewed December 2020 by EBSCO Medical Review Board Rimas Lukas, MD
Last Updated: 1/26/2021
EBSCO Information Services is fully accredited by URAC. URAC is an independent, nonprofit health care accrediting organization dedicated to promoting health care quality through accreditation, certification and commendation.
This content is reviewed regularly and is updated when new and relevant evidence is made available. This information is neither intended nor implied to be a substitute for professional medical advice. Always seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider prior to starting any new treatment or with questions regarding a medical condition.
To send comments or feedback to our Editorial Team regarding the content please email us at firstname.lastname@example.org. Our Health Library Support team will respond to your email request within 2 business days.
All rights reserved.