Torchlight’s Level 5 curriculum for learners ages 10-14 is titled Equity & Ethics. In Level 5, we take a short diverted path away from a heavy history focus, although history is woven in, to a social studies core with a geography spotlight. Our materials will take us from the inner workings of cities to globalization and citizenship, helping us see how our current civilizations function from within and the relationships we maintain for a more significant benefit for all people.
We will look at our global community and how we can become effective global citizens. We will be dismantling our natural propensity to stereotype by learning how our brains work and when it is helpful to categorize versus harmful. Then we will work on gaining tools to help us better understand our global neighbors and ourselves, no matter our differences.
Art is getting edgy with Torchlight’s The Art of Rock & Roll, vol. I, a 19-lesson self-contained curriculum that will introduce learners to genres, movements, and music rebels. Our focus will be on rock and roll artists and those that influenced them and were influenced by them. Art lessons, such as design, photography, and more, are woven throughout the genre and artist studies, along with activities, extensive listening experiences, and music history. Level 5 will also mix art with our geography lessons, creating a hands-on, fun look at maps, biomes, and habitats.
We started our Brave the Page novel writing journey in Level 4. If you are new to Torchlight, we are guided through this project with Brave the Page, in conjunction with National Novel Writing Month (NaNoWriMo), and it culminates in becoming a published author! We will try our now experienced hand at creative writing in a second novel writing project before moving onto a new writing focus in Level 6.
Level 5’s poetry will help us understand how to read poetry with more depth. Instead of sprinkling poetry throughout our year, we will pair our studies with a literature selection that uses poetry to explore life’s truths through the eyes of poets.
Each of Level 5’s literature selections use Torchlight’s Literature Primers. The Primers provide insight into the book’s value, vocabulary, possible concerns to watch for while reading, and inquiry-based discussion opportunities. Literature Primers will prepare you as the learning partner without tying you to a script to create more natural and authentic conversations. Our literature will take us to different countries and cultures, take a glimpse into mental health, activism, and provide some own-voices representation of the beautiful diversity of the human race, among other themes. We will observe a character’s self-discovery through depression, with a strong support system and changing circumstances, walk alongside a Malaysian pelesit that must unpack past damage to learn the true meaning of friendship, and witness a character settling into their identity as they grow and change. From outward activism to internal struggle, we will explore what drives humanity.
Science will be an integrated approach using Scientific Connections through Inquiry (SCI) Level 5, biomes studies with projects, and a collection of the fantastic science trade books paired with scientific topics explored in our literature selections. From the Amazon and its trees to constellations and black holes, learners will participate in Torchlight’s inaugural Book Club Reader program (BCR). BCRs are assigned to the learner and allow deeper dives into topics of study tied to the main subjects. They are given a recommended pace for reading to keep the selections aligned with their academic work and asked to lead discussions through a book club format with their learning partner.
Lastly, Torchlight’s The Art of Navigating Finance will introduce the basics of money and sound financial decision-making through lessons paired with activities that will support them in putting their skills and understanding into practice. We will finish the finance unit with studies on responsible consumerism, an inoculation against common marketing techniques that will prepare learners to evaluate psychological tactics to get them to spend. The Art of Navigating Finance will provide a more holistic look at finances for a balanced economic future.
Let’s welcome a worldview expanding academic year with Torchlight Level 5!
Torchlight Level 5: Ethics & Equity
Daily and Weekly Lesson plan with prep pages for 36 weeks of:
- Literature, Poetry, Vocabulary, Social Studies, Geography, Science, Arts, Equity & Ethics.
- Writing and editing opportunities linked to the literature & a long-term writing project.
- Linked book list
- Weekly library checklist
- Linked media within each lesson
- Additional linked
- Supplemental lists (books, apps, media, etc.)
- Extension activities for seamless further or elevated learning within each week
- Torchlight’s exclusive Literature Primers Include:
- Torchlight’s intent when scheduling the book (educational value)
- Notes on possible secular and ethical issues prior to scheduled readings
- Socratic-inspired discussion outlines
- Engagement opportunities
- Vocabulary Journal (My Vocabulary Spell Book)
- List of alternate/replacement books for easy tailoring of the program to suit each family’s needs
- Original activities to solidify learning and skills
- Recommendations for Math and Grammar (added by learning partners)
Studies included in the Level 5 Bundle:
The Art of Rock & Roll
IMPORTANT NOTE: Included in Level 5 Bundle, PLEASE DO NOT DOUBLE PURCHASE. The Art of Rock & Roll, vol. I is part of the Torchlight Level 5 bundle, which provides a discount on this individual study. Unfortunately, we cannot offer retroactive discounts if The Art of Rock & Roll, vol. I is purchased separately from Torchlight Level 5.
The Art of Rock & Roll, vol. I: Beginnings through 1980 is a 19-lesson self-contained curriculum that explores the rock and roll genre through its history, influences, artists, listening, activities, and hands-on art projects—The Art of Rock & Roll, vol. I is a diverse modern look at how art can affect change and reflect life. The study includes a list of optional extension books, resources, and literature selections that align well with the study material. This study is scheduled within Torchlight Level 5: Equality & Ethics and can be purchased as part of a Level 5 bundle, or it can be used as a stand-alone program and paired with any program of your choice.
Study length: 62 pages. Can be printed double-sided.
The Art of Navigating Finance: Introduction to Finance & Responsible Consumerism
Purchase separately here
IMPORTANT NOTE: Included in Level 5 Bundle, PLEASE DO NOT DOUBLE PURCHASE. The Art of Navigating Finance: Introduction to Finance & Responsible Consumerism is part of the Torchlight Level 5 bundle, which provides a discount on this individual study. Unfortunately, we cannot offer retroactive discounts if The Art of Navigating Finance is purchased separately from Torchlight Level 5.
Torchlight’s The Art of Navigating Finance: Introduction to Finance & Responsible Consumerism is a 16-lesson finance lab that will introduce the basics of money and sound financial decision-making through lessons paired with readings and activities that will support them in putting their new skills and understanding into practice. The closing lessons include studies on responsible consumerism, an inoculation against common marketing techniques that will prepare learners to evaluate psychological tactics to get them to spend. The Art of Navigating Finance will provide a more holistic look at finances for a balanced economic future.
Study length: 58 pages. Meant to be printed single-sided to allow the cutting of game pieces and materials.
Level 5 Booklist
Planet Earth Is Blue
The Care and Feeding of a Pet Black Hole
A Girl, a Raccoon, and the Midnight Moon: (Juvenile Fiction, Mystery, Young Reader Detective Story, Light Fantasy for Kids)
Ana on the Edge
When You Trap a Tiger: (Newbery Medal Winner)
Music for Tigers
The Sea in Winter
From the Desk of Zoe Washington
The Girl and the Ghost
The Simple Art of Flying
The Girl Who Speaks Bear
The Starspun Web
Global Citizenship: Engage in the Politics of a Changing World
Micronations: Invent Your Own Country and Culture with 25 Projects
For Which We Stand: How Our Government Works and Why It Matters
Cities: Discover How They Work with 25 Projects$16.95 (as of March 22, 2023 08:03 GMT -07:00 - More infoProduct prices and availability are accurate as of the date/time indicated and are subject to change. Any price and availability information displayed on [relevant Amazon Site(s), as applicable] at the time of purchase will apply to the purchase of this product.)
Globalization: Why We Care About Faraway Events
History Comics: The Challenger Disaster: Tragedy in the Skies
Biomes: Discover the Earth’s Ecosystems with Environmental Science Activities for Kids (Build It Yourself)
The Wild World Handbook: Habitats
The Wondrous Workings of Planet Earth: Understanding Our World and Its Ecosystems
A Black Hole Is Not a Hole
Science Comics: Spiders: Worldwide Webs
A Shot in the Arm!: Big Ideas that Changed the World #3
Can You Hear The Trees Talking?: Discovering the Hidden Life of the Forest
Deep into the Amazon Jungle (Fabien Cousteau Expeditions)
All in a Drop: How Antony van Leeuwenhoek Discovered an Invisible World
What We See in the Stars: An Illustrated Tour of the Night Sky
Plasticus Maritimus: An Invasive Species (David Suzuki Institute)
Torchlight: The Art of Rock & Roll, vol. I
Legends, Icons & Rebels: Music That Changed the World
Torchlight: The Art of Navigating Finance