If you’re reading this post, you have probably had a few encounters with freelance clients that didn’t go exactly as you wanted or how you planned. If you are new to freelancing, it's great to incorporate these tips and practices sooner rather than later. 

While it’s true you must stick up for yourself in any workplace, it can be especially true for freelancers. You are your own business, boss, and employee. If you feel that you could use some tactics to come across as more confident and assertive while remaining professional, keep reading. 

It's best to avoid noncommittal words and phrases like “maybe, sometimes, in my opinion, and sorry.” While this may be your way of speaking to sound polite, it can come across as “wishy-washy” to a client. Replace them with words like “yes, no, always, and exactly.”

Research the client beforehand. If you are taking on a new client, be sure and research them or their company before starting the work or before your initial meeting. This may seem more obvious to some than others. This is part of a client-centered approach and ensures you are prepared to tailor your work to their needs. 

Make a checklist of questions. Whenever a question occurs to you, it’s important to jot it down and ask at your next interaction. This tells a client that you are paying attention, prepared, and respectful of their time. 

Have prepared responses. There are certain things that, as a freelancer, you should have a straightforward answer to. These things include your rate, experience, and how long it takes you to complete a project.  

Don’t be guilted into anything. It can be tempting to overcommit at times, especially when it is for a client that is very valuable to you. However, committing to work that is beyond your bandwidth or skillset can negatively impact both you and the client. It’s better to be honest and reliable rather than to underdeliver. 

Much of speaking to clients with confidence is the work that goes on behind the scenes. It’s about being prepared so that each time you speak or interact, you will feel and come across as more confident during each interaction.
