DAR revisits the history of Savannah, Georgia | News
Savannah, GA, a place of history, a place of mystery, was founded as the first English settlement in Georgia in 1733 on land purchased for the Crown by James Edward Oglethorpe from the Yamacraw Indians. Tomochichi, their chief, with Mary Musgrove acting as interpreter, met with Oglethorpe at Yamacraw Bluff and negotiated the transaction. Oglethorpe had developed a plan for this town that was neatly laid out in squares on the banks of the Savannah River just across from South Carolina. The squares served as parks around which stately houses were built.
This was the Age of Enlightenment where religious tolerance was practiced. As a retreat from the Spanish Catholics in Europe and the New World, Protestants located here. There were Moravians, French Huguenots, Scottish Presbyterians as well as Jews.
The Congregation Mickve Israel is the third oldest synagogue in the United States, having been establish in 1733 by mostly Sephardic Jews. It is the only Gothic style synagogue in America; It is located in Monterey Square, one of twenty two squares in the city. Later the city embraced Irish, French and Greeks. In 1742, during the War of Jenkins’ Ear, when Spanish tried to capture the area to reinstate Catholicism in Georgia, many Jews feared for their lives and left the coastal city. The congregation, bereft of many of its members, largely disappeared but was re-established in 1790.
The land around Savannah was perfect for growing rice, indigo and cotton. The islands surrounding it contained rich soil and sufficient water for these crops. In addition the Savannah and Wilmington Rivers as well as others served as a water highway for transporting these goods and deer skins from interior reaches to the ships that would carry the raw materials to the North and to Europe. Savannah became a city of much commerce as cotton factors strolled their high walks, watching the cotton arrive by boat. Other raw materials were exported while manufactured goods and clothes were imported.
Savannah became a Royal Colony in 1754 and was the colonial capital of Georgia. Tensions with England arose early on over taxes and manufacturing costs. The Anglican Church, the official church of England, supported the British while the Protestant denominations favored separation from England.
Noble Jones, a friend of James Oglethorpe, was caught up in the controversy over whether the new land should remain a colony of Great Britain or pursue separation from the homeland. He built Wormsloe Plantation in a land grant about 8 miles from Savannah and fortified it against any enemies, especially the Spanish. He was known as “The Morning Star of Liberty,” serving in state and provincial governments. Having fielded Savannah when the town was captured by the British in 1778, Jones was captured in Charleston then released. He then practiced medicine until his death.
Meanwhile, Savannah grew as the Creek and Cherokee Indians ceded land in the interior. Some of these lands reached toward Augusta, a town founded in 1736. The Treaty of Paris allowed the deer hide trade to flourish, sending the hides to Europe and further expanding Savannah’s wealth and importance.
Early in the Revolutionary War, Savannah fell under British control. American and French troops tried to hold the city but were overpowered by the British in the Siege of Savannah. It came under Union control during the Civil War when William Tecumseh Sherman won the city for President Abraham Lincoln.
In 1785 the State Assembly met in Savannah to create the first state-chartered university in the country -The University of Georgia. The Savannah Golf Club, the first golf club in the country, followed soon after, and then Candler Hospital, one of the oldest hospitals in America.
Savannah’s cemeteries, especially Bonaventure and Colonial Cemetery are the settings for a host of ghost stories. At one time a railroad was planned to bisect the Colonial Cemetery where Sherman’s soldiers desecrated many graves. Bonaventure is often said to be the subject of Johnny Mercer’s song “Moon River.”
Today, despite fires, wars and devastating outbreaks of yellow fever, Savannah continues to flourish. Its Bonaventure Cemetery draws tourists as do its beautiful squares and lovely houses. SCAD, Savannah School of Art and Design, is famous across the country. The rowdy St. Patrick’s Day celebration brings folks in from all over the Southeast. Riverwalk draws shoppers and cafe goers alike. Savannah has a vibe all its own. Savannah has been hosting the filming of the movies “Midnight in the Garden of Good and Evil,” “Forrest Gump,” “Savannah Sunrise,” and others. The city respects the past while moving constantly toward the future.
The Captain John Wilson Chapter is part of the National Society of Daughters of the American Revolution and is a 501(c) non-profit, non-political women’s service organization. DAR objectives are historical, educational and patriotic and its motto is “God, home and country.” Any woman 18 years or older who can prove lineal bloodline descent from an ancestor who aided in achieving American independence is eligible to join the DAR. Please refer to www.dar.org other www.johnwilson.georgiastatedar.org for more information about the organization.
Comments are closed.