How cold was it when it snowed in Florida in 1977?
That day, the high temperature was a chilly 47 degrees, with temps dipping into the 30s. The farthest south snow had been previously observed in Florida was along a Fort Myers to Fort Pierce line in February 1899. The 1977 snow caused more than $300 million in agricultural damage in South Florida.
What day in 1977 did it snow in Florida?
On Jan. 19, 1977, snow fell in South Florida for the first time in recorded history. Residents and visitors were both surprised and thrilled at the rare phenomena, and local newspapers ran headlines which were nearly as big as it would be for major national or world events.
When was the last time there were snow flurries in Florida?
Latest Weather As for snow, snow flurries have been seen in northern Florida as recent as 2017, but 1977 on average was recorded as one of the coldest years in the United States, according to The Weather Channel.
When was there a blizzard in Florida?
In Miami, Fort Lauderdale, and Palm Beach there has been only one known report of snow flurries observed in the air in more than 200 years; this occurred in January 1977 (though debate exists as to if this was rime or snow).
What is the coldest temperature ever recorded in South Florida?
The coldest temperature recorded in Miami was on January 22, 1985, when it dipped to 30 degrees and on January 19 and 20, the day it snowed in Miami when the lowest temperature recorded was 31.
Has Florida ever had a snow storm?
It was also known as the “Cold Wave of January 1977,” and this event brought the first and only known trace of snow in the Miami-area. West Palm Beach reported its first snowfall in the morning and it reached down to the Ranger station in far southern Dade County, where a trace was measured.
Did snow ever fall in the Sahara Desert?
Snowfall in a hot desert may seem a contradiction but snow has been recorded several times in the Sahara Desert over the last decades, most recently in January 2022. Thus, snowfall may be unusual but is not unprecedented in the region.
What is the farthest south it has snowed in Florida?
Prior to 1977, the furthest south snowfall was ever documented in Florida was a line stretching from Fort Myers across to Fort Pierce in February 1899, according to the National Weather Service in Miami.
What is considered South Florida?
South Florida refers to Broward, Miami-Dade and Monroe Counties . Treasure Coast refers to Palm Beach , Martin, St. Lucie and Indian River Counties . Click here for an overview of the demographic characteristics of the region made up of both South Florida and Treasure Coast , also referred to as Southeast Florida .
What year did it snow in Jacksonville Florida?
JACKSONVILLE, Fla. The Christmas of 1989 was one to remember for the city, with so much snow sticking to the ground that people sledded down the Dames Point Bridge. The historic event resulted when arctic air pushed temperatures below freezing through Florida with ice accumulating down to Miami.
Did It Snow in South Florida in 1977?
On January 19th, 1977, snow fell in South Florida for the first time in recorded history. Residents and visitors were both surprised and thrilled at the rare phenomena, and local newspapers ran headlines which were nearly as big as it would be for major national or world events.
How rare is snow in Florida?
For most of the peninsula, especially Central and South Florida, it is indeed an exceptionally rare event. The farthest south snow had been previously observed was along a Fort Myers to Fort Pierce line in February 1899.
Where is the farthest south it has ever snowed in Florida?
Previous to Jan. 19, 1977, the farthest south snow had been seen was along a line from Fort Myers to Fort Pierce in February 1899, according to the National Weather Service in Miami.
Why did it snow in January in Florida?
The snow came on the heels of a strong arctic cold front which moved rapidly down the Florida peninsula on gusty northwest winds of over 30 mph from late on January 18ththrough the pre-dawn hours of January 19th.