This is a question our experts keep getting from time to time. Now, we have got the complete detailed explanation and answer for everyone, who is interested!
If the discriminant of a quadratic function is less than zero, that function has no real roots, and the parabola it represents does not intersect the x-axis.
What does a discriminant less than 0 mean?
When the discriminant is equal to 0, there is exactly one real root. When the discriminant is less than zero, there are no real roots, but there are exactly two distinct imaginary roots. In this case, we have two distinct imaginary roots. Finally, we use the quadratic function to find these exact roots.
Why is the discriminant greater than zero?
If the discriminant is greater than zero, this means that the quadratic equation has two real, distinct (different) roots. x2 – 5x + 2. If the discriminant is greater than zero, this means that the quadratic equation has no real roots. Therefore, there are no real roots to the quadratic equation 3x2 + 2x + 1.
What is the value of the discriminant?
The discriminant of the quadratic formula is the quantity under the radical, b2−4ac b 2 − 4 a c . It determines the number and the type of solutions that a quadratic equation has. If the discriminant is positive, there are 2 real solutions. If it is 0 , there is 1 real repeated solution.
Is a discriminant of zero rational?
The discriminant is 0, so the equation has a double root. If the discriminant is a perfect square, then the solutions to the equation are not only real, but also rational. If the discriminant is positive but not a perfect square, then the solutions to the equation are real but irrational.
How To Determine The Discriminant of a Quadratic Equation
32 related questions found
How do you know if a discriminant is negative?
The discriminant is the term underneath the square root in the quadratic formula and tells us the number of solutions to a quadratic equation. If the discriminant is positive, we know that we have 2 solutions. If it is negative, there are no solutions and if the discriminant is equal to zero, we have one solution.
How many solutions does a discriminant of 0 have?
If the discriminant is positive, there are 2 real solutions. If it is 0 , there is 1 real repeated solution. If the discriminant is negative, there are 2 complex solutions (but no real solutions).
Why is getting the discriminant important?
The quadratic equation discriminant is important because it tells us the number and type of solutions. This information is helpful because it serves as a double check when solving quadratic equations by any of the four methods (factoring, completing the square, using square roots, and using the quadratic formula).
What does discriminant mean in algebra?
Discriminant, in mathematics, a parameter of an object or system calculated as an aid to its classification or solution. … A discriminant can be found for the general quadratic, or conic, equation ax2 + bxy + cy2 + dx + ey + f = 0; it indicates whether the conic represented is an ellipse, a hyperbola, or a parabola.
What is the value of discriminant of the equation x2 10x 7 0?
Discriminant (D) = b² – 4ac.
What are real and distinct roots?
If an equation has real roots, then the solutions or roots of the equation belongs to the set of real numbers. If the equation has distinct roots, then we say that all the solutions or roots of the equations are not equal. When a quadratic equation has a discriminant greater than 0, then it has real and distinct roots.
How many roots if discriminant is negative?
If the discriminant is positive, then you have , which leads to two real number answers. If it’s negative, you have , which gives two complex results. And if b2 – 4ac is 0, then you have , so you have only one solution.
What is the discriminant of 3x 2 10x =- 2?
Find the discriminant of 3×2-10x=-2
To find : The discriminant ? Here, a=3, b=-10 and c=2. Substitute the values, Therefore, the discriminant of is 76.
When discriminant 0 then the roots are?
Clearly, the discriminant of the given quadratic equation is zero. Therefore, the roots are real and equal.
How do you know if roots are imaginary?
Imaginary roots appear in a quadratic equation when the discriminant of the quadratic equation – the part under the square root sign (b2 – 4ac) – is negative. If this value is negative, you can’t actually take the square root, and the answers are not real.
What happens when B 2 4ac 0?
The quantity b2−4ac is called the discriminant of the polynomial. If b2−4ac < 0 the equation has no real number solutions, but it does have complex solutions. If b2−4ac = 0 the equation has a repeated real number root. If b2−4ac > 0 the equation has two distinct real number roots.
Why is it called a discriminant?
The argument (that is, the contents) of the square root, being the expression b2 – 4ac, is called the “discriminant” because, by using its value, you can “discriminate” between (that is, be able to tell the difference between) the various solution types.
What is another word for discriminant?
In this page you can discover 12 synonyms, antonyms, idiomatic expressions, and related words for discriminant, like: univariate, gcd, , chi-square, real-valued, bivariate, glm, variate, PARAFAC, parametric and cross-validation.
How important is the expression B² 4ac?
The expression b2 – 4ac from beneath the radical sign is called the discriminant, and it can actually determine for you how many solutions a given quadratic equation has, if you don’t feel like actually calculating them.
What does it mean when the discriminant is a negative integer?
A discriminant of zero indicates that the quadratic has a repeated real number solution. A negative discriminant indicates that neither of the solutions are real numbers.
Why is there only one real solution when the discriminant equals zero?
If the discriminant is zero, then the quadratic equation has only one real solution. The discriminant is the expression b2 – 4ac under the radical in the quadratic formula. … To get a discriminant of zero, we need to set b2 – 4ac equal to zero. This gives us b2 – 4ac = 0, or b2 = 4ac.
What is a real solution in quadratic equation?
If the discriminant is greater than 0, the quadratic equation has 2 real solutions. If the discriminant is equal to 0, the quadratic equation has 1 real solution. If the discriminant is less than 0, the quadratic equation has 0 real solutions.
Why do quadratic equations equal zero?
The simple answer to your question is that so you can find the roots. It is very common to need to know when an equation (quadratic or other) is equal to zero. That is why you set it to zero and solve.