An exclusive portrait of women in the works of Indian writers in English literatureAuthor(s):
Caroline Satur and Dr. Sunil GourahaAbstract:
“If others see something feminist in my writings, I must say that it is not consciously done. It is because the world for women is like that and I am mirroring the world.
The seed of Indian writing in English was sown during the period of the British rule in India. Now the seed has blossomed into an ever green tree, fragrant flowers and ripe fruits. The fruits are being tasted not only by the native people, but they are also being ‘chewed and digested’ by the foreigners. It happened only after the constant caring, pruning and feeding. Gardeners’ like Tagore, Sri Aurobindo, R.K. Narayan, Raja Rao-to name only a few, looked after the tender plant night and day. In modern time, it is guarded by a number of writers who are getting awards and accolades all over the world. Bankim Chandra Chattopadhyay (1838-1894) wrote Rajmohan's Wife and published it in 1864. It is the first Indian novel written in English.
Jai Shankar Prasad, who was famous for his strong portrayals of women became popular for famously glorifying women. A popular verse from one of his most widely read poems, ‘Kamayani’ reads - "Nari! Tum kewal shraddha ho, Vishwas-rajat-nag-pal-tal mein, Piyush strot si baha karo, Jeevan ki sundar samtal mein. (Oh woman! You are honour personified, under the silver mountain of faith, Flow you, like a river of ambrosia, on this beautiful earth)”.R.K. Narayan was one among greatest Indian novelists. He wrote many novels such as, “Mr. Sampath” (1949), “The Financial Expert”(1952), “Waiting for the Mahatma” (1955), “The Guide” (1958), “The Vendor of Sweets” (1967), “The Painter of Signs” (1977) etc. Most of his novels were on contemporary social issues. His novel have women characters not as central characters but are often secondary characters like mother, sister, friends, wife or foreigners. He portrays female characters who accept marriage as their fate, about which they can do nothing but suffer patiently. These characters are ever shy and demure as traditional Indian women should always be.
Since the time of the first explorers to the present, women’s roles and portrayal in literature reflect the changes occurring historically for women. The insignificance and oppression of women prior to the mid-19th century is related by the small roles of females in literature. As women gained equality, the heroine continued to change. By studying these changes, it is observed that not only do the characters embody the female identity, but also the heroines transform into the new figures that women aspire to be. A woman is a dawn of light where all the darkness disappears. She is the sun that enlightens everyone and beholds the ability to vanish all the fear that grows in darkness of mind. Women are essentially the origin of life. No one can cast a doubt on the substantiality of women that they are the ultimate creators of this very existence. The woman strengthens the foundation of family as a mother, daughter, sister, and wife embracing everyone with the unconditional love. If allowed to grow their potential they not only enhance a women's world as writers, entrepreneurs, mystics, painters, counsellors, scientists but can also provide a better vision to the men's world. Pages: 107-109 | Views: 2774 | Downloads: 1996Download Full Article: Click Here
How to cite this article:
Caroline Satur, Dr. Sunil Gouraha. An exclusive portrait of women in the works of Indian writers in English literature. Int J Adv Acad Stud 2020;2(2):107-109.