Apr 24, 2023 - May 16, 2023
Full course description
Online Only | Oftentimes, an educator’s implicit bias is demonstrated through discourse and actions when responding to motivating and disciplining discouraged learners. In this course, participants will self-examine their responses to unmotivated student behavior by resetting their mindset and bias towards students’ behavioral challenges and subsequently focus on positive academic and social emotional well-being.
This 30-hour online course supports currently practicing classroom teachers of all subjects and grade levels, counselors, and social workers in developing teaching strategies and resources that capture individual student interests and strengths. Issues as to why students become discouraged and ways in which to increase their motivation will be explored. This course focuses on how to engage and encourage unmotivated students by addressing their individual academic, social, emotional, and behavioral needs. Teachers learn key processes that provide the appropriate amount of challenge, student choice, and risk-taking activities that enable students to find personal relevance and meaning in school work. Participants will create a motivation action plan that targets the needs of a discouraged learner. This offering is aligned to the CPS Framework for Teaching Components 1a, 1b, 1d, 2a, 2b, 2d, 3a, 3b, 3c, 3e, 4c, and 4d.
Instructor: Michael P. Moriarty, NBCT
Course Dates: 4/24/2023, 5/1/2023, 5/8/2023, 5/15/2023
Live Session Times: 5:00 - 7:00 PMLocation: Online at ctuf.instructure.com
Click Pay Now on the PayPal processing page only ONCE.
Do not click back or reload
Do not navigate away from page as it is processing
You should see a confirmation when checkout is complete. If you do not see this confirmation, or if you have been charged but not enrolled in the course, please contact the instructor or Walter Taylor at email@example.com.
For more information about registration, please refer to our Frequently Asked Questions page at https://www.ctuf.org/questcenter/quest-center-faq-and-disclaimer/.