How many state electors does each state have?
For California, this means we get 55 votes (2 senators and 53 members of the House of Representatives) — the most of any state.
Who picks the delegates for each state?
Who selects the electors? Choosing each State’s electors is a two-part process. First, the political parties in each State choose slates of potential electors sometime before the general election. Second, during the general election, the voters in each State select their State’s electors by casting their ballots.
How are delegates allocated to each state?
Allocation methods are also listed to the right of each state name, first by district-level allocation, then by at-large allocation. If both district-level and at-large delegates are allocated by the same method, it is only listed once. Also, no vote count will be reported for any of the American territories.
How many delegates do you need to win the 2012 election?
In order to become the Republican party’s 2012 presidential nominee, hopefuls need to win the support of a majority of the 2,286 delegates to the GOP National Convention. The total number of delegates includes those who are pledged and unpledged. Candidates win the support of pledged delegates based on primaries and caucuses.
Which states have unpledged delegates?
Iowa’s 28 delegates (including its three RNC delegates) are unpledged. New Hampshire was deducted 50 percent of its 23 delegates for holding its Jan. 10 primary, which was in violation of RNC rules. New Hampshire’s 12 at-large delegates are awarded proportionally to candidates that receive at least 10 percent of the statewide vote.
How do I Count delegate counts by state?
Delegate counts by state. Click on the information button to the left of each state name for each state’s delegate allocation method. Allocation methods are also listed to the right of each state name, first by district-level allocation, then by at-large allocation. If both district-level and at-large delegates are allocated by the same method,…