The Most Important
Feature of Probiotics
What is meant by
According to (WHO) World Health Organization and Food and
Agriculture Organization, Probiotics are living microorganisms like bacteria and other good organisms such as
yeast found in the human gut and in skin. It is also called good bacteria in some foods and dietary supplements
consumed by the body. They also called as CAM or complementary and alternative medicine for several diseases as
well as helping to boost the body’s health and the person’s general wellness.
These good or friendly bacteria play an important part in
the proper development of the immune system and to protect against harmful microorganisms that can cause
illnesses like diarrhea, irritable bowel syndrome, urinary tract infection, vaginal infection and effective
treatment for certain intestinal infections.
similar to pre bio tics?
Probiotics are not similar to pre bio tics but they go
side by side. Probiotics are indigestible foods that serve as the food or stimulate the growth of those good
bacteria or Probiotics which already exist in the body. Probiotics are available in foods and dietary
supplements in the form of capsules, tablets, powders or in some foods like yogurt, miso, some juices, fermented
and non-fermented milk as well as in soy drinks. Probiotics are found in banana, whole grains, onions,
artichokes, garlic and other foods.
When Probiotics and pre bio tics are combined, they form
symbiotic or mutually beneficial agents. One of the examples of symbiosis is the yogurt and kefir or fermented
dairy products where bacteria get its food needed to live. In addition, Probiotics and pre bio tics are one of
the ingredients added to some foods which are available in dietary supplements.
Most of the Probiotics are the same with those naturally
found in humans guts particularly breastfeeding infants who are protected naturally with these good bacteria
against many kinds of diseases.
comes from two groups of bacteria:
1. Lactobacillus or Lactobacillus acidophilus—the
acid-friendly milk bacterium type of Lactobacillus. This is a
Homo fermentative type which functions to ferment sugar to form lactic acid in the body. It is normally found in the human
and animal digestive tract, vagina and mouth.
2. Bifidobacterium or Bifidobacterium bifidus—other good
bacteria like lactobacillus which is a major genus of bacteria that
make up the colon or gastrointestinal tract which also function as Probiotics.
Health benefits of
pro biotic s-there are lots of medical researches that show amazing benefits of
Can treat severe diarrhea with or without follow up treatment of
A quick treatment for intestinal infections. A recent study shows that
Probiotics may possibly treat any of the various forms of gastroenteritis.
Prevent and gradually cure colds and flu.
Prevent and reduces risk of bladder problems like
Prevent occurrence and cure urogenital problems like vaginal infections
as well as urinary tract infections which can create risks during pregnancy.
There are strain-specific health benefits in taking some
dietary supplements. Not all strains or type of Probiotics are effective for you condition. This is because some
of the dietary supplements found in the market that failed the testing and approval process of drugs still
claims to be effective. So, if you want a healthy diet, consult a medical practitioner familiar with the
Probiotics to get optimum benefits. Don’t forget to let your health care provider know about your diet plans to
know if those are beneficial or not for your health and well-being.