Teeth gap filling cost in Hyderabad
Gap between teeth treatment in Hyderabad at Gnathos Dental Clinic
A gap between teeth is also known as a diastema. In general, the gap is wider than 0.5 mm. Though a gap is common between the front teeth, it can also develop between any teeth.
Does diastema need treatment?
Diastema is a common problem. It appears in children as well as adults. It is not harmful – and therefore, treatment is not necessary. However, if a person is worried about his or her looks and aesthetics, then there is a possibility to narrow or close the gap. In children, when the permanent teeth come through, the gap closes.
Let us try to explore the causes, treatment, and prevention of diastema.
Large labial frenum
The tissue that extends from the inside of the upper lip to the gum above the upper front teeth is known as the labial frenum. A gap appears between the front teeth if this tissue is oversized.
Undersized or Missing teeth
When the upper lateral incisors are small or missing, a gap develops between the front teeth.
The size of teeth with respect to the jawbone
In comparison to the size of the jawbone, if the teeth size is relatively small, gaps tend to develop between the teeth. Variations in teeth and jawbone sizes can be genetic. Owing to this reason, diastemas can run in families.
Tongue thrusting, lip sucking, thumb sucking, and other types of bad habits can put pressure on the front teeth and make them move forward. This can lead to diastemas.
A correct swallowing reflex is when your tongue presses against the roof of your mouth when you swallow food. An incorrect reflex is when you push your tongue against your front teeth when you swallow food. If you continue this trend repeatedly by putting pressure against the front teeth, they move forward from their place. A gap thus develops between the front teeth.
An advanced-stage gum disease can damage the bone (the jawbone) that supports the teeth. Gaps thus appear between the teeth when they become loose and migrate. This is a typical sign of advanced-stage gum disease.
In diastema, the gap between the teeth is visible. This is a prominent indication of diastema. But, in severe gum disease or periodontal disease, in addition to bleeding gums and severe pain, the other signs and symptoms may include the following:
- Loose teeth
- Bad breath
- Receding gums
- Loose, detached gums
- Bleeding gums
- Swollen and tender gums
- Bright red gums
Read more about “Periodontal Gum Disease”
Teeth Gap Treatment
Diastema doesn’t require any treatment unless it is medically necessary or when a person has concerns pertaining to facial aesthetics. If you want to close the gap between the teeth for aesthetic reasons, our orthodontist can help in determining the best approach. There is a wide range of treatment options available, including:
Dental bonding or veneers
Dentists recommend dental bonding or veneers if a person has smaller teeth. They use these options as alternatives to braces.
Learn more about Dental Bonding and Dental Veneers.
This is the most commonly used treatment for diastemas. Dentists recommend wearing braces for a certain period of time to close the gap as braces put pressure on the teeth. Just for treating one gap, it may be necessary to wear a full set of braces. Because moving even just two teeth can affect the entire mouth.
Gum disease treatment
Dentists at Gnathos Dental Clinic treat gum disease and infection to prevent complications such as tooth loss. They do scaling to remove tartar from the gums and also pockets of bacteria that cause infection and gum disease. They also do deep scaling to remove deep tartar and also flap surgery if the infection is severe.
Frenectomy: It is a recommended procedure to remove a large (excess tissue) or oversized labial frenum. It is a recommended procedure if a diastema results from a large labial frenum. Young adults and older children may require another treatment such as braces to close the gap.
Teeth gap filling cost in Hyderabad
Tooth filling costs in Hyderabad may vary depending on the extent of damage and severity of the condition. A gap between teeth can be due to many causes. Therefore, treatment is according to the cause. Expert orthodontists at Gnathos Dental Clinic provide apt treatment based on the underlying cause of the condition.
Experienced orthodontists at Gnathos Dental Hospital evaluate all adults and children to diagnose the underlying cause of diastema and recommend the appropriate treatment. If you have any concerns related to diastema then talk to your dentist at Gnathos Clinic.