As winter speedily approaches and Christmas is just around the corner, you may be tempted to eat until you can’t breathe and enjoy the comfort of unhealthy food. Have you considered fasting until the festive season of over-indulgencing on a home-cooked feast?
On the recommendation of natural healer Dr Sebi, fasting is an honourable practice with astronomical healing and cleansing benefits that will work wonders on your mind, body, and soul. It has been around for centuries and is commonly practised in most religions.
So, you’re probably wondering why you should be fasting?
Fasting is to reduce or abstain from food or drink within a time frame. There are many practises around fasting, circulating the health world; however, the mutual consensus is to eliminate food consumption for 12 hours – 3 days or longer while intaking large quantities of water and green vegetables.
Even though the health world highly acclaims fasting, it is essential to note that the time and intensity should depend on the person; as Dr, Sebi advises, ‘everybody will react differently to fasting, and fasting is not for everyone. He believed it’s essential to follow your body’s inner wisdom, so we encourage you to listen to your body and be aware of its reactions when you try fasting’.
When you fast, digestion and other metabolic functions are suspended, all energy aims to heal and cleanse the body. So, it’s essential to stay hydrated and break the fast with light food but healthy nutritious meals, like homemade vegetable soups and a bowl of alkaline foods, like warm spinach salad.
So, what benefits does fasting have?
Fasting is beneficial to those looking to perk up their health, detox or improve their overall lifestyle. In addition, the reduction or elimination of foods can heal itself, prevent diseases, and help with weight loss, which will keep you healthy and potentially prolong your life expectancy.
Here are a few benefits below to fasting:
- Tackles inflammation: Daily, we usually consume a collection of acidy-forming foods without realising, digesting toxins, and being surrounded by a toxic environment, resulting in inflammation. Inflammation also causes chronic conditions like heart disease, multiple sclerosis, rheumatoid arthritis, and cancer. Fasting for as little as 8-12 hours can reduce inflammation and possibly treat the onset of the diseases mentioned earlier.
- A youthful you: If you include fasting periodically, it is proven to delay ageing and increase longevity whilst practising other healthy lifestyle alternatives.
- Blood Sugar Control: Beneficial for those who have diabetes – fasting can decrease insulin resistance, thus allowing your body to transport glucose from your bloodstream to your cells more effectively. Blood sugar control works with short-term intermittent fasting – no food for 18 hours and eating within a six-hour grace window.
- Heart and Brain function boosts: By incorporating fasting in your routine, it is possible to lower high blood pressure, triglycerides, and cholesterol, leading to heart disease. Fasting also helps with brain functions and moods. When we fast, the brain undergoes neurochemical changes, thus enhancing cognitive functions, reducing inflammation, and boosting stress resistances and neurons in the brain.
As you can tell, fasting has many benefits to encourage a healthy and energic life. Although I asked if you considered fasting just before Christmas, do note incorporating fasting in your routine, either bi-weekly or even monthly, is absolutely beneficial for you. Why? As well as the descriptors stated above you will eliminate any build-up of toxin, negative energy, and shed a little bit of those unwanted weight. Though it is also a feel-good factor, a sense of accomplishment, knowing you’re loving your body inside out.
Fasting is a holistic practice.
Happy fasting x
Please note: I am not a licensed practitioner and this is all based on research and personal experience