Now that you've done your pirate research, you're ready to act the part. Enjoy these activities.
Make a map and make sure to give an X to mark the spot. You could even practice printing x's on old maps (bus route maps, highway maps, maps from amusement parks, etc.) If you want them to be reusable, laminate your map first, then use a dry erase marker on the laminated surface, then wipe off.
Dig for treasure in your sand box or sensory tub. Gold coins, costume jewelry, plastic gems, or anything else that looks treasure-like will be perfect.
Don't forget a treasure chest to store your loot.
Make a treasure chest:
Dr. Jean seminar. (LOVE Dr. Jean!)
You will need:
small brown paper bag
stickers, glitter, whatever you want to use to decorate with
To make the treasure chest:
1. Cut 1/3 of your paper bag off from the top. (You could just fold the excess under if you want to skip this step.)
2. Cut down the sides of the bag until you get to the fold in the bag.
3. Fold down the front and two sides (this will reinforce your box).
4. Fold the back side over the top of the box to make the lid.
5. If you want a lock, tear off a piece of one of the side flaps or extra cut bag and cut it into an oval. Glue half of the oval onto the outer edge of the lid and fold the other half down to hang over the front of your box.
6. Decorate the box as you wish.
Hang on to your peg legs and eyepatches. I have more pirate "treasure" to come!
Great treasure chest! It looks like this activity was a hit.ReplyDelete
What a great way to make a treasure chest!ReplyDelete
What a cute treasure chest- love it!ReplyDelete
I've never seen a treasure chest out of a paper bag before, brilliant!ReplyDelete
Simple and cute. We have done similarly with a small wooden box, beans or rice and hidden treasures (coins, small toys, etc.). The kids use their fingers or a spoon to find the treasures. Great sensory and fine motor work...ReplyDelete
What a wonderful way to recycle a paper bag! They did such a nice job.ReplyDelete
Running way late in commenting, but this is a fun idea. We have lots of things that need to be put into a treasure chest! Thanks for linking to Show & Tell!ReplyDelete