It’s that time of the year when the world is immersed in the ocean of love – St Valentine’s Day. It is a day that everyone looks forward to, whether single or in a relationship. Nowadays, February 14 is more commonly known as simply “Valentine’s Day”, so why is it called “St Valentine’s Day”. Let’s talk a little bit about the history of this romantic day.
There are many different stories behind how St Valentine’s Day was established, but the most believed story says that Valentine was a priest serving during the third century in Rome. When Emperor Claudius II realized that single men made better soldiers than married men with families, he outlawed marriage for young men. Valentine opposed to this and continued secretly performing marriages for young lovers. When Claudius discovered this, he ordered Valentine to be put to death. Valentine’s death or burial occurred around the middle of February, so the Christian church decided to place St Valentine’s feast day in mid-February to commemorate his death or burial. And this is the most likely reason why St Valentine’s Day is celebrated and celebrated on February 14.
What’s more touching than having someone express how they feel about you, how much they are interested in you, or how much they love you. If you are single and are eager to get rid of your single status, this is the perfect time to do this, so everyone, including you, should take this chance to tell their other halves how much they mean to you! But let’s first find out how Valentine’s Day is and used to be celebrated in different parts of the world.
France: It is believed that the first Valentine’s Day card originated in France when Charles, Duke of Orleans, sent love letters to his wife while in prison in the Tower of London in 1415. There was also the “loterie d’amour”, or “drawing for love.” Men and women stood in houses facing one another and took turns calling out to one another and pairing off. Men who were not satisfied with their matches then left their women for another. Women who were left unmatched gathered afterward for a bonfire, burning pictures of the men who insulted them, swearing and howling insults at the opposite sex.
Italy: Young lovers used to gather outside in gardens to enjoy poetry readings and music then take strolls with their beloved. Young single girls would also wake up before dawn to find their husbands-to-be, and believed that the first man they saw that day would be the man they would marry within a year. Today, Italians have romantic dinners and exchange gifts, such as the most popular small, chocolate-covered hazelnuts wrapped with a romantic quote in four languages called the Baci Perugina.
Philippines: Mass wedding ceremonies have become popular in recent years in the Philippines on February 14. Hundreds of couples gather at malls or other public areas to get married or renew their vows.
To help all you singles out there, and those who already have a special someone, LatamDate is specially giving out Valentine’s Day discounts on Live Chat, Call services and Gifts and Flowers from February 12 to 14 to bring you closer to your favorite lady and create great opportunities!
Live Chat – 20% off on text chat (0.4 credits returned for each 2 credits used)
Call Services – 4 credits returned for every 10 minutes of call
Gifts & Flowers – USD 20 off for first order (members who have never used the service previously)
Don’t forget to check in from February 12 to 14 every day. Take this opportunity to express your love to your special someone!
Latamdate.com is one of the most popular online communication platforms. It has helped over millions of people successfully built casual friendships or lasting relationships. The mission is simple?—?to provide members with a safe, easy-to-use and professional platform and quality services which includes EMF Mails, Live Chat, Camshare, Call, Video, Gifts and more.