Sure, I am happy to help you with your request. Even house plants can be very picky when it comes to Florida's heat and humidity, but here are five suggestions of plants that should grow very well in your mother's new apartment:

1: Aloe vera is a hardy little succulent. It is a very easy plant to grow, even for beginning gardeners or someone who does not have much time to tend to a plant. Not only is it beautiful, but it also has medicinal qualities and is used to soothe sunburns, cuts, and even constipation. It comes in several varieties, including hedgehog and tiger tooth. It can be damaged due to overwatering or too much sunlight.
2: Jade plants are another succulent variety that can grow well in Florida. It is a stunningly beautiful plant that comes in several varieties, including dwarf and silver dollar. It is very easy to keep alive as it requires very little maintenance. All it requires is water, but be careful not to overwater it.
3: For someone who might not like succulents, peace lilies are both pleasing to the eye and very versatile. They can grow in pots, hanging baskets, or even low-floral planters. They, too, have different types of peace lilies, including the Sonia peace and white stripe varieties. Other than overwatering, the biggest threat to a peace lily is its delicate nature. It would be best not to touch or move them too often.
4: Orchids come in an array of colors and types and thrive in Florida homes. Whether you choose the cattleya, oncidium, or dendrobium orchid, you are going to be in for a treat with these beautiful flowers. The only threat to an orchid is too much water. It is recommended by many home gardeners to use an ice cube when it comes to watering your orchid.
5: Basil is more of an herb than a houseplant, but it is used in many recipes and makes for a great windowsill plant. It only requires water once or twice a week. While it is one of the easiest herbs to grow, it is also susceptible to diseases including rot, blight, and fungus.
