The museum's director continued to acquire works by Dix, but eventually resigned in 1928. doi:10.2307/777257. Prominent Nazi visitors to the Dresden exhibition included Goebbels, Göring, and Hitler; Hitler remarked, Es ist schade, daß man diese Leute nicht einsperren kann. In addition the harsh shadowing and red-hued paints add to the theme, emphasizing the bold truth. Otto Dix's painting, 'The Trench,' which graphically showed the horrors of World War I, featured in an exhibition of works the Nazis deemed 'degenerate.' The mayor of Cologne, Konrad Adenauer, was against the painting being kept by the museum. Directed by William Boyd. 1st Artists' Rifles at Marcoing, 30th December 1917 Painting, A Prisoner of War. The Trench (German: Der Schützengraben), but earlier known as Das Kriegsbild ("The War Picture") or simply Der Krieg ("The War"), was an oil painting by German artist Otto Dix. With its disappearance, a powerful statement of the impact of war was lost to later generations. Examples of these are now in the Herbert Hoover Museum, but some were sold to soldiers in Paris or given as gifts. War Horses of World War One Painting, A Horse Ambulance in World War One Painting, A Mark V Tank Going into Action, WWI Painting, 1917 Illustration From Literary Digest Painting, 1910s March 1918 Cover Literary Digest Painting, 1910s 1918 Painting Titled The Man Painting. Dix returned to anti-war sentiments with a portfolio of fifty prints entitled The War ("Der Krieg") published in 1924, and his 1929 to 1932 triptych, also entitled The War ("Der Krieg"), the central panel of which reworks themes from The Trench. Free painting valuation, original works of art. Change ), You are commenting using your Twitter account. Size is 43 H x 43 W x 1.8 in. In the catalogue for the exhibition, it was described as "Gemalte Wehrsabotage des Malers Otto Dix ("Painted military sabotage of the painter Otto Dix") and given a long entry which stated that The Trench and his painting "War Cripples": Hier tritt die ‚Kunst' in den Dienst der marxistischen Propaganda für die Wehrpflichtverweigerung. The Trench. 1926.National Preparatory School, Mexico City. ( Log Out / Spirit of the Blitz, WWII Painting, History in Color. 1 (1992): 72–80. Andrea Mantegna's Dead Christ (1480) is evoked in the lower panel showing the dead soldiers. 23x34cm | oil on panel | Mednyánszky, László Paintings in the Kieselbach Gallery. His murals always have symbolic meaning, which usually pertained to politics and the sorrows of the time. The Trench was not included in the auction sale of some works of degenerate art by the German government in Lucerne in June 1939. D Day, Omaha Beach, WWII Painting, History in Color. In 1939 several hundred modernist artworks were burned by the authorities in an open bonfire in the Berlin fire station. This piece strikes a chord with me because I just finished two weekend showings of our Community Theatre’s production of Les Miserables and this painting reminded me of the barricade scene. He studied at the San Carlos Academy for Fine Arts in Mexico City. Dix became a professor at the Dresden Academy in 1927, but he was one of the first artists to lose his job after the Nazi Party came to power in Germany in 1933. The large painting was made from 1920 to 1923, one of several anti-war works by Dix in the 1920s inspired by his experience of trench warfare in the First World War.