As energy prices rise, and the reliance on home appliances increases, choosing energy efficient appliances becomes even more important. The simple truth is that upgrading to more efficient appliances can save you energy, and hence, it can also save you a lot of money overall. When it comes time to replace your old appliances with new ones, then it is essential to think about both the purchase price and the energy requirements of the appliance in question. Although energy-efficient models usually cost more, they will save you lots of energy and money over the course of the appliance’s life cycle, so the initial spend is a really sound investment.
Running costs can add up over time, so it’s worth taking the time to calculate the running costs of your appliances. If you are choosing new appliances, then this will help you to determine the real cost of the product over its lifetime. For example, it is estimated that on average, cooking appliances account for up to 11% of a home’s total electrical consumption, while refrigeration uses up to 8%. If you manage to reduce the energy consumption of these appliances, you can greatly reduce the charges on your monthly utility bills – a saving that can add up over time.
The best way to determine the energy requirements of any appliance is to look out for its energy rating label, but that it is essential to understand the energy usage beforehand.
One thousand watts is equal to one kilowatt. Electricity consumption is measured in kWh (kilowatts per hour). One kWh means that one kilowatt (1000 watts) has been used over a period of one hour. This, in turn, means that a 1kw appliance requires one kilowatt of electricity to operate for one hour. As such, the higher the wattage of an appliance, the more electricity it requires to function.
However, although some appliances have much higher energy requirements, it is essential to also take into account how long you use them for every day. Although a tumble dryer uses much more power than a television since you use the tumble dryer for far less time every day, they both require similar energy requirements. For example, a 3.3 kW tumble dryer used for 20 minutes will require 0.66 kWh, while a 0.2 kW television used for 4 hours will require 0.6 kWh. So, you can see it is important to factor the usage of the appliance in as well.
Choose an appliance that can accommodate your requirements – for example, it is no use investing in a huge fridge/freezer if it is just you and your partner living in your home. A smaller model will serve your needs far better and use a lot less energy.
Energy rating labels provide an independent verification on how energy efficient an appliance is. Although energy labels are optional for appliances manufactured in many countries, it is not wise to purchase an appliance without one, as an appliance without a label could be an energy guzzler that will cost you lots of money to run. If you cannot see the label on the appliance, it is always a good idea to search the make and the model on the Internet and find the rating so that you can compare it to other makes and models and choose a truly efficient model. Energy Star is the main label on American appliances and is easy to locate when shopping.
When you’re ready to upgrade to energy efficient appliances, Cathey Electric can help!