Psychological effects of Missing Teeth
If we are missing teeth, it can have a huge emotional impact on our lives. Our teeth not only help us eat and speak, but our smiles also have an enormous impact on how we connect with those around us.
As we’ve said before, there are many reasons why a person may be missing teeth: accidents, medical conditions, medications, hygiene, and more. Some are left feeling ashamed, worried, or scared of the social stigmas surrounding the loss of teeth and its impact not just on the ability to eat but also, on how they interact socially.
Appearance, Speech & Self Confidence
Just because an individual is missing teeth, it does not mean that they do not take care of themselves, that they don’t care about how they look, or, that they may not be able to afford dental treatments. These stigmas can be a detriment to one’s self-confidence and cause a lot of anxiety. Our Denturists often hear that patients avoid social gatherings that include food because they are not able to chew or they are embarrassed by their smile.
A person who has no natural teeth or well-fitted dentures can lack facial support and some may even say that they look older. This can occur because as the bone in your mouth resorbs and the jaw disappears, the distance between the nose and chin (vertical dimension) continues to decrease. At the same time, the lips continue to flatten causing little vertical wrinkles and folds to form. This accelerates the appearance of aging. Well-fitting dentures provide the necessary support to your lips and cheeks, giving them a more full appearance.
Missing teeth can make it more difficult to speak. Why? Because, to pronounce and form words, your lips, teeth, and tongues need to position properly. Some words are very difficult to pronounce without touching your tongue to your teeth.
Missing teeth can compromise your health and eating habits. Chewing ability is decreased and over time, deterioration of the jaw structure. An unbalanced diet or consuming less food altogether due to poor chewing abilities can result in nutritional deficiencies, digestive problems, depression, and other psychological impacts. You don’t have to adopt the common “I’ll live with it” attitude!
How we can help
We are located in Winnipeg and have been building trusting relationships since 1977. These relationships start as soon as the phone rings and an appointment is made for a free consultation. We are centrally located here in Winnipeg with ample parking and close to major bus routes, making it easy for you to plan your visit! For first-time denture wearers, making the initial appointment can feel scary. Our Free Consultations are non-invasive; include a brief oral examination and an in-depth treatment plan discussion by the Treatment Coordinator and Denturist.
We have noticed that when people are feeling overwhelmed or nervous, it can be hard to retain information. At the end of the consultation, all clients are given a Treatment Package. This package includes options for suggested treatment with an estimate for cost, consent to treatment (once decided), and a Denture Care Schedule (step-by-step explanation of all appointments).
Once you have consented to treatment, your Denturist will work for hand in hand with all other dental professionals involved in the treatment plan. (If applicable ie: oral surgeon). Then, your smile transformation begins!
Call our office today to schedule your free consultation at 204-589-6329. Your new smile is waiting for you!
Minuk Digital Denture and Implant Clinic Centre is Canada’s largest Denture Clinic located in Winnipeg, Manitoba. With over 100,000+ dentures created since 1977, our team is confident that we can help you love your smile again. Minuk has denture solutions for all budgets and are here to help you understand the cost of dentures and the process of getting new dentures. Our team of Denturists and expert staff are here to help you get the smile you’ve always wanted. Check out our Smile Stories and learn more about the Minuk difference by reviewing our website or calling us at 204.589.6329. Book your Free Consultation Today!