Cloves are the dried, flower bud of the evergreen tree, Eugenia aromatica. While the tree is indigenous to the Maluka Islands of Indonesia, cloves also grow naturally in India, the West Indies, Tanzania, Sri Lanka, Brazil and Madagascar.
They might be tiny, but cloves are giants when it comes to nutrition and natural health.
Cloves also help to control diabetes by controlling insulin. Clove helps to mimic insulin in the human body in order to help control blood sugar levels.
When a diabetic cannot utilize the insulin hormone anymore, maybe cloves are worth trying.
Cloves also help to preserve bones, the teeth, boost immunity, destroy mutagenic cells, and much more.
Cloves help to reduce pain and inflammation because of their anti-inflammatory properties. The Eugenol in cloves helps to reduce pain by stimulating pain receptors in the body, making them more active and alert.
Cloves can also be used to reduce or even remove headaches. Simply mix clove water with Himalayan salt and drink up.
The circulation boosting effect and minerals can help to ease tension and stress associated with headaches which can remedy the actual headache.
Used often in Ayurvedic medicine, cloves are anti-fungal, antibacterial, antiseptic and analgesic. They?re packed with antioxidants and are good sources of minerals (especially manganese), omega-3 fatty acids, fiber and vitamins.
Here are some great uses for cloves, culled from an Ayurvedic tradition:
Temporarily treat a toothache
You can temporarily alleviate the pain by dabbing a little clove oil on a cotton ball and placing it on the sore tooth or on your gums. An added benefit is that it will also pull out any infection.
Relieve upper respiratory infections
Ayurveda suggests making a tea to lessen, or prevent, colds and flu. It is also used as an expectorant, making it easier to cough up phlegm. Cloves are a natural painkiller and also attack germs, so they’ll help you get rid of that sore throat.
Use clove oil to massage sore muscles; some also use it for arthritis and rheumatism.
Treat scrapes and bruises
Cloves are pretty strong and can sting, so the best bet is to probably make a poultice with a little olive oil.
Cloves help relax the smooth lining of the GI tract, so they help alleviate vomiting, diarrhoea, intestinal gas and stomach aches. Just be careful; since they’re strong, they can also irritate the stomach.
Enhance sexual health
Sometimes used as an aphrodisiac, cloves can also help men from reaching orgasm too early.
Clove Increase the WBC count
This nature of clove increase the White Blood Corpuscles count in the blood. The WBC in our blood is responsible for antigen-antibody interaction which kills the foreign bacteria and protects our body to get diseased. By increasing in WBCs number, we increase the chance of being healthier.
Cloves Increases Digestion
The clove stimulates the secretion of larva and other enzymes of the stomach which are responsible for digestion of food and hence it indirectly increases digestion. The Clove was listed in a regular spice due to its digestion nature, fragrance and crispy taste.