Views: 0 Author: Site Editor Publish Time: 2021-01-28 Origin: Site
Carbon steel is a carbon-iron alloy, and its advantages are strong hardness, easy smelting, and low price. The advantages of aluminum alloy are good corrosion resistance and good thermal conductivity. It is the raw material used in mainstream baking molds. At present, there is a saying on the Internet that metal residues in aluminum alloy materials are bad for health, and carbon steel is relatively healthy. This statement is not scientific, aluminum alloy is metal, and iron alloy is also metal. All molds are generally processed after they are made, and there is no need to worry about the human body absorbing excessive harmful metal elements. To judge whether the product is aluminum alloy or carbon steel, you only need to suck it with a magnet. The carbon steel is sucked, and the aluminum alloy is not sucked.
In fact, more attention should be paid to the coating problem. At present, there are two main types of mold coatings: anode and non-stick.
The anode is to anodic the metal to form an oxide film on the surface. After surface anodization, its corrosion resistance, hardness, abrasion resistance, insulation, heat resistance, hygiene, etc. have been greatly improved. Only aluminum alloys can be anodized, carbon steel products are not.
Precautions for use of non-stick products:
1.Do not use sharp metal products, scouring pads and chemical cleaners to wipe.
2. Do not leave the baked or unbaked products in the appliance. The corrosion products formed by the accumulated moisture, sugar and starch will corrode and oxidize the metal materials at the bottom of the coating.
3. Try to avoid collision and friction caused by careless operation, causing wear or scratches of the non-stick coating.
4. Be careful when storing and stacking, keep the appliance dry, and do not store and stack in a humid place.
5. Pick up and place up and down during use to avoid wearing or scratching the non-stick coating.
6. When the non-stick coating is operated for a long time with a large difference in high and low temperature, small cracks will be generated and the residual material will corrode the non-stick coating, which will cause the non-stick coating to lose its non-stick property. To prevent this from happening, we suggest: the baking temperature of non-stick appliances is lower than 240℃, which can extend the service life; non-stick appliances should avoid uneven heating; non-stick appliances cannot be burnt empty