Tina wasn't a baker. Not in any sense of the word. But that was about to change this Saturday afternoon as she stared down the barrel of a bushel of bananas. The bananas had been sitting on her counter for over a week at this point, turning shades of green, then to yellow, and finally growing brown spots and looking a little limp. The perfect bananas to bake bread with.

She had always aspired to be a baker but never had the time with her demanding career. But today was the day that would change. Tina shut off her phone and directed her attention solely to what was in front of her.  Flour, sugar, eggs, bananas of course, and all the fixings for a proper banana bread. She was feeling very much connected to her country roots just looking down at the bounty. Her mom was always the master baker in the family, and Tina was sorely hoping that skill did not completely skip a generation.

Consulting her recipe, Tina mashed up the bananas as best as she could. Some were quite soft, and others a bit hard, but none held up to the pressure beneath her mighty fork. She furrowed a brow, cracked an egg, and then tossed it into the bowl along with the whole butter stick and an egg. The recipe called for sugar but she only had the brown kind on hand. Oh well, that'd have to do. Into the bowl that went. Then the salt but lacking any measuring device she eyeballed it with her fingertips.  Another dash of this and that, and she was done.

The concoction looked almost right, a bit gloopy but not runny. But Tina wanted to make it better. In the pantry, she found chocolate morsels, some cashews, and even some shredded coconut.  Into the mix, she tossed it all making sure to stir the batter a bit to incorporate the new flavors before spooning it into a loaf pan and then into the oven.

An hour later, she heard the oven beep and opened the door to see her creation. Hit with the sweetest of smells; her eyes were less happy. The top was dark brown and the edges were nearly black. But more than that, it was sunken in like a volcano. Sighing under her breath she muttered, "Drat."
