- News Releases
Influenza is a respiratory infection that can cause serious complications, particularly in young children. Getting a flu vaccine is the best way to prevent the flu and its complications. Even when the vaccine doesn't completely prevent the flu, it may reduce the risk of serious illness requiring hospitalization. Recent research shows that the vaccine significantly reduces the risk of dying of the flu for both children with an underlying medical condition and healthy children.
Getting a flu vaccine is especially important this season because the flu and the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) cause similar common signs and symptoms. Flu vaccination could reduce symptoms that might be confused with those caused by COVID-19. Preventing the flu and reducing the severity of flu illness and hospitalizations could also lessen the stress on the health care system.
Depending on your child's age and health, you might be able to choose between the flu shot and the nasal spray flu vaccine:
The flu vaccine can't give your child the flu. The vaccine also doesn't protect your child from COVID-19 or increase your child's risk of COVID-19.
The number of flu vaccine doses your child needs depends on a few factors:
Keep in mind that it takes up to two weeks after vaccination to be protected from the flu. Also check with your child's health care provider if:
If your child has an egg allergy, he or she can still receive the flu vaccine.
This article is written by Mayo Clinic staff. Find more health and medical information on mayoclinic.org.
According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), routine vaccinations for kindergarten in the U.S. fell to 93% during the 2021-2022 school year. That's ...
DEAR MAYO CLINIC: My 4-year-old daughter already has had three ear infections this winter. When she isn't feeling well, our entire family is miserable. The pediatrician ...
Healthy Weight Week will be observed Jan. 15–21, so this is a good time for a reminder of the connection between weight and health during ...