You probably didn’t see what was so great about broccoli as a child, but the truth is that this vegetable is one of nature’s superfoods. From its stalk to its flowering head, broccoli is packed with nutrients and vitamins needed for your overall health and wellbeing.
This vegetable has been around for centuries, and it has always been used and viewed as the perfect go-to food.
It’s healthy, can be eaten in a number of different ways, comes with a variety of benefits, is easy to cook, and offers the body a single boost of minerals in every serving.
For a comprehensive understanding of this perfect food, check out the following information.
The Anatomy of Broccoli: Understanding the Veggie from Top to Bottom
Many people aren’t aware just how much there is to know about broccoli.
Yes, it’s a vegetable, and yes, it’s incredibly good for you—but that’s not all.
This anatomical breakdown of broccoli should teach you everything you need to know about this vegetable and more. So, let’s begin with the basics.
What Exactly is Broccoli?
An edible green plant belonging to the cabbage family, broccoli is a vegetable that originated in Italy as many as 2,000 years ago.
While, its flowering head is usually used as a vegetable in a variety of meals, the entire vegetable can be eaten and contains a host of nutritional values.
Arranged like a small tree, broccoli closely resembles cauliflower, which is another vegetable of the same species.
Due to its rich green color, broccoli is high in antioxidants and other essential vitamins.
Parts of the Broccoli Plant
A broccoli plant is made up of three main parts:
• The root system
• Leaves and stalk
• The crowning head
When still in the ground, the root system of the broccoli plant needs nutrient-rich soil in order to grow and support the plant.
Broccoli plants need to be watered often in order to keep the plant hydrated and well fed as it approaches maturity.
The leaves and stalk are lesser-known parts of the broccoli plant because gardeners and farmers often discard these pieces at harvest.
However, they are actually edible and highly nutritious.
Broccoli leaves can be long and thin or short and wide and grow along the stalk.
They are often blue-green in color and thicken towards the head of the plant.
The crowning head is the part of the broccoli most familiar to people.
Sometimes called the curd or the head, the top of the broccoli is most commonly eaten.
This head is made of small, dense edible floral shoots.
Usually, the head is harvested long before the shoots, or little florets open.
Sometimes the heads are purple, but the green shoots are most commonly cultivated by gardeners.
The best growth environment for the broccoli plant is in full sun, with plenty of water, and of course, the nutrient rich soil mentioned earlier.
What is Broccoli’s Nutritional Value?
Broccoli is a great food to eat when you are looking to get extra fiber and vitamin C into your diet.
It contains various nutrients that hold anti-cancer properties and support a strong, healthy immune system.
A great source of natural energy, broccoli is low in carbs, and fat but high in protein.
Nutrients: It contains B vitamins, Thiamine, Niacin, Riboflavin and Folate as well as traces of calcium, iron, potassium, and phosphorous.
High Fiber: Broccoli is also high in fiber that supports heart health, helps lower bad cholesterol and supports healthy weight management because it is filling and very low in calories.
How is Broccoli Prepared?
Broccoli can be steamed, boiled, microwaved, stir-fried, or eaten raw.
However, over cooking or boiling broccoli has been proven to reduce levels of anti-carcinogenic compounds present in the food.
It is therefore best to steam it until it reaches a bright green color, but no longer.
How You Can Add Broccoli to Your Diet
Adding broccoli to your daily diet can do wonders for your health.
A side of broccoli at dinner, a broccoli salad for lunch, chopped broccoli along with eggs or in an omelet for breakfast, and even eaten raw as a healthy snack is great way to include this superfood in your diet.
All parts of broccoli can also be juiced, including the stems, leaves and heads, and it makes a great addition to green juice, along with kale, spinach, green apples, celery, cucumber, and lemon.
A successful diet is one where the changes will last a life time.
The good news is that healthy cooking doesn't have to be difficult or boring.
With just a few small changes you can make a big difference in the health of you and your family. You can learn more here about the specific steps you need to know for how to learn healthy cooking.
Did you like this Healthy Cooking blog post?
Well first, share it so someone else can get some good advice about healthy cooking.
Then, subscribe so you don’t miss more – subscribe to my RSS feed at the bottom of this page
And if you have any tips or suggestions that you would like to share with us just click the COMMENTS link BELOW and send us your story!
Join in and write your own page! It's easy to do. How? Simply click here to return to Cooking & Recipes.
"Power Tips" magazine is back!
You Get A Free Complete Self Help Report delivered to your email box every edition, plus you get a free PLR article and other great gifts!
SUBSCRIBE BELOW ... I promise you will want to USE what you learn!
I really want to know what you think of this site, this page, and to hear your tips or suggestions about it.
So please share your story or simply add a Comment in the comment box.
If you feel that the information on this page has been useful to you please give it a Like or share it with your friends - thanks!!
"You are a life Saver!!
I recently discovered this site and I can tell you that my life has not been the same. I now come here EVERYDAY and spend at least 1 hour.
I used to spend that time browsing online fashion and beauty
magazine which just means that I spend more. Now I have replaced that
habit with coming here.
In future I will think about contributing articles as well. Thank you! Thank you!! Thank you!!! and God bless"
Amazon and the Amazon logo are trademarks of Amazon.com, Inc. or its affiliates. As an Amazon Associate I earn from qualifying purchases. Product prices and availability are accurate as of the date/time indicated and are subject to change. Any price and availability information displayed on [relevant Amazon Site(s), as applicable] at the time of purchase will apply to the purchase of this product.