The controversial elements of the Internet diversity weakening and the characteristics of diversity
Internet diversity has always been a goal, but it also has certain controversial; internet diversity over time is also gradually reduced. According to “the United States General Social Surveys”, a research survey shows that in 20 years, the Internet community people become lonely and isolated, the discussion of the online community gradually reduced, diversified lack problem gradually deepened (Hampton, 2011). The emergence of the Internet and the spread and transformation of online network information environments are multifaceted, and online networks bring diversity, rich content, discussion, community and user contact (Burri, 2016). Some of these sources and reports suggest that there is no intermediary agent in the Internet information space and that people can choose to read anything and join any discussion in the online community and public sphere (Burri, 2016). However, many studies of digital web practice suggest that these statements and opinions may be “myths” (Burri, 2016). The fact is that there are different kinds of control and supervision on the Internet, no matter it is the media, the platform and all kinds of intermediary elements. This management may have the problem of stereotypes and lack of diversification. Some platforms and intermediaries may deliberately choose to let the public see some content or prohibit the dissemination of some content (Burri, 2016).
On the other hand, whether the spread of all kinds of content on the Internet will bring negative influence or not, maintaining the existence of diversity may also have uncontrollable factors. The diversity of the Internet includes various elements such as cultural communication, language diversity and discussion of diverse cultures in media platforms. For example, the BBC reports on Chinese culture; Some hashtags in the TikTok challenge can stimulate the users to join it, and some of the hashtags challenges are about cultural diversity. The user can shoot some videos to show their own country or another country’s culture, including food, clothing, and language; most of these can trigger discussions and other users to join. The Main is to use social media platforms to stimulate cultural diversity, To make the public aware of the existence of different cultural groups. However, there will still be negative comments on these videos as part of a broader discussion for internet diversity and allows for different “voices” on the web.
Social and cultural issues arising from the lack of diversity on the Internet
The Internet has become an important pillar in modern society, carrying society’s development, communication, science and technology research, etc. The world contains many diverse elements of culture, language, race and religion, which also exist in the digital network. Social media platforms provide a space for people from different backgrounds to communicate and share, which is also part of diversity.
The fan culture on the Internet is a typical characteristic of pluralism and represents the diversity in the digital network. These fans group have set up a cultural community with people of different countries, language, race, religion, and other cultural background is different; most of these fans are activity group that contains powerful mainstream culture that can be transformed into a trend (Jenkins, 2014). Fan culture formed a public domain that allows people to redefine themselves, collective action and target formation (Jenkins, 2014). This diversified and highly participatory communication culture also belongs to the expression elements of diversity (Jenkins, 2014). The fan culture on the Internet provides a variety of ways and modes of innovation, which affects the community and market environment in the online network environment and promotes the development of the Internet (Jenkins, 2014). Fans in the community diversity exist to build better communication and share space, such as harry potter around the world has loyal readers and fans who have loyal beliefs. It also emphasizes the power of online communities and markets because of the diversity and innovation to expand by multiple forms, such as online celebrities and YouTubers. The diversity of fan culture permeates every part of the Internet. For example, the flow of social media platforms, Internet celebrities and hot topics have a fan culture effect. If fan culture is affected by the lack of diversity, it will increase the generation of boundaries, restrict people’s communication and deprive the rights of fan groups. It may also redefine the existence of idols and destabilize the consumer market for fans (Jenkins, 2014). However, the weakening of cultural diversity among internet fans group is not regulated, which will also have negative effects and is more likely to endanger the safety of society and individuals. For example, J.K. Rowling’s comments on transgender rights have been met with backlash and online violence from Harry Potter fans. J.K. Rowling’s comments on transgender topics may be controversial, but she has also been met with resistance from extreme groups to the existence of such diversity topics. The anti-fan groups in the Korean fan community do things that endanger idols and social security, such as attacking idols through online speech and posting extreme remarks on the Internet. Therefore, the diversity of Internet fan culture also needs to be regulated and controlled to a certain extent.
The influence and development of the lack of Internet diversity culture
The lack of diversity on the internet also contains historical, political and economic factors affecting and developing. Australia’s aborigines’ history has gradually gained traction on the Internet and social media platforms, which have become a tool for aborigines to communicate, share and seek help (Carlson, 2019). On the internet, indigenous groups also use media platforms to share and maintain aborigines’ languages and diverse indigenous histories and cultures and to teach their traditional cultures and protocols to younger audiences (Carlson, 2019). The internet is cheap and efficient; it can effectively attract large audiences and influence change, Challenge governments and policy-making, and highlight interactive communication and sharing (Carlson, 2019). For example, there is a separate media account dedicated to sharing indigenous culture and history on Twitter and the website, which is the “IndigenousX“, and the main goal of amplifying indigenous voices and appeals (Carlson, 2019). However, due to the lack of diversity on the internet, the history and culture of the indigenous group are difficult for young people and the public to understand and focus (Carlson, 2019). For the first time, some students and the audience know the native history and grim problem of indigenous culture protection (Carlson, 2019). This may be due to the government’s intervention and increased lack of diversity, such as the suspension of racial discrimination legislation and legislation for the natives (Carlson, 2019). Therefore, the lack of diversity on the internet can lead to cultures and histories being ignored and forgotten in the public sphere.
Internet diversity is also politically and economically relevant. Political decisions and intervention, and regulation in the public sphere are related to economic markets and values and are often controversial (Burri, 2016). Political decisions and economic interest relations in the Internet environment system will also have a certain degree of influence (Burri, 2016). The lack of diversity drives some governments to protect and promote diversity on the digital web, but moving forward with the complex environmental politics of the internet also requires boundaries and regulation (Burri, 2016). Digital media diversification policies also positively affect economic and trade markets (Burri, 2016). Therefore, the World Trade Organization has promoted the cultural trade-oriented Policy Act and the Convention on the “Protection and Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions” (Burri, 2016). Policies are also promoted in response to multilateral markets with different actors, protecting public images and business models, and media platforms actively promote cultural diversity and regulate controversial and extreme content (Matamoros-Fernández, 2017).
In conclusion, the Internet needs diverse cultural and social manifestations. Audiences interact and communicate more and more in the public sphere, and different cultural backgrounds, social systems, and humanistic values can be expressed in the digital network. The rich and diversified content in the network environment enables the public to find their positioning, learn about different cultures and the history of different races, and obtain more resources and values in multilateral trade markets. The Internet receives more variety of response information, and this information is passed to the audience if they are not regulated and intervention may appear to be extreme and violent content of information. In the context of network diversification, there are also contradictions and controversies. In this case, the intervention and supervision of the government and media platforms have also become necessary factors. On the contrary, diversified content needs to be established and supported. Under the condition of intervention, there is also information that the platform wants the audience to see and receive. Therefore, there are also two sides to the diversified Internet environment.
Burri, M. (2016). Cultural diversity in the internet age: in search of new tools that work. DigiWorld Economic Journal Communications & Strategies, 101, 63–.
Carlson, B. (2019). Disrupting the master narrative. Griffith Review. https://www.griffithreview.com/articles/disrupting-master-narrative-indigenous-tweeting-colonial-history/
Chinese culture. (n.d.). BBC News. Retrieved October 15, 2022, from https://www.bbc.com/news/topics/cl72rk22k8wt
cultural diversity. (n.d.). TikTok. Retrieved October 15, 2022, from https://www.tiktok.com/discover/cultural-diversity?lang=en
Edwige, C. A. C. C. T. M. (2020). IndigenousX – Showcasing & celebrating indigenous diversity. IndigenousX. https://indigenousx.com.au/
Hampton, K. N., Sessions, L. F., & Her, E. J. (2011). CORE NETWORKS, SOCIAL ISOLATION, AND NEW MEDIA: How Internet and mobile phone use is related to network size and diversity. Information, Communication & Society, 14(1), 130–155. https://doi.org/10.1080/1369118X.2010.513417
Jenkins, H. (2014). Fandom studies as I see it. The Journal of Fandom Studies, 2(2), 89–109. https://doi.org/10.1386/jfs.2.2.89_1
Matamoros-Fernández, A. (2017). Platformed racism: the mediation and circulation of an Australian race-based controversy on Twitter, Facebook and YouTube. Information, Communication & Society, 20(6), 930–946. https://doi.org/10.1080/1369118X.2017.1293130
Shead, S. (2020). JK Rowling criticizes “cancel culture” in open letter signed by 150 public figures. CNBC. https://www.cnbc.com/2020/07/08/jk-rowling-cancel-culture.html
Unesco. (2018). The convention on the protection and promotion of the diversity of cultural expressions. Diversity of Cultural Expressions. https://en.unesco.org/creativity/convention
12 times anti-fans have conspired to kill idols. (2019). Koreaboo. https://www.koreaboo.com/lists/12-idols-antifans-conspire-kill/