There are no products in your shopping cart.
When it comes to antibiotics, they are considered the most powerful & safe medicines to treat bacterial infections.
Though antibiotics are extremely effective in fighting against bacterial infections, it is necessary to understand how long they take to work.
An antibiotic is a medicine that fights against infections caused by harmful bacteria. It treats infection by killing or decreasing the growth of bacteria in your body.
With time, antibiotics have become powerful and lifesaving medicines for people suffering from certain serious infections. Intake of antibiotics can prevent your fewer infections to become serious.
It is important to know there are several classes of antibiotics. Certain types of antibiotics work best to treat certain types of bacterial infections.
Antibiotics are available in several forms, including:
After a prescription from the doctor, you can buy most antibiotics. However, some antibiotic creams and ointments are accessible over the counter.
Antibiotics start to treat bacterial infections by killing bacteria or slowing down the growth of bacteria. This action is done by:
There are several factors that can affect the length of time taken by antibiotics to start working and be effective in treating bacterial infections.
Some of the factors include:
Different types of infections often require different lengths of treatment with antibiotics. Mild infections like Urinary Tract Infection might respond quickly to treatment when compared to other severe infections.
It is important to understand that different infections need different treatments with some working more quickly than others.
Individuals suffering from compromised immune systems or other underlying health conditions might take long to respond to treatment than people who are healthy.
Right after you start the treatment with antibiotics, they begin to work. It might be possible that you do not feel better for 2 to 3 days. How quickly you will start feeling better after antibiotic treatment might differ. The time taken by antibiotic depends upon the infection being treated.
Most antibiotics take time of almost 7 to 14 days to treat the infection. In some cases, shorter treatments also work. The best length of treatment and correct antibiotic type for you will be determined by the doctor.
You might start feeling better after a few days of treatment, it is always advised to first complete the antibiotic treatment in order to treat the infection. This will further prevent antibiotic resistance.
Unless the doctor recommends, do not stop your antibiotic regimen.
What is the average length of time for antibiotics to start their working mechanism?
The average length of time for antibiotics to start their work often differ depending on the type of infection.
For most mild infections such as sinus infections, you will start to feel better usually within 1 to 3 days after starting the antibiotic treatment.
With more serious infections such as pneumonia, patients can experience improvements within 3 to 7 days.
These types of serious infections might require a long course of treatment in order to get fully resolved.
Chronic infections such as chronic sinus infections or bone infections might take a long time to treat when compared to serious infections. Resolve completely, chronic infections can also take a long time.
In case, you are already taking antibiotics or about to start your treatment then this section can help you to maximize the efficacy of your treatment. This will further help you to feel better early.
Receive the full course of treatment
Stopping your treatment early can lead to the growth of antibiotic resistance. As a result, it makes it difficult to treat future bacterial infections.
Take your antibiotic at the same time every day
Make sure your body has an even level of medicine to help the treatment work effectively.
Alcohol can interfere with how antibiotics work in your body. As a result, the effectiveness of antibiotics is decreased.
Depending upon the type of infection, a doctor might recommend you one of two types of antibiotics: broad-spectrum or narrow-spectrum.
Broad spectrum antibiotics are responsible for affecting a wide range of bacteria. On the other hand, narrow-spectrum antibiotics attack only particular types of bacteria.
Usually, doctors recommend narrow-spectrum antibiotics to patients when they know which bacteria has caused the infection. Intake of broad-spectrum antibiotics unnecessarily can lead to antibiotic resistance.
It is always better to take antibiotics only after consulting the doctor to avoid serious problems.
So, if you think you suffer from symptoms or signs of bacterial infection then it is better to meet the doctor once. The doctor will help you to determine which antibiotic prescription is best for you and how long it will take to treat the infection completely.
Thus, the sooner you receive the right antibiotic treatment, the sooner you start feeling better.