mind and Karma
Karma means action .All actions, right or wrong a man performs either with body or, speech or mind are called karmas. But only those karmas are governed by ‘Law of Karma’ which leave imprint or impression on our subconscious mind. In such cases our mind is fully involved. That is the prime condition.
For example: for committing all crimes, such as robbery, theft, murder etc. mind is fully involved, since there is danger or fear of man being caught while doing above acts. Therefore all evil and sinful acts get recorded in our subconscious mind.
However, reverse is not true. For example a man may be reciting God’s name by mouth, but his mind is towards sinful acts, what leaves impression on his subconscious mind will be evil acts and not good acts. In such cases man may get appreciation from other persons and society, but in the eyes of God, he is doing sinful acts.
All actions are performed by mind, but under whose command; it directs the senses to perform actions? Man is prompted by various doers (kartas), which are hidden inside him .Anger, fear, vasanas (ego, lust and greed) etc, are negative doers. Love, devotion, humbleness, selfless service etc. are positive doers.
For example an angry man murders a man with revolver. It is the anger of the angry man who has prompted him to do this sinful act .Three factors are necessary for such acts. The doer of the action (Anger of the angry man), the instrument of action (revolver), and the act itself. None of them can independently produce the result. Action is inert and has no existence without doer of the action and no result is possible without an action being performed. The hand cannot write without a writer. Farming the land with plough cannot be done without a farmer.
There is a story about a man who after marriage of his daughter remained very upset. Somebody asked, him the reason. The man replied that he had spent 25 lakhs of rupees on the marriage for which he had taken huge loan. When asked, why he had spent so much on marriage, the man replied, because his neighbour had spent 20 lakhs on his daughter’s marriage a few months back. So it was his false ego(negative doer) who prompted him to take loan .Sometimes the man does not get desired results in spite of his best efforts .He gets dejected, and various negative doers take birth in side him . He should understand that the results are not in his hand since the same are governed by various God’s created laws on which he has no control. So he should leave everything to God, and feel that He will give him award at the right time.
- All actions, such as murder, rape, acid throwing on ladies are result of negative doers of young brain. Our children are the future citizens and wealth of our nation. There is an urgent need to modify our Education system which should aim at cultivating good sanskaras, mind control, healthy thoughts and developing spiritual attitude towards life. Education should teach harmonious relationship with everybody and love for God. This will develop confidence, will power, and make them truthful humble and courageous .This will give birth to positive doers in their mind. There will be dawn of a new civilization with an ideal society, where children and ladies are safe, people serve everybody and lead a harmonious and happy life.