Children learn about winning and losing at a young age. Whether your child joins you while you watch your favorite sports team or the two of you love playing board games, he or she is learning about the concept of winning and losing. Who better to inspire a discussion about sportsmanship than the definition dynamo WordGirl and her new Word of the Week: champion.
Discuss sportsmanship with your child while also having fun playing lots of games. Incorporate the word "champion" into everyday games -- from an organized board game to a quick race to the car. Have fun this week teaching your child what it means to be a champion!
Activity 1: Read about a champion. Help teach your child about all kinds of champions -- both fictional and real -- with a good book. You can find titles about every sport, ranging from football to baseball, and even the Olympics. You can also turn to newspapers and magazines to find inspirational sports stories that will make great reading material for your child.
Activity 2: Host a family game night. You can’t truly teach a child about being a champion without a little friendly competition. This week is a great time to host a family game night and crown a family member a “Champion of the Board Game.” Allow each member of your family to pick his or her favorite board game. Complete a round of each game and crown the person who wins the most a champion. Make the awards ceremony extra fun and include home-made ribbons for each participant.
Activity 3: Encourage your child to try a sport. Help your child learn about champions by encouraging him or her to participate in a new sport. Whether your child is a gifted athlete or just enjoys watching a baseball game on television now and then, sports can be an important learning tool. Sports teach your child to work with others and to persevere when faced with obstacles. Plus, they’re a great way to exercise. Encourage your kids to try out for a team and remind them that whether they win or lose, they’re still champions for trying.
Activity 4: Invent a new game. Encourage your creative child to invent a new game to master. Even simple games like who can bounce a ping pong ball the most using a book or who can teach the family dog to roll over first can be fun activities that also encourage family bonding. Help your children make as many interesting rules as possible and help them become a champion of your newly invented game.
Check back every Tuesday for the WordGirl Word of the Week and get instant access to more learning activities by visiting the Scholastic Parents Facebook page.