The Benefits of iTEP Aviation
iTEP Aviation is the quickest and most secure, accurate, and affordable method for the cockpit crew and aviation industry to measure the English proficiency of prospective employment candidates and active team members.
iTEP Aviation Overview
The primary function of iTEP is to assess the English language proficiency of individuals who use English as a second language. iTEP Aviation’s uses are vast, some of them include:
- Measuring a pilot’s ability to understand spoken English, including instructions, commands, flight plans, and tower communications.
- Evaluating the communication fluency of air traffic controllers.
- Understanding which employment applicants fullfil your English language requirements.
- Ensuring that your staff is comprised exclusively of top-tier talent.
iTEP AVIATION STRUCTURE (AT-A-GLANCE):
iTEP Aviation assesses grammar, listening, reading, writing and speaking. The exam is 80 minutes in length, with an additional 10 minutes for pre-test preparation.
TEST FORMAT & DELIVERY
iTEP exams are delivered via the Internet and must be administered at a secure location or a certified iTEP test center. The examinee completes the test in the following manner:
During the grammar, listening, and reading sections, the examinee clicks on one of four answer choices for each question.
Writing samples are typed directly into a text-entry
Speaking samples are recorded with a headset and microphone at the examinee’s
iTEP Aviation Structure
In each section, examinees will encounter content and questions targeted to varying levels of proficiency.
- Grammar (Structure) — 10 minutes/ two parts
Part 1. Thirteen fill-in-the-blank, multiple-choice questions testing the examinee’s familiarity with key features of English structure; questions range from beginner to advanced.
Part 2. Twelve multiple-choice questions where the examinee selects the part of speech with incorrect English structure; questions range from elementary to advanced.
- Listening — 20 minutes/ three parts
Part 1. Four high-beginning to low-intermediate level short conversations of two to three sentences, each followed by one multiple-choice question.
Part 2. One two- to three-minute intermediate-level conversation, followed by four multiple-choice questions.
Part 3. One four-minute upper-level lecture, followed by six multiple-choice questions.
- Reading — 20 minutes/ two parts
Part 1. One intermediate-level passage of about 250 words in length, followed by four multiple-choice questions.
Part 2. One upper-level paragraph of about 450 words in length, followed by six multiple-choice questions.
- Writing — 25 minutes/ two parts
Part 1. The examinee is given five minutes to write a 50-75 word note on a supplied topic, geared to the low-intermediate level.
Part 2. The examinee is given 20 minutes to write a 175-225 word piece expressing and supporting his or her opinion on an upper-level written topic.
- Speaking — 5 minutes/ two parts (plus one minute warm-up section)
Part 1. The examinee hears and reads a short question geared to low-intermediate level, then has 30 seconds to prepare a spoken response and 45 seconds to speak.
Part 2. The examinee hears a brief upper-level statement presenting two sides of an issue, then is asked to express his or her thoughts on the topic, with 45 seconds to prepare and 60 seconds to speak.
Please complete the booking schedule form below and indicate your preferred testing date and time. We will reply to you to confirm your test date.*
*Note. This is a preliminary booking, please wait for an email confirmation before proceeding to the test center.