Recent media coverage about the Everglades continues to fuel myths and misinformation surrounding Florida's commitment to restoring the famed River of Grass.
Here are the facts: The state has invested more than $1 billion in water-quality improvements alone, making remarkable progress to date. The amount of phosphorus entering the natural system has been dramatically reduced during the past decade. Through a combination of research, treatment wetlands and improved farming practices, Florida prevented more than 1,900 tons of phosphorus from entering the Everglades.
Florida has constructed more than 36,000 acres of treatment wetlands -- including the largest in the world -- to naturally clean pollution from water entering the Everglades. With the governor's commitment to accelerating restoration, the state will add 5,000 acres of stormwater-treatment areas by 2006 and another 15,000 acres by 2009.
A decade ago, before the implementation of these "green" technologies, discharges of phosphorus into the Everglades averaged 170 parts per billion (ppb). Today, the constructed wetlands discharge water as low as 12 ppb -- repeatedly bettering the predictions and projections for reducing phosphorus levels.
A recent court ruling addressed water quality in the Arthur R. Marshall Loxahatchee National Wildlife Refuge. To put the ruling into context, phosphorus never exceeded the currently required levels by more than 2.1 ppb -- comparable to two people in a population as large as China. And, the required levels have been met in 55 of the past 60 months.
Florida even surpassed the interim water-quality goals defined by the federal settlement agreement, achieving the more stringent, long-term water-quality requirements during 17 of the last 21 months in which sampling was possible.
The same ruling commended Florida's leaders for the monumental scale of the effort to clean up the environment. As the court recognized, the goal of the settlement agreement is complex, but, for Florida, achieving Everglades water-quality standards is a priority -- not only because it's mandated by law, but because it is the right thing to do.
Our diligence and resolve is making a difference. In many areas of the 2.4 million-acre marsh, including the Refuge and Everglades National Park, we are knocking on the door of the long-term, ultra-low phosphorus targets. No other government in the world has invested as much time or money in improving the quality of one single body of water or natural system. And we will not rest until the job is done.