Toad Hollow Day of Encouragement
Toad Hollow Day of Encouragement is observed next on Friday, January 26th, 2024 (300 days from today).
Toad Hollow Day of Encouragement is celebrated annually on January 26th.
History of Toad Hollow Day of Encouragement
Toad Hollow Encouragement Day begins in Kalamazoo, Michigan. Ralph C. Morrison, who teaches at a local community college, has an older student named Eunice in his class. One day, he was reading a story in a local newspaper that had written about her. It refers to the school she attended while growing up: Toad Hollow Country School. The name of the 1834 school, once located at the end of Knox Street in Kalamazoo, resonated with Morrison. He tells stories by hooking Toad Hollow into his fictional stories. He turned it into a town, and when people asked where he was, and he would say to them, "In your heart."
Finally, Kalamazoo County said he could use a local park to tell his stories. In 1992, he founded a non-profit organization to operate the park; it is made up of volunteers called "volunteers". They built a house and town in the 19th century, and refurbished the existing meat grinder. They call their creation Toad Hollow. Classes in forging, quilting, and candle and soap making were held, as were events such as the Renaissance Fair and Civil War rehearsals. This lasted only three years when it seemed the county had regained its land.
Volunteers continued to teach at nearby schools until 2003, where they shared art, knowledge of the professions, told stories, wrote, and even made some baking. At some point, volunteers also give Toad Hollow Incentive Days. It comes from the idea that they love to share what they know with others and they think that one day it will help others act in the same way. The day is devoted to supporting, encouraging and sincerely connecting with others and for sharing "a kind word to your fellow man." This is a day for volunteering, showing others what you love and encouraging them to share.
Volunteers also create Toad Thank You Day and Hollow Toad Encouragement Week. It's not clear why January 26 was chosen as Toad Hollow Incentive Day, but it also happens to be the anniversary of when Michigan became state, so that may have something to do with it.
How to celebrate Toad Hollow Day of Encouragement
Celebrate this day by sharing about the things you love with others and encouraging them to share. Work to create genuine connections with others and share kind words with them. Do some volunteering, support and encourage others in any way you can. You can also head to Kalamazoo, Michigan, and stop at Scotts Mill Park, where it begins.
ObservedToad Hollow Day of Encouragement has been observed annually on January 26th.
Wednesday, January 26th, 2022
Thursday, January 26th, 2023
Friday, January 26th, 2024
Sunday, January 26th, 2025
Monday, January 26th, 2026