[ wob-uhl ]
/ ˈwɒb əl /
Save This Word!
verb (used without object), wob·bled, wob·bling.
to incline to one side and to the other alternately, as a wheel, top, or other rotating body when not properly balanced.
to move unsteadily from side to side: The table wobbled on its uneven legs.
to show unsteadiness; tremble; quaver: His voice wobbled.
to vacillate; waver.
verb (used with object), wob·bled, wob·bling.
to cause to wobble.
a wobbling movement.
CAN YOU ANSWER THESE COMMON GRAMMAR DEBATES?
There are grammar debates that never die; and the ones highlighted in the questions in this quiz are sure to rile everyone up once again. Do you know how to answer the questions that cause some of the greatest grammar debates?
Question 1 of 7
Which sentence is correct?
Origin of wobble
1650–60; <Low German wabbeln; akin to Old Norse vafla to toddle, Middle High German wabelen to waver, Old English wæflian to speak incoherently
OTHER WORDS FROM wobblewobbler, noun
Dictionary.com Unabridged Based on the Random House Unabridged Dictionary, © Random House, Inc. 2023
How to use wobble in a sentence
Mr Wobbler recovered his equanimity, and affably condescended to apologise for his remarks.
The mere learning to box, and the necessary association with a man like Wobbler, would not have done the boys much harm of itself.
Wobbler, a foot soldier, a term of contempt used by cavalrymen.The Slang Dictionary|John Camden Hotten
I've loved that boy and he's far too good and fine for a wobbler like yourself.The Duchess of Wrexe|Hugh Walpole
So the departure of Mr Wobbler did not keep him away, and he went to the yard as much as ever.
British Dictionary definitions for wobble
/ (ˈwɒbəl) /
(intr) to move, rock, or sway unsteadily
(intr) to tremble or shakeher voice wobbled with emotion
(intr) to vacillate with indecision
(tr) to cause to wobble
a wobbling movement, motion, or sound
Also called: wabble
Derived forms of wobblewobbler, noun
Word Origin for wobble
C17: variant of wabble, from Low German wabbeln; related to Middle High German wabelen to waver
Collins English Dictionary - Complete & Unabridged 2012 Digital Edition © William Collins Sons & Co. Ltd. 1979, 1986 © HarperCollins Publishers 1998, 2000, 2003, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2009, 2012