Check Student Verification Check Here
We discuss reasons why nutrition has to be studied by everyone. Be it a fitness trainer or a sports person or a sports coach or a body builder or a corporate professional or even a housewife.
Understanding the pathway, destination and the physical and chemical reactions that the food has to go through, to provide the Nutrients and design effective nutrition plans.
a. History of nutrition science and its research in the world
b. How this performance nutrition course has been evolving since the last 10 years.
c. What are the topics that will be covered in the course and their relationship with the demands of the ever-evolving Indian fitness and health industry?
a. In this chapter of the course we discuss the anatomy and physiology of the human body.
b. How a human body is made?
c. What are the different systems of the body and how nutrition and diet affect each and every system.
d. What is the relationship between each system and how they work together to make a human body healthy and fit for optimum performance?
e. Digestive system is discussed in detail so that the student can learn to make customized, scientifically effective and completely digestible foods in the nutrition plans.
A "Diet Plan" is a well formatted and scientifically designed eating pattern made specifically for an individual to meet his/her individualized nutrition requirements which may change from person to person and also for the same person from time to time.
So, understanding the human digestive system is of utmost importance.
It is the study of the nutrients which our food is made up of. These are actually the tools we will be using based on their chemical structure, functions, sources and requirements for planning meals at the end of the course. Right selection of nutrients in right quantity, quality and frequency is the art of curating most effective nutrition plans.
Hormones are the commanding officers of our body. A deep study of hormones which are directly related to nutrition science and health and fitness is needed to become a successful nutritionist.
In this chapter we study the different energy pathways. Body makes energy from different sources and different biochemical pathways. Which macro nutrient is getting converted into energy for physical and mental performance is discussed in this chapter. Knowledge of bioenergetics helps a nutritionist to plan diets for optimum performance in all kinds of sports and exercise related activities.
Exercise creates different nutrition demands in the body of the exercising individual. These demands when fulfilled through the eating pattern designed bring about the actual change desired in the body through exercise. Moreover, these demands keep changing for the same individual from time to time depending on the type and intensity of exercise the person does and the changes seen in the body as a result of the exercise and diet modifications. Planning diets for exercising people needs a deep understanding of calculation of all the macro and micro nutrients for regular progress in the intensity, faster recovery and protecting the immune system. Case study-based calculations are discussed in this chapter and practical applications are practiced in the classroom.
It has been observed,High body fat percentage is 95% of the times directly or indirectly related to some kind of a Metabolic disorder. Understanding the various metabolic dis orders which are controlled by the different hormones of the body and their implications on the body's metabolism which can be treated through Diet therapy and exercise nutrition combined together is what we will cover under this topic. Poly cystic ovarian disorder, hypothyroidism, diabetes mellitus, hypercholesterolemia, high uric acid etc. are the topics in this chapter.
Food science is another very deep and highly researched aspect of diet and nutrition. It makes long lasting difference in the results we can achieve from conventional diet plans. We discuss many such phytochemicals which works in a very subtle manner but have long term effect on health and fitness.
We will also study nutrition supplements which support a nutrition plan for achieving fitness goals and also those supplements which are needed for other body's requirements like a good night's sleep, better liver function. improved sex life, etc.
Every other day we see new supplements sitting on the supplements stores which are highly recommended by the fitness and body building fraternity. We bring you unbiased scientific knowledge of recent and updated research of nutrition supplements and discuss in detail which really work and which do not really make much of the difference for the claims they make.
This is the actual goal of the Nutrition course. To enable every student who sits through all the lectures religiously to be able to design an easy to follow and effective nutrition plan for anyone who he/she counsels form any walk of life to achieve any fitness goal.
It is just not enough to be able to study and plan diets. Being capable of counseling the client so that he/she understand the importance of every meal and components of every meal planned for him/her so that we get 100% compliance from the client to help the client get best results from the foundation of good nutrition.