The titanium alloy market is booming, with growth expected to reach more than $6 billion over the forecast period 2022-2026, according to a report on MarketWatch. The strength to density ratio, lightweight structure, and corrosion-resistant nature of titanium makes it an ideal metal for manufacturing and even jewelry making. Titanium has also gained a lot of attention in the automotive industry, as it helps automakers come up with cutting-edge car designs and innovations for the future. Keep reading to learn more innovative applications of titanium.
The aerospace industry is the largest consumer of titanium products, including titanium bars, sheets, tubes, and rods. The ability to withstand extreme temperatures makes titanium an excellent material for manufacturing engine parts, like blades, discs, casings, and shafts exposed to high temperatures of up to 600 degrees Celsius. Titanium is also used to manufacture body frames for aircrafts, space shuttles, and space stations. Just like a typical aircraft, space shuttles require materials that are lightweight but strong, and resistant to extreme heat and corrosion.
The applications of titanium in the medical field are many, thanks to the metal’s biocompatibility or ability to join with the human bones and tissues without causing harmful effects. For this reason, biomedical manufacturing companies buy titanium bars, sheets, and tubes to create a variety of implants. For example, titanium bars or rods are perfect for making dental implants and bone screws, while titanium sheets make durable cranial plates. Other medical implants made of titanium include eye implants, heart stents, joint replacements, and hip balls.
Besides being biocompatible, titanium is durable. Ideally, implants made from this metal can last for twenty years or more. Titanium is also anti-magnetic, meaning patients with titanium-based implants can use MRI machines safely. Because of its strength, malleability, corrosion resistant, and lightweight properties, titanium is the most sought metal for the customization of surgical instruments like scalpels, scissors, and tweezers.
The demand for titanium is also increasing in the jewelry industry. Because of its resistance to wear and tear, durability, and lightweight structure, titanium has become a popular choice for jewelry makers. The uses of titanium in jewelry making range from rings to stylish glass frames, and fasteners. For example, jewelers are using titanium sheets instead of silver and gold to design stunning engagement and wedding rings, and glass frames. Titanium bars are also perfect for making fasteners, which provide a lustrous finish to any jewel.
Titanium has desirable features that make it perfect for manufacturing in various industries. For example, the automotive industry relies on titanium’s high strength and light weight to make innovative cars that are light. Likewise, the aerospace industry uses titanium to build durable aircraft parts, including engine parts, thanks to its resistance to corrosion and extreme temperatures. Other industries using titanium in various applications are the medical field, jewelry market, and marine engineering.