These 7 people helped shape Grand Canyon National Park. Here are their stories.
Spanish explorers are credited with being the first Europeans to see the Grand Canyon in 1540, but historians believe humans have lived in and around Grand Canyon since the Ice Age.
Indigenous Havasupai, Paiute, Hopi, White Mountain Apache, Hualapai, Navajo, Yavapai Apache and Zuni people all have deep spiritual and physical connections with the area.
But after the Mexican-American War, the United States funded expeditions to explore the territory newly acquired from Mexico, including the Grand Canyon, which it hoped to develop as a trade route. That would change the course of history for the national landmark, although it wouldn't blossom as a tourist destination until the early 1900s.
Here are some of the explorers, miners and tourism developers who were influential in developing and preserving the Grand Canyon.
Army First Lt. Joseph Christmas Ives
"The region is, of course, altogether valueless. It can be approached only from the south, and after entering it there is nothing to do but leave.” -- Joseph Christmas Ives
Joseph Ives was the first of the Anglo explorers to take on the unknown of the Grand Canyon. His report to Congress seems humorous in retrospect when you consider that the national park drew more than 6 million visitors in 2017.
Between 1857 and 1858, Ives was assigned by the Department of War to lead an expedition to explore and document one of the last areas of wilderness in the United States: the Grand Canyon. Along with getting better information about the area, the government hoped to explore the Colorado River as a potential trade route.
MORE: Grand Canyon park opened with a shrug. Now it's on everyone's bucket list.
Ives started at the mouth of the Colorado River and made the difficult way upstream by steamboat. According to the National Park Service, he crashed near Black Canyon, in the area of today's Hoover Dam.
Not yet into the Grand Canyon, Ives didn't give up. He reportedly used a small rowboat to travel 30 more miles and eventually ditched the boat to continue on foot. That trek landed him near what today is the Hualapai Reservation in the canyon.
His report to Congress, Report upon the Colorado River of the West; Explored in 1857 and 1858, was published in 1861. Though in awe of what he had seen, Ives did not think the area would have any value.
"It seems intended by nature that the Colorado river, along the greater portion of its lonely and majestic way, shall be forever unvisited and undisturbed," he wrote.
You could go on a Grand Canyon adventure! Enter for the chance to win a trip to America's famous national park. Prize includes airfare, hotel, tours and more!
Create a free online account to enter. You must have an online account or subscription to be eligible to win. Entries accepted 9/9-10/29. See the official rules for more details.
John Wesley Powell
John Wesley Powell is legendary in the history of the Grand Canyon as he was the first Anglo man known to travel the length of the Colorado River through the canyon.
An Army major during the Civil War, Powell lost an arm in the Battle of Shiloh and later became a geologist. In his initial canyon expedition, he led a team of 10 men aboard four row boats down the furious rapids of the Colorado River.
One man abandoned the group early in the trip. Three others bailed later at Separation Canyon, only to be killed by indigenous people who mistook them for men who murdered a Hualapai woman.
RELATED: Here's proof the Grand Canyon is a pop culture icon
The remaining expedition members emerged from the canyon after more than three months of battling the harsh conditions of the Colorado River. Powell would conduct a second expedition in 1871 and go on to serve as director of the U.S. Geological Survey.
Along with mapping the topography and geology of the area, Powell was known as a climate scientist and conservationist. After studying the Southwest's aridity, he advocated that the United States take great care in how it used Western land and urged letting watershed areas determine the boundaries of Western states.
Ellsworth and Emery Kolb
You need look no further than the Kolb brothers' studio on the South Rim to see that taking the perfect Grand Canyon vacation pic is not a modern obsession. For decades, the Kolb Brothers documented the adventures of brave people willing to ride a mule into the canyon.
Ellsworth Kolb was 25 years old when, in 1901, he headed west to the Grand Canyon and worked in one of Ralph Cameron’s early hotels. A year later, his brother Emery followed.
READ: 100 things you should know about the Grand Canyon
While waiting for his train, Emery found a photography store that was for sale. He bought it for $425 (about $12,000 today) and a year later moved the business to the canyon's Bright Angel Trailhead.
The studio started in a tent but in 1906 the brothers built Kolb Studio — a small wooden structure perched right on the edge. There they lived and worked, developing and selling their photos in leather-bound folders for $3 — about $83 today. Later, they made a film of their canyon exploits that they took on tour through the United States. It's still playing at their studio, which now has historical exhibits and a shop.
Fred Harvey and the 'Harvey Girls'
An immigrant from London, Harvey arrived in New York in 1835 and made his way West. While working in the railroad business, Harvey saw that travelers lacked places to get good food during their trips. He pitched the idea to the Santa Fe Railroad chief, who allowed him to open his first restaurant at the Topeka depot in 1876.
Harvey's restaurants were known for their quality food and upscale atmosphere, with fancy linens and silver as well as the requirement that male guests wear coats. They also were known for their "Harvey Girl" waitresses — attractive and skilled women who wore black dresses and pressed white aprons and had impeccable manners.
After Harvey died in 1901, his sons and grandsons went on to run the company, eventually building El Tovar hotel, which opened its doors on the canyon's edge in 1905.
Mary Elizabeth Colter
The biggest indicator of architectural pioneer Mary Elizabeth Colter’s impact on the Grand Canyon is the fact that her work still stands there today. From Phantom Ranch on the Colorado River to Hermit's Rest to the Desert View Watchtower, she wanted the buildings to mirror, not compete with, their setting.
Born in 1869, Colter went to design school in San Francisco and apprenticed for an architect. Afterward, she returned to St. Paul, Minnesota, where she worked as a teacher until some personal connections with the Fred Harvey Company helped her land an interior design position with the company.
She eventually worked her way into the male-dominated field of architecture by designing several buildings for the Fred Harvey Company in the Southwest and at the Grand Canyon. Colter took her inspiration from nature and used natural materials to create buildings that blended with the surrounding landscape.
One of the more controversial players in Grand Canyon history is Ralph Cameron. Cameron originally came to the canyon with his business partner, Pete Berry, to set up mining claims everywhere they thought would be profitable.
Cameron and Berry worked to construct two trails into the canyon. Cameron went on to develop the Bright Angel Trail while Berry pursued the Grandview Trail. Cameron registered his trail as a toll road and also built a hotel in the area.
Cameron fought constant battles with other businessmen and the government over his mining rights and the right to collect a toll from visitors on the trail. The government eventually declared his mining claims invalid and, in 1920, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that he was trespassing on the property.
But Cameron launched a successful U.S. Senate bid and largely ignored the order. As senator, he continued his bitter feud with the park service. He temporarily triumphed by removing funding for the service in 1922.
However, Cameron lost re-election in 1926 and finally turned the trail over to the park.
One of the most influential people in making Grand Canyon a national park was President Benjamin Harrison. He introduced the first bill to Congress to make Grand Canyon a national park, in 1882, as well as two subsequent bills.
In 1893, when he was president, Harrison issued an executive order creating the Grand Canyon Forest Reserve, which limited the amount of logging that could be done.
The Grand Canyon didn't become a national monument until President Theodore Roosevelt proclaimed it one in 1908. President Woodrow Wilson eventually signed the Grand Canyon National Park Act, approved by Congress, in 1919.
Have a travel-related story you'd like us to investigate? You can connect with Melissa through email at email@example.com. You can also follow her on Twitter and Instagram.
- What will you see in this hike's red rocks if you free your mind?
- Movies, TV and stunts: The Grand Canyon in pop culture
- Selfie improvement: New Disneyland attraction will up your Instagram game
Support local journalism like this story by subscribing today.