This book brings together stories of the green schools movement ((Eco Schools, Enviroschools, Green Schools, Sustainable Schools, ResourceSmart Schools etc) in several countries around the world, with a focus on the impact of the movement on the development and implementation of education for sustainable development in each of the countries. In particular, each story will explain the history of the movement per country, its current status, achievements, obstacles and broader impact.
There have been a number of evaluations of these school movements at a national or more local level, and numerous articles and chapters have been published on aspects of these schools' activities, but to date these have not been brought together in a single volume that focuses attention on the impact of the movement on education for sustainable development in each country. This is the purpose of this volume.
The green schools movement focuses on a whole school approach which aims to include everyone (students, teachers and the local community), to improve school environments, including resource usage and the environmental footprint of the school, to motivate students to take on environmental problems and seek resolutions particularly at a local level but also thinking globally, and to improve students' attitudes and behaviours as part of developing a sustainable mind set.
Annette Gough is Professor of Science and Environmental Education in the School of Education and the School of Global, Urban and Social Studies at RMIT University, Melbourne, Australia, and previously Head of the School of Education. She has been an adjunct/visiting professor at universities in Canada, South Africa and Hong Kong, and is a Life Fellow of the Australian Association for Environmental Education (since 1992). She has led research and development projects funded by the Australian and Victorian governments and non-government bodies, worked with UNESCO, UNEP and UNESCO-UNEVOC, and has been co-editor of the Australian Journal of Environmental Education. She has over 130 publications (books, chapters and articles and curriculum materials) and is an editorial board member for the Australian Journal of Environmental Education, Environmental Education Research and the Journal of Biological Education. Her research interests span environmental, sustainability and science education, research methodologies, posthuman and gender studies. John Chi-Kin Lee is the Chair Professor of Curriculum and Instruction, Vice President (Academic) and Provost, Director of the Centre for Religious and Spirituality Education and Co-Director of the Centre for Education in Environmental Sustainability at The Education University of Hong Kong (EdUHK). He has been appointed as the UNESCO Chair in Regional Education Development and Lifelong Learning at the EdUHK. He has been the Changjiang Scholar Chair Professor conferred by the Ministry of Education, the People's Republic of China. He has served as the Editor-in-Chief of Cogent Education, Editor of International Journal of Children's Spirituality, Regional Editor (Asia-Pacific) of Educational Research and Evaluation and Executive Editor of Teachers and Teaching as well as advisory editor of Journal of Environmental Education Research (Taiwan). He is also a prolific writer who has edited and written more than 25 books, and published over 100 journal articles and book chapters. Po Keung Eric Tsang is a Professor, Associate Dean of the Faculty of Liberal Arts and Social Sciences, Head of the Department of Science and Environmental Studies, and Associate Director of the UNESCO-UNEVOC Centre at The Education University of Hong Kong. He is an environmental scientist by training, but he also specialises in environmental education research, and was one of the pioneers of the Green School initiative. He has been appointed visiting professor by Northeast Normal University and South China Normal University, and founding director of the Hong Kong and Guangzhou Centre for Environmental and Science Education in South China Normal University. He is active in the community as chairman/ member of numerous high-level government committees, chairman of Green Power, a major NGO in Hong Kong, and member (outreach panel) of the International Year of Global Understanding, launched by the International Geographical Union and UNESCO.