Email sign ✉
People has been sending mails since many centuries ago. But now allmost any mail is sent by electronic way. We can see this mail symbol in any mail client, in our phone's messages menu, and on post offices. This sign is popular computer symbol that people had been texting from the times when Unicode encoding was developed.
What mail sign mean
Mail, is a system for transporting letters and other tangible objects: written documents, typically enclosed in envelopes, and also small packages are delivered to destinations around the world. Anything sent through the postal system is called mail or post. A postal service can be private or public, though many governments place restrictions on private systems. Since the mid-19th century national postal systems have generally been established as government monopolies with a fee on the article prepaid. Proof of payment is often in the form of adhesive postage stamps, but postage meters are also used for bulk mailing. Postal authorities often have functions other than transporting letters. In some countries, a Postal Telegraph and Telephone (PTT) service oversees the postal system as well as having authority over telephone and telegraph systems. Some countries' postal systems allow for savings accounts and handle applications for passports.
How to input email symbol
Choose your system and find out.Windows
Configure your keyboard layout in Windows so that you can type all additional symbols you want as easy as any other text. Takes about 5-10 minutes to set things up, but you'll be typing like a boss. You can assign email symbol and any other text characters to your keyboard using this technique.
CharMap allows you to view and use all characters and symbols available in all fonts (some examples of fonts are "Arial", "Times New Roman", "Webdings") installed on your computer. You can input email symbol using it.
Emoji on iOS (iPhone, iPad and iPod touch)
Character Palette allows you to view and use all characters and symbols, including email, available in all fonts (some examples of fonts are "Arial", "Times New Roman", "Webdings") installed on your computer.
|Unicode hex code||Symbol|
Character map allows you to view and use all characters and symbols available in all fonts (some examples of fonts are "Arial", "Times New Roman", "Webdings") installed on your computer. It can also help you lookup Unicode codes for entering symbols with keyboard.
|HTML entity||JS entity||Symbol|