GENEVA: The economic cost of climate-related disasters hit $2.25 trillion over the last two decades, an increase of more than 250 percent compared to the previous 20 years, the UN said on Wednesday.
The United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNISDR) noted that "climate change is increasing the frequency and severity of extreme weather events" such as floods and storms.
Between 1978-1997, total losses for climate-related disasters was $895 billion (780 billion euros), UNISDR said in a report by the Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters (CRED) at the Universite Catholique de Louvain in Belgium.
But between 1998-2017 that figure hit $2.25 trillion, the report said, listing the United States, China, Japan and India as the countries where the financial toll has been highest.
The findings were released as Michael, a Category Four hurricane, rumbled towards the Gulf Coast of Florida, in the latest storm to threaten vast destruction across the eastern US.
"The report's analysis makes it clear that economic losses from extreme weather events are unsustainable and a major brake on eradicating poverty in hazard exposed parts of the world," the UN secretary general's special representative for disaster reduction, Mami Mizutori, said in a statement.
UNISDR counted the number of climate-related disasters between 1998-2017 at more than 6,600, with storms and floods the most common events.
The report notes gaps in data collection, but says the findings clearly show investing in disaster risk reduction must become a central part of policy making in response to climate change.
"The group has shortlisted two bond tranches, amounting to $500 million and $650 million, respectively, of Adani Green Energy and Adani Ports & SEZ, to begin with," said one of the sources. "The group believes there will be a reasonably good appetite for its bonds in the private market since most of the debt is backed by strong cash flows."
The review is part of an annual exercise undertaken by lenders to evaluate the company's operations and assign capital on the loans. Lenders have progressively increased AEL's loan limits but this is an exceptional year since the group is reassessing funding needs.