Sandhyavali, Sandhyāvalī, Samdhyavali: 3 definitions
Sandhyavali means something in Hinduism, Sanskrit, Jainism, Prakrit. If you want to know the exact meaning, history, etymology or English translation of this term then check out the descriptions on this page. Add your comment or reference to a book if you want to contribute to this summary article.
Purana and Itihasa (epic history)
Sandhyāvalī (सन्ध्यावली).—Sandhyāvalī was the wife of King Rukmāṅgada. (See under Dharmāṅgada).
The Purana (पुराण, purāṇas) refers to Sanskrit literature preserving ancient India’s vast cultural history, including historical legends, religious ceremonies, various arts and sciences. The eighteen mahapuranas total over 400,000 shlokas (metrical couplets) and date to at least several centuries BCE.
General definition (in Jainism)
Sandhyāvalī (सन्ध्यावली) is the sister of Vidyādhara Vajravega (son of Aśanivega), according to chapter 4.7 [sanatkumāra-cakrin-caritra] of Hemacandra’s 11th century Triṣaṣṭiśalākāpuruṣacaritra (“lives of the 63 illustrious persons”): a Sanskrit epic poem narrating the history and legends of sixty-three important persons in Jainism.
Jainism is an Indian religion of Dharma whose doctrine revolves around harmlessness (ahimsa) towards every living being. The two major branches (Digambara and Svetambara) of Jainism stimulate self-control (or, shramana, ‘self-reliance’) and spiritual development through a path of peace for the soul to progess to the ultimate goal.
Languages of India and abroad
Saṃdhyāvaḷi (ಸಂಧ್ಯಾವಳಿ):—[noun] a red or saffron coloured sari (a garment worn by Indian women, consisting of a long piece of cotton or silk wrapped around the body with one end draped over the head or over one shoulder).
Kannada is a Dravidian language (as opposed to the Indo-European language family) mainly spoken in the southwestern region of India.
See also (Relevant definitions)
Full-text: Dharmangada, Citrasena.
Search found 2 books and stories containing Sandhyavali, Sandhyāvalī, Samdhyavali, Saṃdhyāvaḷi, Sandhyāvaḷi; (plurals include: Sandhyavalis, Sandhyāvalīs, Samdhyavalis, Saṃdhyāvaḷis, Sandhyāvaḷis). You can also click to the full overview containing English textual excerpts. Below are direct links for the most relevant articles:
Puranic encyclopaedia (by Vettam Mani)
Trishashti Shalaka Purusha Caritra (by Helen M. Johnson)
Part 17: Battle with Aśanivega < [Chapter VII - Sanatkumāracakricaritra]
Part 16: Sanatkumāra’s marriages < [Chapter VII - Sanatkumāracakricaritra]