Magnesium is a vital mineral. It is essential to the proper functioning of your body. Your body can’t make magnesium on its own, so it’s dependent upon outside sources for proper amounts. Ideally, we would all get plenty of magnesium through our food. But unfortunately, an excess of heavy metals due to soil contamination and a lack of minerals due to soil erosion means our food isn’t as magnesium-rich as it once was. (1) Many people are now turning to oral or topical magnesium to make sure they are maintaining proper levels of magnesium. Unfortunately, according the latest statistics 80% of Americans are deficient in magnesium.
As the fourth most abundant mineral in your body, magnesium is involved in over 600 different reactions in your body. It's vitally important for biological function and optimal health.
Magnesium is a mineral used by every organ in your body, especially your heart, muscles, and kidneys. If you suffer from unexplained fatigue or weakness, abnormal heart rhythms or even muscle spasms, low levels of magnesium could be to blame.
Optimal magnesium levels are especially important in supporting women having a healthy pregnancy and successful lactation for their newborn. Magnesium has been reported to support a normal range of blood pressures along with healthy blood glucose levels when diabetic patients are testing consistently. A natural relaxant, magnesium is reported to help with regulating nerve and muscle function. (3)
Magnesium has many important functions within the body. Doctors are still not sure the overall role it plays in disease formation and the critical functions of the body but the science is fast catching up. Magnesium helps support normal blood pressure levels, strong bones, and keeping the heart rhythm steady or paced. Your body can’t function properly without magnesium, as it is what is known as a ‘macromineral.’ (2) Around half of the population in Western countries would show deficient levels of magnesium if they were to be tested in a lab. (3).
So outside of the obvious important role that magnesium plays in your overall health how does this all relate to whether magnesium can help improve your skin? And more specifically how does magnesium help with rosacea, acne and overall skin health?
Well it’s not exactly clear but according to Dr. Patricia Wexler an New York-based best-selling author "magnesium protects the skin from free radical damage, inflammation, and it's necessary for the enzymes that regulate cell turnover and repair. She also goes on to explain “A lot of people end up using it topically for the treatment of acne and acne rosacea." Wexler says it can help with skin that is red, severely dry, and itchy.
Dr. Engelman also chimes in singing the praises of magnesium specifically in regards to Magnesium oil which he emphasizes “has masterful absorption properties and acts as an efficient humectant that keeps the skin hydrated and flexible."
Magnesium is essential to maintaining proper health. Adults taking less than the recommended amount of magnesium are more likely to have elevated inflammation markers. Inflammation is associated with health conditions such as heart disease, diabetes, and certain cancers. This is why daily supplementation can be important.
It’s possible to get adequate amounts of this mineral from your diet. However, many people would much rather take a supplement than struggle to meet their needs through food when they’re deficient. Women 31 - 50 years of age are recommended to get 320mg of magnesium daily. Men 31 - 50 years of age would be at 420mg. The drawback with oral supplementation is that it can cause gastrointestinal issues like loose stools. You may need to play around with the dose until you find what works best for your body. (4)
What’s the best way to use magnesium to improve your overall skin health? According to Fred Liers, PHD a simple way to improve your skin’s health is to "try adding magnesium oil to your favorite skin lotion. Some individuals report favorable results (and less skin irritation) when using magnesium oil in a lotion." Personally, this is what I have been doing for the last year and my skin is looking amazing.
Magnesium oil is an ideal way to get the mineral applied directly where you need it. The product is made from a mixture of magnesium chloride flakes and water. When the two substances combine, what is created is actually a liquid, not an oil. It is referred to as oil because the resulting liquid has an oily feel to it, but is not actually an oil. Pure Magnesium oil can be rubbed directly on the skin or sprayed onto the skin from a spray bottle. (5)
Dr. Patricia Wexler states that“A lot of people end up using [magnesium] topically for the treatment of acne and acne rosacea." Although this is anecdotal it’s certainly worth a try especially with the anti-inflammatory benefits of topical magnesium.
The answer is yes magnesium can help to improve your skin, but maybe not directly in the way you may be thinking. While soaking in an Epsom salt bath which is pure magnesium is great and relaxing, it is not the cure-all. In order for magnesium to support your body as well as your skin, you need to be supplementing your body daily. When your body has the proper amounts of vitamins and nutrients it needs, your skin can glow with a clear, blemish-free radiance. (6) Many skin issues such as acne or eczema can be the result of underlying stress or imbalances in the body. Regulating your magnesium levels is a great place to start to get these pesky problems under control. (7)
Additionally, Dr. Hank Leirs, PhD states Magnesium "improves health of skin and mucous membranes."
Magnesium is great for a ton of issues not just your skin, although I use it daily on my face the benefits are amazing! Click here to learn more about Magnesium Oil and the benefits?
>>Did you know that 80% of Americans are Magnesium Deficient and it is leading to a myriad of health issues? This deficiency just might be might be the source of all your symptoms download our free comprehensive guide: “The Magnesium Solution Solving the Biggest Deficiency in America”<
I don’t often align myself with products but this is one that I just had to share! My name is Michelle Toole and I am the founder of Healthy Holistic Living.com.
Some of you may already know years ago, I was diagnosed with Multiple Sclerosis.
I can still recall what it felt like to have my life change overnight…
I went from an Executive Director of a non-profit organization, running marathons, rock climbing, hiking canyons and kayaking to being completely bedridden and staring at a wall for 15 hours a day.
Of course, I went to see many doctors but unfortunately I didn’t find the help I needed. So, I had to set off on my own journey to learn my true path to healing.
I’d pretty much turned-over every rock trying to find relief for my pain, sleep issues and myriad of other symptoms…
Fast-forward 18 years.
I was determined to climb one of the true wonders of the natural world, Machu Picchu, the mystical home of the Incas in Peru.
It was there, after a grueling day when my feet, knees, legs, and lower back hurt so bad, that I thought I would have to abandon hopes of our next climb which was Rainbow Mountain! That night I pulled out a little spray bottle of “aceite de magnesio” that a friend had given me before I left on my trip.
What the heck, I thought. I was desperate. And I applied it all over my body before bed.
Because of the grueling day, I woke up expecting to be immobilized, but instead we were off to climb Rainbow Mountain and…I was totally pain-free!
I know it sounds impossible, but it’s 1000% the truth.