What is Depressed Mood?
Need some information on Depressed Mood? Watching this short video is a good place to start.
ePST (electronic Problem-solving Treatment) is a web-based program aimed at reducing symptoms of mood disorders, stress, and anxiety through Problem Solving Therapy which is based on cognitive behavioral therapy. A virtual coach guides the user through a six step program: stating a problem, setting a goal, brainstorming solutions, choosing a solution, making an action plan, and enjoyable activities. The virtual coach provides personalized feedback and interactive activities. ePST records users’ self-assessments in order to track their progress. ePST will cost users $420, which includes six digital sessions guided by a virtual coach.
Available for: Web Browser
Type of Treatment: Cognitive Behavioral Principles
Targeted Conditions: Mood Disorders, Stress and Anxiety
Target Audience: Not Specified
Designed to be used in conjunction with a professional? No
Languages Available: English
Get it on: Web
This study wanted to evaluate the efficacy of an interactive media-based, computer-delivered depression treatment program, the program being ePST. 45 participants with major depressive disorder or dysthymia were randomized to either a condition that received 6 weekly sessions of ePST (n= 25) or a control condition that received nothing at all (n= 20). The primary outcome measure was the Beck Depression Inventory II. It was found that those in the experimental group had a significantly greater reduction in depressive symptoms compared to those in the control condition. 40% of the participants in the experimental group showed clinically significant and reliable changes in depression while none in the control condition met this criterion. (Sandoval et al., 2017, https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0005789416300090?via%3Dihub)
This pilot study aimed to test the efficacy of a computer-guided problem solving treatment (ePST) for reducing symptoms of depression, posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), and insomnia in student military veterans. 24 student veterans were recruited for this study with symptoms of depression and were randomly assigned to either a treatment group (six weekly sessions of ePST) or minimal contact control group. Participants completed questionnaires of depression, PTSD, and insomnia at baseline and post treatments. Results showed improvements in depression, PTSD, and insomnia symptoms. (Bedford, Dietch, Taylor, Boals, & Zayfert, 2017, https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0005789417301284)
This feasibility study wanted to evaluate the usability, acceptability, credibility, therapeutic alliance and efficacy of ePST. 29 people took part in this study. Depressive symptoms and health-related functioning were assessed at baseline, treatment midpoint and study endpoint. Depression outcomes were compared to previously published research on live PST and computer based depression therapy. Participants used the program for 9 weeks which comprised of 6 ePST sessions. They reported that a therapeutic alliance comparable to that observed in live therapy. Depressive symptoms improved significantly over time as well. Where at baseline, 83% of ePST participants met criteria for either or both major depressive disorder or dysthymic disorder. Then at the end of the trial that number dropped to 18% of participants who met the criteria for either or both major depression or dysthymia. (Sandoval et al., 2017, https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0005789416300090?via%3Dihub)
We review apps against rating criteria developed by experts in the field. Some of those criteria are:
We look at the research supporting the technology and the credibility of the development process.
We review privacy policies to see if key pieces of information about what happens with entered data are addressed.
We explore how fun, functional, easy-to-use, engaging, and interesting the technology is.
A professional in a relevant field downloads and uses the technology and writes a narrative review, highlighting pros & cons and some recommendations for use.