In this post I share my top picks for safe kid games. Whether your kids want to brush up on their math skills or explore other science and social studies topics, these interactive activities will make the process both entertaining and informative.
ABCya is a website that provides free learning games for kids in grades Pre K through 6. ABCya learning Games are organized by grade and subject area and cover a wide array of topics including math, typing, literacy, pattern recognition, word formation, and more.
2. Cool Math Games
Cool Math Games offers access to a wide range of free math games that help students sharpen their mathematical skills. These include free thinking, strategy, and logic games. Cool Math games are student friendly and can be used in school and at home. They target various learning skills and cognitive competencies. Check out Cool Math Games full review to learn more.
Prodigy Math Game is an online game-based learning website that helps students practice and learn math through fun and engaging games. As students play, Prodigy’s adaptive algorithm delivers curriculum-aligned math questions and in-game rewards to get them engaged and keep them focused on the learning process. Check out Prodigy full review to learn more.
Digipuzzle is a website that offers a wide variety of free online educational games for kids. These games target various skill areas from math and geography to science and human body. I spent some time browsing through and trying a number of these games and found them entertaining and fun. Check out Digipuzzle full review to learn more.
5. Crossword Puzzle Games
Want to crete crossword puzzle games for kids? Check out this collection featuring some of the best crossword puzzle makers that you can use to easily create and share a wide variety of crossword puzzle games. These tools are simple and easy to use.
Simply type in or paste your words and answers and click on generate to create your crossword puzzles. You can share your puzzles online, embed them on any website or blog, or print them out and use them offline.The tools also offer ready-made crossword puzzle games to use right away in your instruction.
6. Math Playground
Math Playground is an educational website that offers a wide variety of math games, videos and interactive activities for students in kindergarten to grade six. The games are organized by subject and grade level and some of them are aligned to Common Core Standards. Math Playground games cover different topics including fraction games, division games, multiplication games, ratio games, pre-algebra games, geometry games, and more. Check out Math Playground full review to learn more.
SplashLearn offers a huge collection of fun and interactive online math games. You can search for games by grade (from Pre-K to grade 5)or by topic. Use the left sidebar to browse through math topics. For instance, some of the topics covered include number sense, subtraction, multiplication, division, fractions, decimals, algebra, word problems, time, addition, and more. Each topic includes a number of subtopics. Check out SplashLearn full review to learn more.
PrimaryGames offers a wide range of educational games that target specificlaly math and reading. The site also offers free printable coloring pages, worksheets, educational videos, and several other resources. You will also find free holiday and seasonal themed actvities, games, coloring pages and jokes.
Mr Nussbaum has this interesting collection of fun online educational games to use with your kids and students. Most of these games come with instructional videos and other resources to help learners play the game. Topics covered include math, science, language arts, history, geography, and many more.
RoomRecess is another great website where you can access school safe games. The site was developed entirely by an elementary school teacher with the goal of reinforcing fundamental learning concepts in math, reading, spelling, language arts, typing, and problem solving.” No sign up required.
11. Coding Games
12. BrainPOP Jr.
Leave A Comment