Why We Don't Remember Edith Galt Wilson as the "First Woman President"
by Richard Bluttal
While the First Lady ran the executive branch while concealing the extent of Woodrow Wilson's ill health after a stroke, her unofficial stewardship raises too many questions about secrecy and its consequences to be celebrated today.
Again, Russia is at the Center of an American-Backed War for Democracy
by James D. Robenalt
The abdication of Tsar Nicholas II in 1917 removed a major principled objection to calls for Americans to fight for the sake of democracy. The moral lines are clearer today, but once again Russia is at the center of an American debate about intervention.
SOURCE: Saturday Evening Post
The Dangerous “Patriotism” of the January 6 Insurrection
by Ben Railton
The participants in the attack on the Capitol a year ago reflected a "mythic patriotism" founded on the belief in an authentic, white, Christian nation under attack by enemies dangerous enough to justify any measures in opposition.
SOURCE: The New Republic
American Education Is Founded on White Race Theory
In the 1890s the National Education Association worked to standardize the national secondary curriculum, deciding what subjects were worthy of study, and in the process developing a white supremacist curriculum in history.
Could Wilson have Ended the Great War Two Years Earlier? Zelikow's "Road Less Traveled" Reviewed
by James Thornton Harris
Philip Zelikow's book is a provocative and contrarian argument that Woodrow Wilson missed a chance to end the first world war in 1916.
SOURCE: Keeping Democracy Alive
Peace Was on the Floor in 1916-17, but Wilson Failed to Pick it Up
by Burt Cohen
Burt Cohen discusses Philip Zelikow's book which argues that diplomatic failures by the great powers extended the first world war by two years and contributed to the catastrophes of fascism and Stalinism.
SOURCE: Made By History at the Washington Post
President Biden is a Very Different Pandemic President than Woodrow Wilson
by E. Thomas Ewing
A century ago, there was little expectation that a US President would have much to say about a public health emergency, even one of national scope.
Peace, Waiting to Be Picked Up: The Secret Diplomacy Failure of 1916 that Changed the World
by Philip Zelikow
In 1916, the major warring powers of Europe secretly pursued an American-brokered, face-saving peace. Confined to the shadows, the negotiations came close, but failed, with grave consequences for the world.
SOURCE: Washington Post
The Complicated Racial History of the High School D.C. is Renaming
Renaming Woodrow Wilson High after Edna Burke Jackson, who taught history as one of two Black faculty members in the years after desegregation, is an obvious choice.
SOURCE: Norfolk Virginian-Pilot
Wrestling With Woodrow Wilson’s Complicated Legacy
A longtime Virginia political observer suggests that there is more to learn by considering Woodrow Wilson's complex social views and political legacy than by taking his clear racism as reason to hide him from sight.
SOURCE: Made By History at The Washington Post
Trump’s Illness, like Woodrow Wilson’s Stroke, Could be Turning Point in History
by Christopher McKnight Nichols
Presidential illness and disability have historically functioned as a turning point from which presidents never fully recover even if their bodies and minds do.
How Woodrow Wilson Tried to Reverse Black American Progress
Historian Eric S. Yellin discusses the impact of Wilson's decision to impose segregation on federal employment, a major blow to black aspirations.
Woodrow Wilson Was a Hero to Jews. What Should We do with his Racism?
by Jonathan D. Sarna
Many find it discomforting to learn that Wilson was, at one and the same time, so bad for American Blacks and so good for American Jews.
Princeton University Removes Woodrow Wilson From School Name (Audio)
Julian Zelizer discusses Princeton's decision to rename its school of Public Policy.
Parents, Historians Urge DC’s Mayor Bowser To Initiate Wilson High Name Change
Honoring a person like Wilson sends a poor message when in general, society should be honoring the ideals of diversity, respect, equality and inclusion said Judith Ingram, co-founder of the D.C. History and Justice Collective.
SOURCE: Chronicle of Higher Education
‘An Inappropriate Namesake’: Princeton Strips Woodrow Wilson’s Name From Public-Policy School
Princeton's decision is all the more notable for how recently the university had resisted this precise step.
SOURCE: The New Yorker
The History That James Baldwin Wanted America to See
by Eddie S. Glaude, Jr.
"In his reflections on King, Baldwin wrote that we were witnessing the death of segregation, and that the question was how long and how expensive the funeral would be. If only he knew."
SOURCE: New York Times
Monmouth University to Remove Woodrow Wilson’s Name From Building
Historians, including some at Monmouth, have said that Wilson believed in white supremacy and advanced policies to support his racist worldview.
Woman Citizen: On This Day in 1920 Helen Hamilton Gardener Became the Highest-Ranking Woman in Federal Government
by Kimberly A. Hamlin
Gardener’s historic appointment as U.S. Civil Service Commissioner marked one symbolic step toward the idea that women should be universally recognized as “self- respecting, self- directing human units with brains and bodies sacredly their own.”
SOURCE: New York Times
Woodrow Wilson and ‘the Ugliest of Treacheries’
by Erez Manela
After World War I, America was supposed to lead the fight against colonialism. What happened?
- Chair of Florida Charter School Board on Firing of Principal: About Policy, Not David Statue
- Graduate Student Strikes Fight Back Against Decades of Austerity, Seek to Revive Opportunity
- When Right Wingers Struggle with Defining "Woke" it Shows they Oppose Pursuing Equality
- Strangelove on the Square: Secret USAF Films Showed Airmen What to Expect if Nuclear War Broke Out
- The Women of the Montgomery Bus Boycott
- New Books Force Consideration of Reconstruction's End from Black Perspective
- Excerpt: How Apartheid South Africa Tried to Create a Libertarian Utopia
- Historian's Book on 1970s NBA Shows Racial Politics around Basketball Have Always Been Ugly
- Kendi: "Anti-woke" Part of Backlash Against Antiracist Protest Movements
- Monica Muñoz Martinez Honored for Truth-Telling in Texas History