Strengthen your immunity against spring fatigue
With the arrival of spring, complaints such as fatigue and weakness begin to appear.
You can reduce spring fatigue, which prevents you from enjoying the spring months, with the foods you eat. Foods that you can add to your diet to reduce spring fatigue that occurs with symptoms such as weakness, sleepiness and depressed mood…
Foods that are good for spring fatigue
Weakness, sleepiness, and a depressed mood are among the symptoms of spring fatigue. If you keep your immunity strong by getting the vitamins and minerals you need from vegetables and fruits, spring fatigue can pass you by.
Strawberry is rich in potassium, which is effective in preventing spring fatigue, and antioxidants that increase body resistance. It is also beneficial in eliminating edema that causes fatigue. Since it is a fruit with high water and fiber content, it is both a satiating fruit, a low glycemic index and a good fruit for those who are on a diet. However, don't be fooled by its flavor and overdo it because it has a high carbohydrate content.
high in fiber: Asparagus
Asparagus is a vegetable high in fiber and low in carbohydrates. The fibers in its structure have a natural laxative effect, increasing bowel movements and accelerating circulation. Thanks to its high content of vitamins A, B and K, as well as magnesium and folic acid, it strengthens immunity and helps you feel resistant
Boost your immunity with peas
Peas, which are rich in calcium, iron and potassium, are an important nutrient in meeting daily mineral needs because of the content. Being full of mineral stores increases the body's resistance to diseases. It strengthens immunity with its content of vitamins A and B. Being a strong antioxidant with chlorophyll in its structure, peas increase the body's resistance against diseases.
Get rid of edema from the body with zucchini
Zucchini, which is a vegetable rich in vitamin A, fiber and potassium, is an important food that you can consume hot or cold. Vitamin A in its content strengthens the immune system, increases body resistance. Its caloric value is also very low due to its high water content. Thanks to the fiber and potassium it contains, it increases the speed of intestinal functioning; It gives vitality by removing edema, which is an important cause of weakness and fatigue, from the body.
Remove toxins with cucumber
Since it is a food rich in potassium, it helps to eliminate edema. Due to its high water content, it helps to increase fluid circulation and bowel movements. Increasing bowel movements helps to remove toxins from the body and increase vitality. It is a good food for dieters because its energy value is very low.
eat greens raw
Fresh greens such as arugula, mint and parsley are good antioxidants with their high chlorophyll content. Thanks to the fibers they contain, they increase bowel movements. Due to their richness in vitamin C, they should also be consumed raw. All of them are good edema removers because they show water-repellent properties.
Food rich in Omega 3: Purslane
The majority of purslane consists of water. But its immune-boosting effect is great. It gets this feature from omega 3 fatty acids. Purslane, which is the richest vegetable in omega 3, also plays an important role in the storage of iron and calcium in the body. In this way, you will not feel the spring fatigue or you can get over it in a very short time.