While there are many potential causes for your air conditioner to malfunction, we’ll concentrate on the causes of an AC capacitor that keeps blowing and what to do in this circumstance.
The most frequent causes of an AC capacitor blowing include the following:
- Voltage Spikes
- Brief Circuits
- Damage and Wear
Replace the damaged capacitor to get your air conditioner back to working order if it has blown. It is best to get in touch with a pro to replace it.
This article will go into deeper detail about the causes of frequent AC capacitor blowouts. We will also talk about the signs you should watch out for to spot a bad capacitor.
What Leads To An AC Capacitor Blowing Up?
You must first comprehend why an AC capacitor blows out before you can learn how to deal with one. The most typical causes of a blown capacitor are covered in this section:
A power spike can’t be handled by an AC capacitor. As per the design, it can only function under a certain voltage; any higher voltage causes it to disintegrate.
Thunderstorms can also cause power surges. When lightning hits, your home’s electrical system may get overloaded, which may then trigger a power surge throughout all of your electrical appliances.
Similar to a power surge, a short circuit can result in an excessive amount of electricity flowing into the components, damaging them. The improper direction taken by electricity can cause short circuits, though. This causes an issue with your air conditioner and has a significant impact on how effectively your capacitor operates.
Any flaws that could cause a short-circuit can be fixed with regular maintenance. As a result, your air conditioner continues to function properly.
When your air conditioner is working hard and a piece of it is outside your home, it is very likely that the system will overheat. Extreme heat makes your air conditioner work harder to make up for the excessive heat, especially during the summer.
Your capacitor will likely fail and blow when that occurs. The delicate wiring of the capacitor may become stressed from too much heat, which will eventually lead to failure.
Damage And Wear
Like any other electrical component, your AC capacitor will deteriorate and eventually fail over time. After all, they are all limited in their lifespans and cannot last indefinitely. Additionally, wear and tear is likely to occur because the AC occasionally operates in challenging situations.
How To Fix An AC Capacitor That Has Bloated
The only option you have when you think your air conditioner has a blown AC capacitor is to replace it.
Although a homeowner can complete this task on their own, most experts do not advise it. For people with little or no knowledge, the electrical wiring and components inside the air conditioner might result in tragic mishaps.
Therefore, it is preferable to hire an expert to examine and replace a blown capacitor.
What Indicates An AC Capacitor Is Faulty?
This list can assist you if you want to determine whether your air conditioner has a blown capacitor. The majority of the typical signs that the capacitor is bad are as follows:
Lack Of Cool Air Blowing From AC
When your air conditioner starts spewing heated air, that is one of the first indications that you have a blown capacitor.
This is a surefire clue that you have a bad capacitor since the capacitor is in charge of sending power bursts to start the cooling cycle.
Additionally, compared to other motors, the capacitor becomes the primary position. As a result, when a capacitor isn’t functioning properly, the performance of the entire system is affected. You get heated air emanating from your equipment as a result.
The second common symptom of an overheating system is a burning odour. So, if your air conditioner starts to smell like rubber and plastic, something is wrong. This typically occurs as a result of the electrical components in your system wearing out.
The problem can be temporarily fixed by lubricating the affected parts, but the best long-term fix is to replace the capacitor and other problematic components.
It’s very likely that your capacitor is damaged or under stress if you hear a sound that resembles buzzing. Try turning off the air conditioner and then turning it back on to see if it fixes the problem to determine if the capacitor is to blame.
It’s time to see a specialist to take a look if the problem continues. A series of tests will be performed by the HVAC specialist to determine whether additional parts in addition to the capacitor require replacement.
Rising Electric Bills
The effectiveness of an AC is decreased by a faulty capacitor. This inefficiency increases the unit’s energy consumption. You waste energy as a result, and you get broke.
By replacing the capacitor, you can prevent dealing with a broken air conditioner and save money over time.
Another symptom of a faulty capacitor is your air conditioner abruptly turning off. This erratic state of operation is due to the capacitor’s failure to initiate the cooling cycle.
As a result, the system is stressed, which causes it to overheat. The air conditioner shuts off after a set period of time to avoid further problems.
It Does Not Turn On
Your air conditioner does not always cut off at random. Instead, it simply won’t turn on at all.
This might be because the capacitor can’t handle the voltage. But the majority of the time, it’s because the capacitor needs to be replaced because it never worked in the first place.
Machines are not enduring. The likelihood that their components will malfunction and require replacement increases with age.
This frequently leads to you having to replace the entire system. Therefore, if your air conditioner is at least a few decades old, the problem is likely not limited to a bad capacitor. And as a result, it’s best to buy a new machine in its stead at that point.
Will A Bad Capacitor Still Work In An AC Unit?
Simple “no” is the shortest response to this question. The majority of the motors inside an air conditioner are started by the capacitor. An air conditioner with a damaged capacitor will operate poorly or not at all, but it will quickly lose power.
What Is The Price Of Repairing A Blown Capacitor?
A blown capacitor can be repaired for anything from $60 to $300. A drop or increase in price could be caused by a number of things in addition to where you reside and your budget.
First, everything relies on how serious the issue is. The capacitor’s own cost follows. Check whether there are many experts in your area who are able to fix a blown capacitor before talking about labour prices.
Due to an electrical surge, a short circuit, excessive heat, or ordinary wear and tear, your AC capacitor could blow.
Some of these difficulties can be mitigated by routine maintenance before they turn into major issues. To get the AC working properly again if the capacitor blows, you must replace it.
GIPHY App Key not set. Please check settings