On this Tuesday, October 4, 2022, at sundown, begins the Jewish Holiday, Yom Kippur. Yom Kippur will last until the evening of October 5, 2022.
This is the Highest Holy Day on the Jewish calendar. It marks the culmination of the ten “Days of Awe” from Rosh Hashanah [the Jewish New year] to Yom Kippur [the Day of Atonement].
From History.com-Yom Kippur:
“Yom Kippur—the Day of Atonement—is considered the most important holiday in the Jewish faith. Falling in the month of Tishrei (September or October in the Gregorian calendar), it marks the culmination of the 10 Days of Awe, a period of introspection and repentance that follows Rosh Hashanah, the Jewish New Year. According to tradition, it is on Yom Kippur that God decides each person’s fate, so Jews are encouraged to make amends and ask forgiveness for sins committed during the past year. The holiday is observed with a 25-hour fast and a special religious service. Yom Kippur and Rosh Hashanah are known as Judaism’s “High Holy Days.” Yom Kippur 2022 begins on the evening of Tuesday, October 4 and ends on the evening of Wednesday, October 5.”
The evening service [on October 4, 2022] of Yom Kippur is often referred to as the Kol Nidre Service [“All Vows” service]. The first prayer service actually takes place immediately prior to sunset on the evening of Yom Kippur.
It has become traditional for the Kol Nidrei vows to be recited with the accompaniment of the classical music composer Max Bruch’s solemn “Kol Nidre” music.
The service on the day of Yom Kippur [October 5, 2022] lasts from morning until nightfall.
Shana Tovah said on Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur and throughout the ten Days of Awe means simply ‘a good year’ in Hebrew. It is a wish for you to have a good new year.
On the 10th day just before Yom Kippur the phrase Gmar Chatima Tova is said which means “A good final sealing” or “May you be inscribed [in the book of life] for good”. It is generally said to also mean “may you have a healthy, peaceful and fulfilling year”.
Please enjoy this beautiful rendition of the recitation of the Kol Nidre, as sung by the great Johnny Mathis.
To all Jews I wish an easy fast on this Yom Kippur.