Sarah Superfloopstein, better known as the inventor of the Eternal Popcorn Generator, was born to a modest family with a mother and father who cared for her. At the early age of three, she showed a strong yearning for education, to which her parents happily supported her, happy to buy books and discuss all sorts of scientific ideas with her - those that she could grasp at such a young age. It was no surprise when she skipped kindergarten and also no surprise when she excelled in every grade she was in thereafter. She was taking college courses during her high school years, and it wasn't long until she graduated college with her Master's in Engineering and Science, with honors. 

Eager to get to work, she was invited to work at the Lab of Theoretical Sciences and jumped at the opportunity. There, she worked with her peers to run tests, verify, and even create new inventions (or improve older ones). One of her lesser-known contributions is her work on improving the lifespans of apples, giving them twice as much time before they rot and become unfeasible for human consumption. However, it was here that she would work on her biggest invention, the Eternal Popcorn Generator. As a result of previous work, they had discovered certain wormholes and dimensions they could access, if often for brief times. One of these dimensions was one filled with an unlimited amount of popcorn, already popped and never-aging until they were brought into our dimension. Working with a small team, they created an appliance that could tap into this dimension with the flip of a switch, as long as enough electricity was supplied to keep the portal open. And so she was paid trillions for her idea and scientific knowledge and became one of the richest people in the world.

In her final years, she retired to a lakeside home, where she continued her research on her terms. She was able to learn much about the different dimensions and their applications but never had quite the same breakthrough that went into the Eternal Popcorn Generator. Eventually, old age caught up to her, and in a bed surrounded by many of her closest friends, relatives, and young scientists she inspired, she passed away. But even now, her legacy remains strong, and her invention is a staple in every household.
