Insect bites can be annoying, but usually don’t require urgent medical care. If the bite is small and there is no swelling or irritation, you can wait a few days and see if it clears up. Some home remedies can help, like honey, baking soda, or ointments. However, if you have an allergic reaction to a bee sting or a bacterial infection from a tick bite, you will need to go to urgent care. If you currently have an insect bite and are unsure if you should go to urgent care or not, this blog post will help you know the answer to your issue.
When Do Insect Bites and Stings Require Urgent Care?
If you have a small insect bite or sting that is not causing allergic reactions or irritation, it can be safely treated at home. One of the most common reactions to an insect bite or sting is a small, itchy bump. This is usually nothing to worry about and can be treated with over-the-counter antihistamines or calamine lotion. However, if you have any of the following symptoms, you should seek urgent medical care.
1 – A High Fever
If you have a high fever (above 101 degrees Fahrenheit) and you have been bitten by a tick or other type of insect, it is important to seek medical care right away. A tick bite can cause a serious bacterial infection called Lyme disease. Lyme disease can cause high fevers and is difficult to treat.
2 – Severe Allergic Reaction
Severe allergic reactions to an insect bite or stings will need medical care right away. Severe allergic reactions can cause difficulty breathing and can be life-threatening. Also, a bad allergic reaction may cause extreme discomfort and make it difficult for a person to function normally. Seeking medical attention from an urgent care center is the right way to go.
3 – Difficulty in Breathing
Insect bites and stings can cause several different reactions, and some of them can be serious. Anaphylaxis is one of the more serious reactions to insect bites. This is a potentially life-threatening reaction that can cause a plethora of other issues.
Some symptoms of anaphylaxis include difficulty breathing, swelling of the throat or tongue, hives, itching, and nausea or vomiting. If you experience any of these symptoms, it is important to seek medical attention immediately, as anaphylaxis can be a life-threatening reaction.
4 – Swelling and Redness
If you have swelling and redness around the insect bite or sting that is not improving after a few days, you should seek medical care. Swelling and redness can be a sign of a serious infection. Also, if you’re experiencing pain, itching, or burning, try to resist the urge to scratch or rub the area. This will only make the symptoms worse and could lead to an infection. Instead, try using a cool compress to help soothe the area. Finally, if you know you’re allergic to insect bites or stings, it’s important to seek medical attention immediately. An allergic reaction can be life-threatening, so it’s best to err on the side of caution.
5 – Pain
Most insect bites and stings will cause a minimal level of pain and discomfort. However, if you’re experiencing severe pain or pain that seemingly isn’t going away, you should seek medical attention. In some cases, severe pain can be a sign of an infection or a more serious reaction. Also, if you’re experiencing pain that is not alleviated by over-the-counter pain medications, you should seek medical attention.
Insect bites and stings are a common occurrence, especially in the summer months. Most bites and stings will cause a minor level of pain and itching and will resolve on their own. However, there are some cases where you should seek medical attention. If you have a severe reaction or have a large area of skin that is affected, have an allergy specifically to insect bites and stings, or have a bite that seems to be infected, you should seek medical attention.
If you need immediate medical attention for your insect bites, come to Agile Urgent Care. We are a full-service, walk-in medical facility providing convenient, state-of-the-art, and affordable service for injuries or illnesses that can’t wait for your regular doctor but aren’t serious enough for a costly emergency room visit. Our doctors and nurses treat children, adolescents, adults, and geriatric patients.