How to do a bibliography in mla style. How to Write a Bibliography 2023-01-01
How to do a bibliography in mla style Rating:
A bibliography is a list of sources that have been used in the research and writing of a paper. In the Modern Language Association (MLA) style, a bibliography is typically called a "Works Cited" list and is placed at the end of a paper. Creating a bibliography in MLA style involves following specific guidelines for formatting the entries in the list. Here are the steps for doing a bibliography in MLA style:
Begin the Works Cited page on a new page at the end of the paper.
Center the title "Works Cited" at the top of the page. Do not italicize, bold, or underline this title.
Double-space the list of sources.
Indent the first line of each entry half an inch from the left margin. Subsequent lines of the same entry should be indented an additional half inch. This is known as a hanging indent.
Alphabetize the list of sources by the first word in each entry. Ignore articles (a, an, the) when alphabetizing.
Format the entries according to the type of source. For example, a book should be formatted differently from an article in a journal. Consult the MLA Handbook or the Purdue OWL website for specific guidelines on formatting different types of sources.
Use quotation marks around titles of articles, poems, and short stories. Italicize titles of books, films, and long poems.
Use the author's last name and the page number for in-text citations. If the source has multiple authors, use the first author's last name followed by "et al."
Include a corresponding in-text citation for each source listed in the Works Cited page.
Here is an example of a bibliography in MLA style for a book with one author:
Smith, John. The History of Time. New York: Random House, 2010.
And here is an example of a bibliography in MLA style for an article in a journal:
Jones, Susan. "The Evolution of Communication." Journal of Modern Technology, vol. 3, no. 2, 2010, pp. 45-52.
By following these guidelines, you can create a Works Cited page that adheres to the MLA style and accurately lists the sources you have used in your paper.
Creating an MLA Bibliography
Here is a chart explaining the differences between the two styles that are important when you have to choose between APA or MLA as a whole, and not just specifically as they relate to bibliographies. When reports were written on typewriters, the names of publications were underlined because most typewriters had no way to print italics. Add a period after the name. Wurmser, Meyrav, and Yotam Feldner. The bibliography is a list of works cited in MLA,APA or another citation style; the annotations describe responses to the content; can be long or short. Write the first author's name in inverted order LastName, FirstName , but write every following author's name in normal order FirstName LastName. Example annotated bibliography The below is an example of an annotated bibliography: Annotated Bibliography Morritt, Robert D.
The Power of Focus for College Students. New York Review of Books 13 Jan. Use a hanging indent if the entry is longer than one line. Williams, and Adam Schroeder. New York: Chelsea, 1986, 31-44. Etc Have you listed your bibliography in alphabetical order — by surname? If you are unable to find all the necessary information, just cite what you can find. With Scott to the Pole: The Terra Nova Expedition 1910-1913.
Wonders of the World: Masterpieces of Architecture from 4000 BC to the Present. Encarta 2004 Reference Library. By Roger Allers and Irene Mecchi. Augustine, Saint, Bishop of Hippo. The Family: A Novel. LaRocque 52 MLA also had standards for formatting your paper. Example: Butarbutar, R, et al.
How to Write a Bibliography in MLA Format with Examples
The data shows that citations are important Organization for Research. Iona Catholic Secondary School, Mississauga, ON. Arc de Triomphe, Paris. It may help to think of it as a narrative of your response to the article or book you read. It is not essential to include the file size. Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996. Jennifer Lopez and Jane Fonda.
MLA format Creator last name, First name. When including page numbers in a citation, use the abbreviation p. Example, with Publication Date Lorenzi, Rossella. MLA 8 th edition vs MLA 9 th edition The 9 th edition of the MLA handbook re-introduces guidelines regarding paper formatting which were not present in the 8 th edition. It is important to note that it must be a complete list including every source used during the research phase — not just the ones referenced in the text in any styles of writing.
IEEE Software Engineering, 6 6 , 31—50. In your Bibliography, Works Cited, or References page, you must include all of the above When writing a bibliography, remember that the purpose is to communicate to the reader, in a standardized manner, the sources that you have used in sufficient detail to be identified. Plungis, Jeff, Ed Garsten, and Mark Truby. Peter Lang, 2004, pp. Generally, a minimum of three items are required for an Internet citation: Title, Access Date, and URL. This list is generally alphabetized and is referred to as Resources, Works Cited, or Bibliography.
Sources with three or more authors For a source with three or more authors, only type the last and first name of the first author listed in the source, followed by a comma and the phrase et al. Sally Harris ENG 111 7 November 2013 All of the headers in your paper should have your last name and page number in the upper right corner. The Oxford Book of American Literacy Anecdotes. Directed by David Ayer, performances by Brad Pitt, Shia LaBeouf, Jon Bernthal, Sony Pictures, 2014. Suzuki, David, Amanda McConnell, and Maria DeCambra. How to get started writing your bibliography You will find it easier to prepare your MLA, APA, or Chicago annotated bibliography if you keep track of each book, encyclopedia, journal article, webpage or online source you use as you are reading and taking notes.
By Andrew Lloyd Webber. Encyclopedia of Cultural Anthropology. Letter 850318 of Mark Twain. What is bibliography and example? LeBlanc, Susan, and Cameron MacKeen. Fully capitalize all titles except for articles and prepositions. Ormsby Wilkins and Uri Mayer.
Herbie Barnes, Michael Simpson, and Chris Heyerdahl. The data shows that citations are important Williams, Jones, and Smith. Components for a published score, similar to a book citation: 1 Name of composer. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice, 1991. Citing videos with a different creator and uploader Sometimes, you might want to cite a video that has been uploaded by someone other than the creator. These days there are numerous quality formatting software products on the market that can help take the tedium out of this aspect of academic writing.
Basic components of an Internet citation: 1 Author. With the month-day-year style, be sure to add a comma after the year unless another punctuation mark goes there. Links 2003: Championship Courses. Baroque: Architecture, Sculpture, Painting. The author, publisher and page information is concluded with a short description of the actual content or quality of the source used. Yale University Press, 1998.