Blossoms on a Potted Lemon Tree
Are your lemon tree flowers falling off? Citrus fruits can be touchy. Even a citrus plant that is in good soil, in a large pot and in a perfect sunny spot can start to develop problems like bud drop, leaf drop or bloom drop. Some small things that you might not think about can affect the blossoms on a potted lemon tree. Even in a sunny spot, things like drafts from a door opening and closing could cause you to lose blossoms on a potted lemon tree.
If your lemon tree is in a pot, chances are you're growing it indoors. Lemons (Citrus limon) typically grow outdoors in U.S. Department of Agriculture plant hardiness zones 9 through 11, according to the National Gardening Association. In orchards, most citrus can grow more than 20 feet tall in the ground, but dwarf types can be kept at a manageable 3 to 5 feet tall in containers, which makes them perfect for sunny spots in the house.
Growing Citrus Indoors
The University of Wisconsin-Madison Master Gardener Program points out that indoor citrus plants need as much bright light as possible, such as in a south-facing or southwest-facing window. Even placement in a sunny window may not be enough light for an indoor citrus plant if the windows in your home have coatings that prevent infrared and ultraviolet light from getting in. If that is the case, you may need supplemental lighting in the form of grow lamps.
Citrus plants grow best between 55 degrees Fahrenheit and 85 degrees Fahrenheit. They do not like to freeze, but some species can tolerate it for very short periods of time. In order to flower, citrus trees need a day and night temperature difference of five to 10 degrees. Wait until your outdoor temperatures are consistently above 50 degrees Fahrenheit before you move your potted lemon trees outdoors. Move them back indoors once night temperatures approach 40 degrees Fahrenheit.
Temperature is very important to potted lemons and other citrus. The National Gardening Association says that drafts, cold temperatures or fluctuations in soil moisture might be the cause of your lemon tree flowers falling off.
Lemon Tree Flower Buds
The National Gardening Association also says that if the needs of the plant are being met and your lemon tree flowers but has no fruit, try hand-pollinating the buds that are there by dabbing the inside of each flower with a fine camel's hair paintbrush and transferring the pollen to another blossom. Outdoors, wind and insects do a lot of pollination, so if you notice that your potted lemon tree flowers but has no fruit or has very small fruit, hand-pollinating can help, says University of Wisconsin-Madison Master Gardener Program.
It also says that it is common for potted trees to set more fruit than the plant can produce, so seeing fruit dropping off is not a rare sight. When lemon trees flower, clusters of fragrant, white flowers are produced at the ends of the stems. Most citrus trees bloom in spring and then set fruit that is ready to harvest in fall and winter, although you may see stages of blossoms, fruit growth and fruit maturity all year round.
If you happen to have more than one type of citrus in pots or you misplace your plant tags and can't remember which plant is which, look for a purplish color on the blossoms. You will typically see purple buds on a lemon tree, while the flowers of a lime tree will be more white.
Lemon Tree Fertilizer
It takes a lot of work to create blossoms and grow large fruit such as a lemon. Citrus plants need a lot of fertilizer to be healthy, including more nitrogen than phosphorus or potassium. University of Wisconsin-Madison Master Gardener Program supports using specialized fertilizer for citrus and avocado. If you don't have that, give them an all-purpose or acid-loving plant fertilizer that supplies at least a 2-1-1 ratio.
Oregon State University says the best lemon tree fertilizer is one labeled for rhododendrons and blueberries. Your plant store may also have some fertilizer labeled specifically for citrus, especially if you live in an area where a lot of citrus is grown. The same fertilizer works for rhodies, blueberries and lemons because all three like acidic soil. Fertilize in the summer.
One sign that your potted lemon tree may need more fertilizer is yellowing leaves. Oregon State University says that flower, fruit or leaf drop can happen when there is not enough water. Temperature can also have an effect, such as nights that are too cool or temperature variations that are too great.
<div class="gmail_default" style="font-family:arial,helvetica,sans-serif;font-size:small;color:#351c75"><div class="gmail_default"><font color="#000000"><span style="font-family: arial, sans-serif; font-size: 14px;">Vanessa is an avid gardener with experience helping things grow in the three corners of the country where she has lived </span><span style="font-family: arial, sans-serif; font-size: 14px;">— Florida, Pennsylvania, and Oregon. She is also a journalist and marketing content creator who enjoys cooking and eating, both helpful hobbies for a gardener. </span><br clear="all"></font></div><div></div></div>