A new Silicon Valley craze could make people sick - Jen Kirby
image by: Tourmaline Spring
What to know about the “raw water” trend
Untreated, unfiltered “raw water” is apparently the hot new fad around Silicon Valley, or so says a recent New York Times trend piece.
People are eschewing tap and bottled water in favor of an icy cold glass of untreated spring water — so-called “raw” or “unprocessed” water — which proponents say has beneficial minerals that are removed from treated or filtered water, and doesn’t include chemicals in tap water, such as fluoride, or move through infrastructure such as lead pipes.
Some are paying a lot more for the luxury of drinking water that might not have fluoride but could still have chemicals from pesticides and dangerous bacteria. Also animal poop.
The “raw water”…
Raw Water: Here Is What You Need To Know Before You Buy It
Water is not treated and cleaned for fun. Untreated water can include microorganisms such as: Giardia lamblia: This parasite can cause a diarrhea-causing disease called Giardiasis, otherwise known as “beaver fever.” Note: it is not Bieber fever, which is a completely different thing.
The Latest Wacky Food Craze, 'Raw Water,' Could Kill You
Wasn't that long ago, we were writing about drinking water being sold in milk cartons. Then mineral water from an expanded Evian bottling plant on Lake Geneva. Now it's a new pseudo-scientific craze called raw, or off-the-grid, water.
Why the Raw Water Movement Is So Obnoxious
It doesn’t just reveal Silicon Valley’s idiocy and love of capitalism. It exposes their disinterest in everyone else.
With ‘Raw Water’ Trend, Tech Elites Have Scraped the Bottom of the Barrel
Raw water—the untreated, unfiltered variety the pioneers were forced to drink as they made their trek across the plains — is now in vogue. At least, it is among some new-age consumers who are gullible enough to believe it’s somehow better than tap water, and foolish enough to pay $6 a gallon for it, bacteria included.
'Raw Water' Is an Expensive Trend You Should Only Try if You Like Diarrhea
The founder of Live Water says that his water will stay fresh for “one lunar cycle” before it turns green. Sounds totally safe!
Actually, Slate, You Really Should Filter Your Water
While most giardia, e. coli, cyrptosporideum, and waterborne pathogens induce fairly minor illnesses in adults, the effects can be much more severe if the infected person suffers from immunosuppression, is very young or old, or, as with my friend, is simply unlucky. In children, for instance, the CDC says giardiasis can may lead to symptoms as severe as delayed physical and mental growth, slow development, and malnutrition.
All the cool new friends you'll meet when you drink raw water
So many buddies are going to show up in your GI tract.
Get Real With $6-a-Gallon ‘Raw Water’
The trend toward ‘authenticity’ in food has led consumers to strange places.
Unfiltered Fervor: The Rush to Get Off the Water Grid
What adherents share is a wariness of tap water, particularly the fluoride added to it and the lead pipes that some of it passes through. They contend that the wrong kind of filtration removes beneficial minerals. Even traditional bottled spring water is treated with ultraviolet light or ozone gas and passed through filters to remove algae. That, they say, kills healthful bacteria — “probiotics” in raw-water parlance.
What to know about the “raw water” trend
Let’s state the obvious here: Water treatment removes bacteria, parasites, pesticides, and other contaminants, and drinking untreated water come with serious risks.
Līve Water enables global access to lab verified safe and healthy spring water.
The Juicero founder is really into raw water
ust a few years ago, Doug Evans was cresting through Silicon Valley on his way to raise over $120 million in venture capital for his startup, Juicero. The juicing company has since collapsed, but in the interim, he found something new to focus on: raw water.
We are the only water company to bottle untreated natural spring water in Maine’s history. We pioneered the concept of untreated natural spring water in the United States. Our water is so naturally pure that it exceeds every Federal and State guideline for drinking water straight from the ground.
©2020 | HealthWorldNet, Inc. | 114041
Last Updated : Friday, February 21, 2020