Hyperthyroidism Diet: What to Eat and Don’t Eat in Over-active Thyroid, Learn Diet Plan
Hyperthyroidism is a condition in which the thyroid gland becomes overactive. Due to this hormone secretion is high. This affects the level of metabolism. It causes weight loss due to excess production of thyroxine hormone. When the body temperature exceeds normal, problems such as insomnia, excitement, nervousness and irritability begin. Hyperthyroidism also increases the likelihood of developing diabetes. Food plays a major role in normalizing hyperthyroidism (overactive thyroid gland). Let us tell you what diet you should take in hyperthyroidism.
What to eat in hyperthyroidism?
In hyperthyroidism, foods that are easily digested can be eaten. Eat such food which is digested in three hours after eating, these foods increase the level of metabolism. Cold water fish and fish oil (containing 1 to 2 grams of EPA and DHA which are beneficial for thyroid function) are beneficial for thyroid function.
Hyperthyroidism is a problem only when the body lacks the necessary and nutritional elements. Sometimes you eat such foods, which have lost their nutritional capacity, in which whole grains can be beneficial for you. Whole grains such as brown rice, wheat, gram etc. Actually, whole grains are rich in calcium and iron, which makes bones strong. Since thyroid hormone is produced more, it has more effect on bones.
Hyperthyroidism What not to eat?
Low Iodized diet
When iodine is high in the body, the thyroid gland becomes overactive and a condition of hyperthyroidism occurs. The best source of iodine is food. Therefore, diets with high iodine in hyperthyroidism should be avoided. Avoid eating seafood such as sea fish, plants grown around the sea, because they contain a very high amount of iodine. So at the time of account, make sure that the quantity of iodine is more than what you are eating. (There are signs of a thyroid in the neck, know what are the reasons for this)
Avoid these Foods
In hyperthyroidism, the thyroid gland becomes overactive, producing more amount of hormones. There are also some foods that affect the production of thyroid hormones. Avoid eating such foods. Cabbage, cauliflower, sprouts, mustard greens, peaches, soybeans, spinach and turnips inhibit the production of thyroid hormones. So do not eat them at all. Apart from this, drinks like refined sugar, coffee, cold drinks, which contain caffeine, should also be avoided. (Keep thyroid healthy in these 5 ways, these 10 diseases will not happen!)
Nutritious diet is necessary for everyone, but patients with hyperthyroidism must consult a physician once while making a diet chart.