Larry Tesler, a computer scientist, and mathematician, who invented some of the world’s most common user interface tools died at the age of 74ץ
Larry Tesler who worked for Xerox, Apple, Amazon, and Yahoo! was the inventor of ‘copy & paste’, (along with Tim Mott) ‘find & replace’, and Gypsy, the first-word processor with a graphical user interface for the Xerox Alto, while in Xerox researcher center PARC.
The inventor of cut/copy & paste, find & replace, and more was former Xerox researcher Larry Tesler. Your workday is easier thanks to his revolutionary ideas. Larry passed away Monday, so please join us in celebrating him. Photo credit: Yahoo CC-By-2.0 https://t.co/MXijSIMgoA pic.twitter.com/kXfLFuOlonPlease help us out :
Will you offer us a hand? Every gift, regardless of size, fuels our future.
Your critical contribution enables us to maintain our independence from shareholders or wealthy owners, allowing us to keep up reporting without bias. It means we can continue to make Jewish Business News available to everyone.
You can support us for as little as $1 via PayPal at email@example.com.
— Xerox (@Xerox) February 19, 2020
The man whose car was equipped with a personalized California license plate with the number “NO MODES”, had been more interested in personal computers, he left in 1980 to join Apple following two visits Steve Jobs made to PARC.
What Jobs saw Tesler and colleagues developing, are the reason Apple produced the Lisa and the Mac.
While at Apple, Tesler worked on the Apple Lisa and the Apple Newton and helped to develop Object Pascal and its use in application programming toolkits including MacApp.
in October 2001 he joined Amazon and soon become vice president of the shopping experience, where he helped to improve the company’s website interface. Five years later, he opted to quit Amazon to moved back to Silicon Valley where his wife was still living. He then joined Yahoo! as vice president of the User Experience and Design group. Since 2009, he held the position of an independent consultant.