The Rediscovery of an Italian People with no Name
2019, 232 pp., 112 ill. col., 62 ill. b/n
Paperback, 17 x 24 cm
The present volume focuses on the circumstances around the inner part of the Basilicata region during the first millennium B. C. It pays particular attention to the area known as North Lucania which is the Apennine zone surrounding Potenza. This area has recently re-emerged to prominence due to important archaeological discoveries such as the princely tombs at Braida di Vaglio and Baragiano, and the chieftains' houses at Torre di Satriano. A broader research along with the systematic fluid of publications, have made this territory better known than others in the region. The aforementioned research and publications have been produced thanks to brilliant work of the Archaeological Superintendence which has attained a high level of efficiency due in large part of the pioneering commitment of Dinu Adamesteanu and his staff, and years of a close relationship with the University of Basilicata. Such a tight rapport of University-Superintendence has produced the "Torre di Satriano Project, which has given back to the scientific community a true role-model, shedding light on the social and settlement phenomena, ritual dynamics and manifestations of power of the italic cultures of south Italy.
I. The Case Study in Light of the Most Recent Debate on the Topic
1. From "penetration" to "hybridization". Fifty years of debate a bout Greeks and Italians
2. Torre di Satriano, a key settlement in understanding the area: an overview of the diachrony
II. The Formatio n and Development of the Settlements of the "North -Lucania" Area between the 8th and 7th Centuries B.C.
1. A unique ecosystem in the heart of the Lucanian Apennines
2. Cultural traits: a definition of the elements that make it possible to recognize a culture
3. The matt-painted ceramic evidence
4. The funerary rites
5. The haziness of the origin of a land of people without a name and without foundation myths6. Beyond the Potenza area: calling attention to the phenomena of "ethnicity"
III. Growth and Development of the Settlements between the 7th and 6th Centuries B.C.1. The specialized productions of the "Ruvo-Satriano class"
2. A look at the topography of the settlements, from surveys to excavations
3. Connectivity and rituality in the Mediterranean during Iron Age II. The Apsidal Residence at Torre di Satriano
4. Economy, diet and landscape
IV. Spaces of Power
1. From one settlement's nucleus, following the spaces of power................
2. The so-called Anaktoron: articulation of spaces, furnishings, renovations and extensions
3. The Anaktoron's roofing and architectural terracottas
4. The objects: ceremonial and convivial events
5. Places of power
V. Transformatio ns
1. The "Crisis" in the 5th century
2. The Story of a Vase: the nestoris
3. New pottery for a new society
4. The new culture of living
VI. A New World. Lucania (4th-3rd centuries B.C.)
VII. The End of an Era. From Leukania to Lucania
contextos, usos y miradas
Itinerari nel mondo della navigazione,tra storia, archeologia ed etnografia
Potere e orgoglio
Dall'arcaismo alla tarda antichità nel mondo greco-romano
Estimating Labour Costs through Digital Technologies
Hommage à Christian Olive
Archeologia di un villaggio rupestre medievale nel territorio di Vibo Valentia
Nuovi contributi all’interpretazione delle strutture e delle fasi