(Delayed Gastric Emptying)
How to Say It: gas-tro-PAH-ree-sis
by Cynthia M. Johnson, MA
Gastroparesis is when the stomach cannot break down food and move it to the small intestine. With this problem, food either moves too slowly or not at all. This can cause food to harden and lead to blockages. Early treatment can improve outcomes.
The vagus nerve controls movement of the stomach. The nerve may be damaged because of injury or illness. The muscles of the stomach will then not be able to work as they should.
This problem is more common in women.
The main risk factor for gastroparesis is diabetes, which can damage nerves. Other things that may raise the risk are:
Problems may be:
You will be asked about your symptoms and health history. A physical exam will be done.
Your blood and urine may be tested to look for problems.
Images may be taken of the stomach and surrounding structures. This can be done with:
Other procedures may be:
Any underlying causes will need to be treated. The goal will be to ease symptoms. Options are:
Dietary changes may need to be made to ease symptoms. This may mean:
People with severe symptoms may need to have nutrients delivered directly into the:
Medicine may be given to ease symptoms, such as nausea. Other medicines may be given to help the stomach empty. Examples are:
People with severe symptoms and those who are not helped by other methods may need surgery. This may include removing part of the stomach.
People with diabetes can lower the risk of this problem by following their care plan.
American College of Gastroenterology
American Gastroenterological Association
Canadian Association of Gastroenterology
Canadian Digestive Health Foundation
Complications of diabetes mellitus. Merck Manual Professional Version website. Available at: https://www.merckmanuals.com/professional/endocrine-and-metabolic-disorders/diabetes-mellitus-and-disorders-of-carbohydrate-metabolism/complications-of-diabetes-mellitus. Accessed August 18, 2021.
Gastroparesis. American College of Gastroenterology website. Available at: https://gi.org/topics/gastroparesis. Accessed August 18, 2021.
Gastroparesis. EBSCO DynaMed website. Available at: https://www.dynamed.com/condition/gastroparesis. Accessed August 18, 2021.
Gastroparesis. National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases website. Available at: https://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/digestive-diseases/gastroparesis. Accessed August 18, 2021.
Last reviewed July 2021 by EBSCO Medical Review Board James Cornell, MD
Last Updated: 8/18/2021
EBSCO Information Services is fully accredited by URAC. URAC is an independent, nonprofit health care accrediting organization dedicated to promoting health care quality through accreditation, certification and commendation.
This content is reviewed regularly and is updated when new and relevant evidence is made available. This information is neither intended nor implied to be a substitute for professional medical advice. Always seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider prior to starting any new treatment or with questions regarding a medical condition.
To send comments or feedback to our Editorial Team regarding the content please email us at email@example.com. Our Health Library Support team will respond to your email request within 2 business days.
All rights reserved.