For the second year, the Living River Group of the Sierra Club will present a series of films about ecological issues that affect people and the land right here in South Dakota.
The public is invited to view "America's Lost Landscape: The Tallgrass Prairie," Tuesday, June 19. All films in the series will be shown each month at 7 p.m. in the W.H. Over Museum on the USD campus. Lively discussions are sure to follow.
Tuesday, June 19
"America's Lost Landscape: The Tallgrass Prairie." This film tells the story of one of the most astonishing alterations of nature in human history. Prior to Euro-American settlement in the 1820s, one of the major landscape features of North America was 240 million acres of tallgrass prairie. But between 1830 and 1900—in the space of a single lifetime—the tallgrass prairie was steadily transformed to farmland. The film also highlights prairie preservation efforts and explores how the tallgrass prairie ecosystem may serve as a model for a sustainable agriculture of the future.
Tuesday, July 17
"Pipe Dreams." The film documents the path of the proposed Keystone XL Pipeline through interviews with the people who would be most affected by its construction. The pipeline would carry a thick, sticky form of crude oil known as oil sands from Alberta, Canada, through the Midwest to refineries in the Gulf Coast of Texas. Trans-Canada tried to force ranchers to sign easements more or less blind and threatened them with eminent domain suits. It was one of eight films shortlisted for the Academy Award for best documentary.
Tuesday, August 21
"David Versus Monsanto." Imagine that a storm blows across your garden and that now, genetically manipulated seeds are in your crops. A multinational corporation demands that you surrender your crops, then sues you for $200 000 for the illegal use of patented, GM seeds. The definitive documentary on the genetically modified food industry, this is the story of Canadian farmer Percy Schmeiser and his legal struggle with corporate biotech company Monsanto. This first-hand account reveals the increasingly familiar tale of Monsanto harassing farmers with every means possible–civil lawsuits, stalking, trespassing, slander, threats, and crop contamination.
This film series is sponsored by Vermillion's Living River Group of the Sierra Club: southdakota.sierraclub.org/LivingRiver.