We can help
Identity theft is a form of stealing someone’s identity in which someone pretends to be someone else by assuming that person’s identity, typically in order to access resources or obtain credit and other benefits in that person’s name. ! Identity theft occurs when someone uses your personally identifying information, like your name, Social Security number, or credit card number, without your permission, to commit fraud or other crimes with identity theft becoming the #1 growing crimes in the World; it is a lot more common than one might think. Millions of people become victims to identity theft every hour and the numbers continue to grow daily. The victim of identity theft (here meaning the person whose identity has been assumed by the identity thief) can suffer adverse consequences if they are held accountable for the perpetrator’s actions. Much Identity Theft happens through cybercrime and postal mail. In fact Identity Theft is much like a virus or the common cold often it is too late once the virus has been discovered! It can be controlled and slowed down but can also come back out of nowhere all over again!
Cyber (Internet) and Postal Mail Identity Theft Crimes
“Determining the link between data breaches of personal information through an online company, postal mail, and identity theft is challenging, primarily because identity theft victims often do not know how their personal information was obtained,” and identity theft is not always detectable by the individual victims, according to a report done for the FTC. Many Identity Theft victims find out only after they apply for some kind of loan or line of credit. The good news is that recovering from identity theft is not as painful of a process as most people would imagine. With the credit card laws and policies in place today from the FCRA, disputing and recovering stolen funds from fraudulent credit card transactions are a fairly simple process. By simply notifying the card issuer to alert them of your mishap, most banks will reverse the funds back into your account immediately to prevent the consumer from suffering while an investigation is done to make sure that it was indeed fraudulent and done without your consent.
But what is to stop this from happening again??? You have recovered your money from the fraudulent purchases that were made by the identity thieves. But your credit could be a mess. You must take the necessary steps to prevent this from happening again and recover from the damage done to your credit or you could end up even worse off than when it happened the first time.
Steps to follow
Superior Credit Repair can make the identity theft recovery process a lot easier for the victims that are affected from identity theft. The steps and procedures that are taken by Superior Credit Repair for identity theft cases are very different than our standard services that we offer! Unlike our standard service that typically takes about 8-12 weeks, identity theft can be handled in a matter of a couple weeks. This is possible by us applying different tactics based on other areas of law that are in place to protect the consumer. These laws allow the credit bureaus to block accounts in a matter of days and were enforced to prevent the fraudulent debts from ever reappearing on your credit. It also prevents the debt from being reported by a third party debt collector in the future that could have possibly bought the debt before you discovered the fraudulent account.
If you are a victim of identity theft and you would like to take advantage of our special “identity theft credit repair” services, it is imperative to provide us with all of the necessary documents that will be required by the credit bureaus in order to handle this matter efficiently.
Contact Us Today!
For your Free Consultation!