To create Paper-Woven Rainbow, you will need:
- Construction Paper
- Crayons and Markers
Save it for later! Print it or put it on your e-reader.Download & Print
What Makes a Rainbow?
There are seven official colors of the rainbow: red, orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, and violet. On Sesame Street, Leela used the acronym ROY G. BIV to remember all the colors' names. Rainbows occur in nature when light from the sun shines across water drops in the air. Have you and your child ever seen a rainbow in the sky? If so, talk about where and when that happened.
Step 1: Things You'll Need
Collect the items from the materials list to the right.
Little Hands Tip: Ask your child to name her favorite colors.
Step 2: Fold It
Take one 8½ by 11-inch piece of paper and fold it in half width-wise.
Step 3: Creating a Weft
Starting from the folded edge, cut several lines in the paper approximately one inch apart. Stop each cut about an inch before the edge of the paper. When you unfold the paper, the edges should still be without cuts. You have just created a weft!
Step 4: Cut Seven Funky Strips
With another piece of white 8½ x 11-inch paper, cut out seven strips of paper width-wise. Each strip should be about one inch wide. It's OK if your cuts are not straight. That will just make your woven rainbow even more funky! Help your child choose crayons or markers and color each strip a different color of the rainbow.
Step 5: Weave into the Weft
Weave the paper strips into the weft you made in the first step. Put the first strip in by going over, under, over, under. Then, put the second strip in by going under, over, under, over. The third strip should go over, under, over, under. Repeat until you've filled your weft.
Little Hands Tip: What other things are woven in your house? Blankets? Baskets? Braided hair?
Step 6: Beautify Your Rainbow
Only nature can make a perfect rainbow! If some of the strips don't fit, cut and color them again.
Step 7: Anchor Your Rainbow
Slip a small dab of glue under the end of each strip where it meets the edge of the weft. It isn't necessary to glue every square. One or two per strip should be enough to anchor it.
Smile! You've Made a Rainbow!
You can also leave your woven rainbow unglued so your child can take it apart and put it back together again! Next time you visit a grocery store, look for all the colors of the rainbow in the fruits and vegetables section. Nature also puts different colors in the foods that we eat. Can your child find a fruit or vegetable in each color of the rainbow?