Professor Giles Oldroyd of the John Innes Centre explains how plant roots form beneficial interactions with soil microbes. Almost all plants associate with mycorrhizal fungi to help in the uptake of nutrients such as phosphate. Some plants, particularly legumes, also associate with bacteria that ‘fix’ atmospheric nitrogen into a form the plant can use as fertiliser.
In one of the more exciting genetic modification projects, scientists at the John Innes Centre in Norwich are trying to engineer wheat that can produce its own fertiliser. There is also growing interest in understanding the role of ...
British scientists have won a £6.4 million grant to develop GM crops - one of the largest single investments into genetic modification in the UK. The money was awarded by the Gates Foundation and will be used to cultivate corn, wheat and rice that need little or no fertiliser.
The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation has given British scientists a multi-million pound grant to develop GM crops in what could be the most significant PR endorsement for the controversial technology.
A €8.2m ($10m) grant has been given to researchers at the John Innes Center in the UK to develop GM varieties of corn that are able to absorb nitrogen from the atmosphere, thus eliminating the use of fertilisers.
Professor Giles Oldroyd of the John Innes Centre has been awarded £2.5M from the Biotechnology and Biological Science Research Council (BBSRC) to begin developing cereal crops that can ‘fix’ their own nitrogen, making their own fertiliser. This is part of £20M of funding for synthetic biology projects announced by the Chancellor George Osborne to investigate major global challenges, such as reducing agriculture’s reliance on nitrogen fertilisers. The aim is to initiate the first steps of nitrogen fixation in wheat, the major UK cereal crop and global staple. It complements the recent funding from the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation focused on maize, a staple crop for small-scale farmers in sub-Saharan Africa.
On World Food Day, Anna Hill looks at how we may feed the rising world population. Anna discovers two very different attempts to grow more wheat in Africa - efforts to make GM wheat with nitrogen-fixing ability at the John Innes Centre in Norwich, and a new study that encourages farmers in Sub-Saharan Africa to grow certain conventionally-bred varieties and thus unlock the area's underused potential for wheat.
The John Innes Centre will lead a $9.8m research project to investigate whether it is possible to initiate a symbiosis between cereal crops and bacteria. The symbiosis could help cereals access nitrogen from the air to improve yields.
The five-year research project, funded by the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, could have most immediate benefit for subsistence farmers.
British scientists have won a £6.4million grant from Microsoft billionaire Bill Gates to develop genetically modified crops. The Gates Foundation’s donation is one of the largest single investments to the GM project in the UK.
The John Innes Centre in Norwich will use the fund to cultivate corn, wheat and rice capable of taking nitrogen from the air, meaning they need little or no fertiliser.