It is not an over-statement that the scientists rule the world. They make researches and findings about many of the problems and challenges facing man. Man sometime finds himself in situation that requires a way out. It is in view of finding solution to this difficult situation of man that brings about invention. There are many instances for this, however, there are some examples of great historical background, among which is the invention of Penicillin.
There are many things that the scientists have invented and discovered which man benefits from them immensely today. The discoveries are in various walks of life. Scientist research is not restricted to a particular field. There are great researches done in Medical field, Technology, pure sciences, etc.
However, scientific research could be done individually or by a group of scientists. Although many of inventions came up through individual research like Isaac Newton, Gregor Mendel, Pristley, and many other great scientists who came up with new discoveries individually, yet there are some other discoveries, which were made jointly by some group of scholars.
In any way discovery of something comes, there are some steps and procedures that would be taken before such discovery and invention is globally accepted. Scientists who have also worked on the same project or have not worked on it, but who are also in the field, would come together for the review of the discovery. This conference is usually schedule in an agreed country, which will include members from various countries.
Conferences have held in various places in the world which have led to what man now enjoys today. It is from these conferences that a unified approach to the use of the discovery in all countries would be adopted. During the conference, there is a general agreement on the nomenclature of the new invention and a unified unit of measurement in case there is need for it. A very popular conference is Conference on Lasers and Electro-Optics that was held in Australia in 2011 and California in 2013. International visitors see visa letter section and visitor insurance provider for planning and visiting.