China’s first high-precision resource mapping satellite was successfully launched III (Figure)
1 月 9 日 11 时 17 points, China’s first commercial high-precision three-dimensional mapping satellites “Resource-III”, in the Taiyuan Satellite Launch Center using the “Long March-4B” carrier rocket successfully launched.
today 11:17, Taiyuan Satellite Launch Center in China using the “Long March-4B” carrier rocket, the success of “resource-III” satellite into space. Meanwhile, the launch of a Luxembourg carrying a small satellite.
rocket blasts off about 12 minutes later, the Xi’an satellite monitoring center’s data show that the “resource-III” and the satellite separated from the rocket, the satellite successfully entered the height of about 500 km, about 97.5 degrees inclination Sun-synchronous track.
“Resource III” civilian satellite is China’s first high-precision three-dimensional mapping satellite, weighing about 2650 kg, the design life of about 5 years. Satellite’s main task is long-term, continuous, stable and fast access to a nationwide high-resolution three-dimensional images and multispectral images for land resources survey and monitoring, disaster prevention and mitigation, agriculture, forestry, water conservancy, ecological environment, urban planning and construction, transportation of major national projects, and other fields to provide services. Satellite users of geographic information for the National Bureau of Surveying and Mapping.
to experts, “Resource III” satellite launch, land and resources survey for improving data protection and monitoring capabilities, to promote the development of geographic information industry, of great significance. In addition, China’s gravity satellite, radar, satellite and “resource-III” has been included in the relevant follow-up satellite development programs to achieve a variety of climatic conditions, geographic access to information for the national basic surveying and mapping to provide a stable and reliable source of satellite data protection.
“Resource III” satellite and the “Long March-4B” carrier rocket by China Aerospace Science and Technology Corporation and the China Academy of Space Technology Research Institute of Shanghai Academy of Spaceflight Technology. The “kill Double Star” was launched, is China’s first space launch in 2012, is the Long March series of carrier rockets of the first 156 flight. (Zhang Xiaoqi Zhang Liwen)