The following is a list of Bible
Truths in Matthew 16:13-20, the story of Peter
confessing Jesus is the Messiah.
- Peter said Jesus is the Messiah and the Son of God. Matthew 16:16.
- Only God can open the mind of a person to believe that Jesus is the son of
God. Matthew 16:17; John 6:44.
- Jesus builds His church with people who believe Jesus is the Messiah and
the Son of God. Matthew 16:16-18.
The following Background
Information is helpful in understanding the
Christ comes from the Greek word "Christos" which means
"the Anointed One" or "the Messiah." During
biblical times, a person was anointed with oil when that person began
serving in an important office such as king or priest. For example,
God told Samuel to anoint Saul king over Israel (1 Sam. 9:16-17).
During New Testament times, the Jews were hoping that God would anoint a
Messiah or Savior for the purpose of restoring Israel's righteousness and
freeing Israel from foreign domination. The word "Christ" is
sometimes used as a name for Jesus. Other times the word is used to
describe Jesus as the Messiah or Savior, such as when it is used in the
phrase "the Christ."|
Jesus is king of all heaven and earth (Matthew 28:18). Those who do
not presently believe that Jesus is King will be convinced when He comes
again to earth (Revelation 19:16). Peter is blessed because he will
avoid the judgment that comes from not knowing who Jesus is.|
The following activities
can be used to teach the Bible story and truths.
Bible Story Activities.
|Ask the Whiz Kid -
Part II. Use this activity to help the children think about who
|Print the "Dear Whiz Kid" letters
listed below and divide the class into three groups.|
|Give a letter to each group and ask the students
how they would respond to the letters. Discuss the responses.|
|The children can refer to the Qualities
of God or Things You Can Tell About
Jesus for help in thinking up a response.|
|Page 1 includes
- Has a friend who does not think it is important to believe in
- Her friend's brother uses Jesus' name in bad ways.|
- Red says Jesus is dead and cannot help anyone.|
|Building Blocks 101.
Use this activity to help the children understand the strength of
a church built with people who believe that Jesus is the Messiah.
|Put three bricks and about ten playing cards in
|Pull one brick out of the bag and put the brick
on the floor. Explain that the brick represents a foundation based
on the belief that Jesus is the Messiah.|
|Pull the playing cards out of the bag and form
another foundation by standing the cards on edge. You may need to
tape the cards together. Explain that the cards represent a
foundation based on money, power, an important job, and other material
|Pull another brick out of the bag. Explain
that this brick represents the church or a person's life. Put this
brick on the brick foundation which represents the belief that Jesus is the
Messiah. Point out how sturdy the church or the life is when
based on Jesus.|
|Pull the last brick out of the bag.
Explain that this brick also represents the church or a person's
life. Put this brick on the card foundation which represents material
things. The brick should cause the card foundation to fall.|
|Compare the strength and stability of the brick
foundation representing a belief in Jesus to the weakness and instability of the card
foundation which represents material things.|
|Children may get the impression that money,
power, job, and other material things are bad. Material things are
not bad as long as God comes first and the material things do not damage
a person's relationship with God. A person's wealth may cause that
person to view God differently. For example, a person's wealth may
cause that person to stop being friends with people who have no money.|
|Bible Drill. Use this activity to help
the children remember all the things they
can tell others about Jesus.|
People of the Bible.
|Learn about Jesus, Elijah,
John the Baptist, Peter,
Andrew, Matthew, Simon, James,
John, Judas Iscariot, Thomas, and Philip
by playing a game of Who Am I?|