"Give me a ride or I'll vote for Hoover," demanded the sign.
This unidentified man was a foot soldier of a desperate army intent on occupying the nation's capital to demand help from President Herbert Hoover and Congress.
He and thousands of others were known as the "Bonus Army," a ragtag group of mostly World War I veterans who went to Washington, D.C., seeking relief during some of the darkest days of the Great Depression.
These men encamped in Washington for a couple of months before being violently removed, having achieved very little from their hardship.
By 1932, with the nation brought to a standstill by the Depression, World War I vets started the Bonus Campaign to collect a cash bonus promised to them during better times.
This bonus, based on their rank and time spent in service during the war, was not due to be paid vets until 1945. Thousands, mostly without jobs, came to Washington hoping to convince elected officials the money was needed immediately.
On June 10, 1932, with a large number of men already camped in Washington, a Southern California contingent of Bonus marchers left Los Angeles and passed through Ontario before camping the night in San Bernardino.
About 1,000 to 2,000 strong, "Piled in trucks, in passenger cars, and in vehicles no longer qualifying as either, the tatterdemalion army struck
It was not until about 9 p.m. that the end of the long parade of veterans passed through town, heading east.
"Clad in overalls, cast-off uniforms and civilian clothes; jobless but hopeful, and fired with a spirit of self-righteousness mingled with the thrill of a vacation trip, no matter how tawdry, they pushed across Euclid Avenue on the first lap of a peace-time offensive against a so-far militant Congress," wrote the newspaper.
Almost two weeks later, a second group of Bonus marchers left Los Angeles in 40 autos and trucks and spent their first night in Ontario. About 220 men and family members were allowed to camp at the ball field of Fourth Street Park - today's John Galvin Park - on the night of June 22.
The group included a theatrical troupe which performed to an audience of local residents to raise money for the cost of food and fuel for the march.
At the park, some of the marchers slept in vehicles or a few tents, but most of them slept outside on the ground.
E.O. Voigt, commander of this second group, said the "army" would be governed according to military code, and radicalism or panhandling would not be tolerated.
The plan of this second group was to work its way to Chicago where the Democrats were to hold their presidential convention (and nominate eventual winner Franklin D. Roosevelt).
Late the next afternoon, they moved on to San Bernardino.
As near as can be determined through incomplete news accounts, it doesn't appear that many, if any, of the Southern California Bonus marchers actually made it to Washington.
The first group worked its way to El Centro, Yuma and Phoenix, when grumbling began among participants and a number were ordered to leave. March Commander Royal W. Robertson blamed the problem on "deadheads" and others who weren't actually veterans.
By early July, the group had reached Dallas. It was here that many decided to give up and headed back to California, though some reportedly pressed on to Washington.
The second group spent a couple days in San Bernardino and reached Flagstaff, Ariz., at the end of June.
Those who did reach Washington lived in a shantytown of perhaps 15,000 discouraged veterans who had watched as the House of Representatives approved a bill to pay at least part of the bonus early, only to have the Senate vote it down.
Finally, on July 28, Hoover ordered the veterans removed by the Army, under the direction of Chief of Staff Gen. Douglas MacArthur. Ignoring Hoover's orders to show restraint, MacArthur demonstrated little mercy in routing the veterans, with at least one of the group being killed.
Two other future distinguished World War II leaders were involved in clearing out the veterans: MacArthur's assistant, Maj. Dwight D. Eisenhower, and the commander of the 3rd Cavalry Regiment, Maj. George S. Patton.