Animal overpopulation causes concern
The Carbon County Animal Shelter takes proactive measures to ensure that pets have permanent homes and stay out of jail.
According to Becky Gallucci the shelter took in 200 animals last month alone but only adopted out 40 altogether.
"We try to keep the animals as long as we can," said Gallucci. "On average the animals have about a 50/50 chance of making it once they end up here because we take in dogs and cats from all over the county and we only have so much room. Unfortunately we end up having to euthanize perfectly good pets just to make room."
According to the shelter the most important thing that people can do for their pets is to get them fixed. When animals are spayed or neutered not only does it help prevent overpopulation but also prevents them from getting certain types of cancers and other diseases, ultimately promoting a longer, healthier life span.
Installing an Avid Microchip in domestic animals is another important tool that residents are urged to use. This will allow the shelter to identify the pet owners address and phone number to help prevent the loss of the animal.
"The microchips are inexpensive and easy to install," explained Gallucci. "If you come to the shelter to get the chip installed it costs $20. We are going have a booth at Community Daze in East Carbon this weekend and discount the price to $15. We urge anyone with pets to bring them with you to our booth and get them installed."
Each day approximately 10,000 humans are born in the United States and each day there are also approximately 70,000 puppies and kittens born according to SpayUSA. As long as these birth rates exist there will never be enough homes for all of the animals. As a result, millions of healthy, loving, cats and dogs face early deaths as a form of animal control. Others are left to fend for themselves against automobiles, the elements, other animals and cruel humans.
Licensed veterinarians perform the spay or neuter operation while the pet is under anesthesia. Depending on your pet's age, size and health, he or she will stay at your veterinarian's office for a few hours or a few days. Depending upon the procedure, your pet may need stitches removed. Your veterinarian can fully explain spay and neuter procedures to you.
When the animal shelter adopts out a pet it has become standard procedure to have the animal fixed and equipped with a microchip.
According to officials at the Humane Society, millions of tragic pet deaths can be stopped. By spaying and neutering your pet, you can be an important part of the solution. Contact your veterinarian today and be sure to let your family and friends know that they should do the same.