World Teachers' Day, celebrated on Oct. 5, is a great opportunity to show teachers in the Glen Ellyn how great you think they are. But, the day also takes on a deeper meaning, standing for the protection of teachers' rights.
Since its inception in 1994, World Teachers' Day has had a theme every year. The theme for 2012 is “Take a stand for teachers.”
This day was founded by UNESCO, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization.
Its aim is to educate the public about the conditions of being a teacher around the world, focusing specifically on the protection of teachers' rights, and the proper training, development and status raising of teachers.
UNESCO’s partners in this effort are the International Labour Organization, the United Nations Development Programme, Education International and UNICEF.
Everyone has an educator who has changed his or her life with their kindness, humor or educational impact.
On World Teachers' Day, we can remember them by looking at issues and obstacles they may face, knowing that the brightest and most motivated teachers need to be continually attracted to a profession whose status continually needs improvement socially and monetarily.
In Glen Ellyn, one local nonprofit that has been very supportive of teachers is SCARCE (School and Community Assistance for Recycling and Composting Education.) The nonprofit not only assists teachers in bringing programs into the classroom that address sustainable education, but it is a resource for books, equipment and other much needed classroom items.
When donations are made to the nonprofit, teachers often benefit by finding old, unused binders, much needed books and other items students can use, including dictionaries.
More than 100 countries currently observe World Teachers' Day, with many corporate supporters such as Google recognizing the global impact and conditions of teachers.
TELL US: How will you celebrate World Teachers' Day? Give your favorite teachers a shout out in the comments section below.