American Heritage® Dictionary of the English Language, Fourth Edition
- n. Area of land measured in acres.
Century Dictionary and Cyclopedia
- n. The number of acres in a piece or tract of land; acres taken collectively; extent in acres: as, the acreage of farm-land in a country; the acreage of wheat sown.
- n. Size, as measured in acres.
- n. An area of land measured in acres.
GNU Webster's 1913
- n. Acres collectively.
- n. an area of ground used for some particular purpose (such as building or farming)
“Where we're drilling some of the other wells, we are capturing term acreage which is an objective on how we're allocating our capital.”
““My dredgers redeemed twice that acreage from the marshes in the past year,” Dick replied.”
“Then this could simply be a restatement of how much acreage is in each country X the amount they "protect".”
“Hopefully your acreage is not surrounded by skyscrapers - odds are it isn't.”
“Small as the acreage is this year, a poor summer and terrible storms reduced the yield.”
“I do however think it should be limited to private property over a certain acreage to let us public still hunters have a shot.”
“Nearly half of this management area's acreage is devoted to row crops, and the rest is dominated by bottomland hardwoods and open pasture.”
“In this case, the total acreage is 156 or 150, depending again on your preference in acreage calculation.”
“More than half the acreage is irrigated by sprinklers, and almost all the permanent crops have drip or micro-sprinkler irrigation systems.”
“The Canadian taste for beef and pork which has shown a persistent increase for many years will take substantial acreage from the production of wheat to coarse grains and to pasture lands.”
These user-created lists contain the word ‘acreage’.
A list of terms for land, landholdings, or words that contain the string -land-.
condition; result of; account; number of; cost of; place of; collection of; home of; to act
Terms used in the EU's Common Agricultural Policy referring to policy issues in the sugar sector.
HU translations: arable crops, bioethanol distil..., bioethanol outlet, cereals, chicory, common market org..., Everything But Ar..., energy crops, export refund, Generalised Syste..., intervention price, inuline syrup and 83 more...
Looking for tweets for acreage.