school uses TM
TM I instantly
felt whole and
and teachers see
meditate to lower
girls’ squash team
wins big with
benefits of TM
with the TM
Learning readiness is at the core of any comprehensive program for raising student performance. By developing the full brain, reducing the acute stresses that undermine learning and health, and improving the overall environment of the schools, the Quiet Time Program is a practical, highly effective approach to promoting learning readiness among students and thereby markedly improving their academic performance and success in life.
The Quiet Time Program with the Transcendental Meditation technique has already been incorporated into hundreds of public, charter, and private schools throughout the United States and around the world, supported by an extensive body of independent research verifying its benefits. Students participating in Quiet Time score higher on intelligence tests, close the achievement gap, improve test scores, and have higher graduation rates compared to students in control groups. Meditating students also show reduced stress levels, anxiety, depression, violence, and substance abuse. This results in reduced absenteeism, dropout rates, suspensions, and expulsions.
Transcendental Meditation is a simple, easily learned technique, practiced by students and teachers for 10 to 20 minutes twice daily, sitting comfortably with the eyes closed. The technique does not involve any religion, philosophy, or change in lifestyle.
In official collaboration with school districts nationwide, the David Lynch Foundation provides in-school and after-school programs in public, charter, and private middle schools and high schools, including New York City, Washington, D.C., Atlanta, Detroit, Chicago, Tucson, San Francisco, and Los Angeles.
Initial Funding Target: $60,000 per year to employ one specially trained teacher to provide an intensive 10-month program of individualized instruction and follow-up in Transcendental Meditation for at least 200 at-risk students per school. Total budget for 10,000 students in 50 schools: $3 million.
HealthCorps is a health movement founded by Dr. Mehmet Oz, to fight obesity and mental resilience crisis by helping American students and communities across the country to take charge of their health.
Funding Target: $60,000 a year for each specially trained teacher to provide an intensive 10-month program of individualized instruction and follow-up in Transcendental Meditation for 200 students in selected HealthCorps high schools. Our immediate goal is to fund ten trainers to serve 2,000 at-risk students in ten HealthCorps school projects. Total budget for ten schools: $600,000.
Communities in Schools, founded by Bill Milliken, is the nation's leading community-based network of professionals who are working in public schools to empower students to stay in school and achieve in life, serving 1.3 million students in 25 states and Washington, D.C.
Funding Target: $60,000 per year to employ one specially trained teacher to provide an intensive 10-month program of individualized instruction and follow-up in Transcendental Meditation for 200 students. Our immediate goal is to fund ten trainers to serve 2,000 at-risk students in ten Communities in Schools projects. Total budget for ten schools: $600,000.