"It is only with the heart that one can see rightly; what is essential is invisible to the eye. -Antoine De Saint-Exupery
How to take the quiz:
After reading the question, click on the answer that you think is correct to go to the whatis.com definition. If the answer you've chosen is correct, you will see the question text or an approximation of it somewhere in the definition.
After reading the question, write down the letter of your answer choice on scrap paper. Check your answers by using the answer key at the end of the quiz.
1. This is a mobile positioning technique used by emergency services
to find a caller's location.
b. Cell of Origin
c. location-based services
d. automatic vehicle locator
e. Interactive Voice Response
2. This takes the entire allocated frequency range for a given service and multiplexes information for all users across the spectrum range at the same time in order to optimize bandwidth.
a. dynamic multi-pathing
b. time division multiple access
c. single mode fiber
d. code-division multiple access
e. channel extender
3. If a transmission is good, this is what happens when a mobile or
portable cellular subscriber passes from one cell into another and the
network has to switch coverage responsibility from one base station to
b. seamless interface
c. cross-bar switch
d. analog-to-digital conversion
4. This technology allows programmers to use Java programming
language and related tools to develop programs for mobile wireless information
devices such as cellular phones and personal digital assistants (PDAs).
a. Enterprise Java Beans
b. Java 2 Platform, Micro Edition
d. Specialized Mobile Radio
e. Windows CE
5. This is a computing and telecommunications industry specification
that describes how mobile phones, computers, and personal digital assistants
can connect with phones and computers by using a short-range wireless connection.
6. This term was invented by networking expert John Sidgmore to describe
the tiny portable electronic devices that experts predict will become wildly
popular with young people and put new demands on network bandwidth capacity.
a. script kiddy
b. eye candy
c. silicon cockroach
d. pulsing zombie
e. honey pot
7. This third-generation, broadband, packet-based transmission of text,
digitized voice, and video offers a consistent set of services to mobile
computer and phone users no matter where they are located in the world.
a. Universal Mobile Telecommunications System
b. Global Positioning System
d. Synchronized Multimedia Integration Language
e. Broadband Integrated Services Digital Network
8. This family of "smart" microprocessors from Transmeta is expected
to introduce a new era of low-powered mobile devices that can run all day
without requiring a battery recharge.
10. This wireless transmission refers to energy whose wavelengths are
longer than those of visible light, but shorter than those of radio waves.
a. infrared transmission
c. wavelength-division multiplexing
d. Terrestrial Trunked Radio
SCROLL DOWN FOR ANSWER KEY
To learn more, we recommend you visit our Mobile and Wireless Middleware section on searchMiddleware.
To learn more, we recommend you visit our XML and WAP/Wireless section on searchMiddleware.
To learn more about wireless networking, we recommend you visit our sister site searchNetworking.com.
Be sure to try these other quizzes:
Quiz #1: Help Desk Basics
Quiz #2: Security Basics
Quiz #3: Data Storage
Quiz #4: Networking Hardware
Quiz #5: Getting Your Message Across the Network
Quiz #6: Servers
Quiz #7: Protocols
Quiz #8: Database Basics
Quiz #9: Wireless (you're on this quiz now)
Quiz #10: TCP/IP
Quiz #11: Ego-Booster
Quiz #12: Database II
Quiz #13: AS/400
ANSWER KEY: 1b - 2d - 3e - 4b - 5a - 6c - 7a - 8b - 9e - 10a
Let us know how you did and suggest a topic for a future quiz! firstname.lastname@example.org