THIS is the day sentiment reigns. Flowers and candy, cards, hugs and kisses take over for the celebration of Valentine's Day.
The commercial side of the holiday has been growing ever more profitable. There are all sizes of candy boxes, cards by the zillions for everyone from a sweetheart to a pet, the love letters abound as do the bouquets and sweet sentiments.
It is the so-called language of flowers that has often played a huge part of providing the proper sentiments.
And the prize always goes to the red roses. For no matter what book or article read, the significance of the rose as a symbol of affection is time honored. Even Shakespeare was enamored of the rose as a love symbol. He mentioned the flower 70 times in his writings. Of course, there may have been a bit of national pride there, too, since the rose is known as the emblem of England as well as the queen of flowers.
Shakespeare's most famous reference to flowers is the speech he wrote for the long-suffering Ophelia in ''Hamlet.'' She referred to rosemary for remembrance as well as pansies for thoughts.
The beginnings of the entire lore of a flower language is attributed to Lady Mary Wortley Montagu, who accompanied her husband to Turkey when he was sent there as ambassador in 1716. Her letters back to England included a Turkish interpretation of floral symbols and language. Her initial efforts did not catch on too well. This was left to the next century, when Queen Victoria began her reign. Books on the language of flowers began to appear. The meaning started an unusual cult of believers and much of the sentiment and language known today depends greatly on the references read. Yet it is always fun to know a little about the lore.
From childhood one might recall sitting on the lawn and pulling apart a white daisy to know if the child in the next row, ''loved me'' or ''loved me not.'' As each petal was pulled off with a declaration, it could turn out well -- or not so well; little did one know what the fates might bring!
But back to the lore of the rose: There are many tales to be told about why the red rose is such a vivid symbol. Some history books say the scent of the heritage roses was part of the romances of those days.
A belief of some ancient historians is that the red rose was stained by the blood of Venus. Indeed, the red rose remains a symbol of fidelity and love. (And one should also know that for some the yellow rose is meant to signify jealousy.)
Here's another bit of flower lore: The white lily is meant to signify purity. That is one reason it is so often included in bridal bouquets. The Greeks and Romans, however, were believed to have crowned the brides of their day not only with lilies but also with wheat.
One of the more unusual notes about the lily concerns dreams. If the flower is dreamt of during the spring and summer season, it is said that the marriage will be happy and prosperous. But if the lily is dreamt of in the cool fall or winter months, then the marriage will be unhappy and hopes will be dashed.
Most of flower lore deals with the early blooms of spring, as in the case of violets. These sweet early flowers have an innocence about them, too, yet they always have a stalwart reliability, appearing on schedule every year. It is this quality of the delicate flowers that has therefore earned them the symbol of faithfulness. (Even Shakespeare noted the violet for its faithfulness.)
There is some dispute about the pansy being for thoughts, as Ophelia declared in ''Hamlet.'' Yet some early historians note that the pansy was also used as a symbol for the Trinity, which rather sets aside the traditional shamrock.