Courtesy of the Historical Society of Berks County
"The Property of Fred R. & Esther Bechtel, Cumru Township" by Frederick A. Brader.
Q: Who was Frederick A. Brader and what did he do for Berks County?
In the 1880s, when photographs were still relatively rare, itinerant artists traveled the highways and byways painting or drawing homes, barns and landscapes on commission with the property owner.
Typically, they lived with the family while painting and earned room and board in exchange for their art.
Berks County had its share of such folk artists, whose work is highly prized among collectors.
Prime examples are the Berks County almshouse painters - Charles Hofmann, Louis Mader and John Rasmussen - who not only painted the almshouse but also lived in the county-run poorhouse.
Another of that generation is Frederick A. Brader, who was in Berks from 1880 to 1883.
Unlike the almshouse artists, who were painters, Brader made pencil sketches on heavy brown paper. Researchers believe the paper was obtained from grocers, who normally used it to wrap meat.
Brader sketched about 200 homesteads, farmsteads, kilns and various landscapes before moving to Ohio.
Though 130 years have passed since Brader sketched in Berks, he's more popular than ever.
The Reading Public Museum has acquired "The Property of John Bitting, Cumru Township, Berks County: 1879" - the earliest of Brader's farm drawings.
And the McKinley Museum and Canton Museum of Art, both in Canton, Ohio, will hold simultaneous Brader exhibitions in December 2014.
Beulah B. Fehr, president of the Historical Society of Berks County, said three of Brader's works from the society's collection and one from her own collection will be on exhibit in Ohio.
With then-curator M. Theodore Mason Jr., Fehr did extensive research on the artist for "Brader in Berks: 1880-1883," a 1986 retrospective at the Historical Society.
Fehr and Mason wrote the exhibit catalog, edited by Paula M. Flippin.
Researchers believe that Brader, who was born in Switzerland in 1833, was drawn to Berks by its large German population.
Descendants of families whose properties Brader sketched recalled how he would eat with the family but would not sleep in the house. He always slept in the barn.
His paintings, Fehr noted, are characterized by a solitary figure standing in a barn door.
"The man is usually holding a pitchfork and frequently has patches on his trousers," Fehr said. "The figure surveys the farm below, just as Brader drew from a hillside perspective."
Brader was not a resident of the Berks County almshouse, but is believed to have seen paintings of it.
Later, he resided at the Portage County Infirmary, an Ohio almshouse, and drew it in much the same style as the Berks almshouse painters.
Brader had an artistic bag of tricks, Fehr said, that appear in many of his drawings. One of the most treasured depicts two boys playing fife and drum while a rooster chases a hen on a country road.
Among the drawings in the 1986 exhibit in Reading were "The Property of Wm. R.B. and H.H. Bertolet in Cumru," "The Property of Catharina and Peter Rothermel, Muhlenberg Township" and "J. D. Hornberger's Five Mile House" on Route 222, west of Reading.
Brader is believed to have done about 1,000 drawings over a 15-year period before disappearing around 1896.
One story is that he inherited $4,000 and returned to Switzerland. A Swiss court declared him missing in 1901, the official year of his death at age 68.
Ask Ron is a weekly feature providing answers to quirky curiosities of the Berks County area. Is there something that you're curious about? Pose the question to Ron Devlin at 610-371-5030 or firstname.lastname@example.org.