by Karen C. Fox for Goddard Space Flight Center
Greenbelt, MD (SPX) Oct 10, 2012
At 11:24 p.m. EDT on Oct. 4, 2012, the sun unleashed a coronal mass ejection (CME).
Not to be confused with a solar flare, which is a burst of light and radiation, CMEs are a phenomenon that can send solar particles into space and can reach Earth one to three days later.
Experimental NASA research models show the CME to be traveling at about 400 miles per second.
When Earth-directed, CMEs can affect electronic systems in satellites and on Earth. CMEs of this speed, however, have not generally caused major effects in the past. Further updates will be provided if needed.
NOAA's Space Weather Prediction Center is the United States Government official source for space weather forecasts.
NOAA's Space Weather Prediction Center
Solar Science News at SpaceDaily
Comment on this article via your Facebook, Yahoo, AOL, Hotmail login.
Getting NASA's SDO into Focus
Greenbelt MD (SPX) Oct 10, 2012
From Sept. 6 to Sept. 29, 2012, NASA's Solar Dynamic Observatory (SDO) moved into its semi-annual eclipse season, a time when Earth blocks the telescope's view of the sun for a period of time each day. Scientists choose orbits for solar telescopes to minimize eclipses as much as possible, but they are a fact of life - one that comes with a period of fuzzy imagery directly after the eclipse. ... read more
|The content herein, unless otherwise known to be public domain, are Copyright 1995-2012 - Space Media Network. AFP, UPI and IANS news wire stories are copyright Agence France-Presse, United Press International and Indo-Asia News Service. ESA Portal Reports are copyright European Space Agency. All NASA sourced material is public domain. Additional copyrights may apply in whole or part to other bona fide parties. Advertising does not imply endorsement,agreement or approval of any opinions, statements or information provided by Space Media Network on any Web page published or hosted by Space Media Network. Privacy Statement|