Launched by Microsoft Research, Moscow State University and UC Berkeley, ChronoZoom has, oh, just about 14 billion years for you to learn about as you travel through time. You didn't have anything else planned today, did you?
Titanic Director James Cameron has just joined one of the most exclusive clubs on Earth, becoming just the third person to reach the deepest part of the ocean, and return safely to the surface.
Generating a non-destructive 100 Tesla magnetic field has been a project of the Los Alamos National Lab for about a decade and a half, and just yesterday, they managed to pull it off. A huge nested magnet hooked up to an even huger generator kicked out a pulse 2 million times stronger than the Earth's magnetic field, and it screamed in the process.
From Blastr: On Sept. 13, 1999, a tragedy befell all mankind. An accident of unknown origin at the nuclear waste dumps on the far side of the moon caused a massive explosion that hurled the moon out of Earth orbit.
There's a lot we take for granted each day. How food gets to the table. The way electricity powers our appliances. Downloading music. All of these things got their start somewhere.
Scientists have successfully germinated a plant from an Ice Age fruit found squirrel burrow deep in the Russian permafrost. At 30,000 years old, the plant material is the oldest plant to ever be revived.
If you are not a Navy seal — which I am not — you may not be aware that current night vision goggles are on the cumbersome side. The problem is how to cool the bad boys down enough to provide an accurate visual signature. So the beauty of the solution to improving them and lightening them up coming from an ethereal little butterfly is not lost on me.
Fossils are capable of giving up incredible secrets — the color of a feather, the sheen of a wing and now the sound of a chirp. A chirp doesn't sound like much but considering it last sounded 165 million years ago, it's music to scientist's ears.
Just because Valentine's Day is coming up doesn't mean you have to change who you are to give a great gift. If flowers, chocolates and fine dining (molecular gastronomy excepted) make you think, "been there, done that," then we've got some ideas for you. We've hunted around to come up with gift ideas that are off the beaten path for you to consider. Are you in love with a bonafide geek? A Trekkie? A science buff? We've got you all covered — just hop on into the gallery below.
You may have heard, but there are some folks out there who aren't too pleased with all the plastic we have in clogging our landfills and killing our wildlife. Luckily, now all these anti-our-giant-and-oh-so-necessary-3-friggin'-liter-bottles-of-sugar-water might be able to throw a party replete with tofu cubes and spring rolls: a mushroom has been found in the Amazon that might simply eat it all. Yep.