Aphrodite was created from the foam of the crystal waters of Paphos in the fragrant island of Cyprus, when the Titan Cronos slew his father, the major Titan Ouranos, and threw then his genitals into the sea.
Husband and Relationships: Aphrodite was married to the lame smith Hephaestus, the Olympian God of the Iron, but her heart was devoted to Ares, the God of War, with whom Aphrodite was having a passionate, but secret love affair.|
Famous Children: According to a myth, Aphrodite gave birth to Eros, the winged cupid of love and was often accompanied by him.
Other children of Aphrodite were Himeros (desire), Pothos(desire), Phobos(fear), Deimos (terror), Armonia (Harmony) and the Nymph Rhode .
[View Aphrodite's full family tree here...]
Aphrodite was the most attractive goddess of Mount Olympus. She was the goddess of Love, Beauty and Eternal Youth, arousing desire to gods and humans as well as birds and beasts. In addition, she was connected to the death/rebirth of nature and human beings.
Aphrodite may have been the most attractive goddess, but according to the Iliad(the famous poem by Homer), she was a rather weak, frightful goddess.
Aphrodite was a highly attractive young woman who dressed elegantly and loved to wear jewellery. Her eyelashes were curled and she had a constant smile on her lovely face, since she was a lover of smiles. Aphrodite had a tender neck, tender breasts  and beautiful buttocks
Aphrodite's symbols were the girdle (which she was using to compel love), the seashell and the mirror. Her sacred animal was the dove.
Aphrodite means "arisen from the foam" in ancient Greek.
The Roman name of Aphrodite is "Venus"
Myths and Fables about Aphrodite
Places of Worship related to Aphrodite
| Places of Worship related to Aphrodite|
Festivals celebrating Aphrodite
| Festivals in honour of Aphrodite|
- "Aphrodisia" A festival in honour of Aphrodite celebrated mainly in the island of Cyprus
Titles of Aphrodite
Anadyomene ("arising") ,
Cypria ("from Cyprus") ,
Cytherea ("from the Greek island of Cythera") ,
Genetyllis ("capable of reproduction") ,
Kallipygos ("of the beautiful buttocks") ,
Nomios ("of the flocks") ,