How does California draw its districts: State lawmakers have the power to draw their own districts (as well as congressional districts and districts for the Board of Equalization). This occurs after each U.S. Census. The Legislature uses this power to draw lopsided districts where the number of Democrats outweighs Republicans, or vice versa. As the party in control, Democrats make sure there are more districts weighted in their favor, which means Republicans have no chance of picking up more seats. Republicans want the system changed so districts are drawn more competitively.
How would the new system work: Republicans want to give the power to draw districts an independent commission. Assembly Speaker Fabian Nunez, D-Los Angeles, Assembly Republican Leader Mike Villines of Clovis and Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger have all proposed plans involving an independent commission. Nunez's and Schwarzenegger's plans call for the commission to be composed of 11 members who are Democrats, Republicans or independent voters. Villines' plan doesn't get that specific, but it does call for the commission to draw reasonable districts that encompass existing city and county lines.
What should districts look like: Three issues come up - the political skew, the geographic clutter and the poor overlap between Assembly and state Senate seats.
The skew: Generally speaking, a district with 5 percentage points more Republicans than Democrats is considered a lock for Republican candidates while a district with 9 percentage points more Democrats is considered "safe" for Democrats. (Republicans tend to vote more than Democrats and Democrats are also considered more transitory than Republicans.)
Based on that calculation, 160 of the 173 seats in the Assembly, state Senate and U.S. House of Representatives give a decided advantage to one of the two major parties, essentially making the seats safe from challenge. Here's a look at the imbalance:
But voter registration isn't the only gauge of competitiveness. A region's voting history could make it a safe area for one party or the other regardless of the registration numbers.
The clutter: California Common Cause says districts should be "geographically compact and contiguous." Assemblyman Bob Huff's District 60, for example, curves around cities and overlaps three counties - including parts of Orange County
The overlap:Republican Leader Mike Villines wants each Senate District to encompass only two Assembly Districts, unlike Senator Dick Ackerman's District 33, which overlaps at least six Assembly Districts.
Can reform work:Few expect that if redistricting overhauls pass, they suddenly will make all legislative districts competitive. "Much of California doesn't lend itself to competitive districts," including Orange County, said Ned Wigglesworth, a policy advocate for California Common Cause. But that doesn't mean there aren't other good reasons for overhauls. Wigglesworth said taking away the lawmakers' power to draw their own districts removes a major conflict of interest that has made voters distrustful of government.
A look at the numbers
Statewide registration:Democrats hold the edge by 8.3 percentage points.
O.C. registration:Republicans hold the edge by 17.6 percentage points.
Statewide control:Democrats control 107 of 173 legislative seats, nearly twice as many as Republicans.
O.C. control:Republicans hold 16 of 20 seats, four times as many as Democrats.
Competition:Only five of the 173 seats are held by the party that does not have the registration edge.