Disunion follows the Civil War as it unfolded.
Disunion follows the Civil War as it unfolded.
The last day of Lincoln’s journey was the most difficult of all. He had braved the elements, the enormous crowds and the strain of speaking incessantly. By his words, and even more by his physical presence, he had shored up America’s flagging belief in her institutions. “Never before have we had man in the open air,” Whitman once wrote. Now, a million or so Americans had glimpsed a top hat parting a sea of humanity, or seen a bearded man wave from the back of a speeding train, or waved to him on a balcony in a downtown hotel, and felt a connection to their government.
But on this day, he had to reverse his open-air approach, and indulge in a most un-Lincolnesque deception. He canceled his planned appearances, and allowed himself to be whisked unceremoniously into Washington on a series of secret trains and carriages. He agreed to this plan only after revelations from different sources confirmed that the threat of assassination at Baltimore was real. The indignity of this final day undid some of the good work he had done, but it was necessary. As deeply as he believed in democratic institutions, he needed to survive this trip in order to save them. That was the tightrope Lincoln walked in February 1861 – how to give the people as much as he could of himself, without giving everything.
The night before, while still in Philadelphia, he had received not one but two secret messages about the Baltimore plot. The first came from Allan Pinkerton, a private detective, who had received intelligence of a sensational plot to surround Lincoln in Baltimore and stab him. Lincoln protested, and said to his advisers, “What would the nation think if I were to sneak into Washington like a thief in the night?” Then, later that evening, Lincoln received Frederick Seward, the son of William Seward, who brought letters from his father and Winfield Scott conveying news of the same threat. The coincidence of the two allegations persuaded him that it was true. (Frederick Seward, along with his father, would be brutally attacked the night that an assassin’s bullet finally found Lincoln.)
Lincoln had long disregarded his own physical safety. He had received a steady stream of assassination threats in the weeks before he left Springfield. Before starting the trip, he had bragged that he would happily suffer death rather than compromise on certain core principles, and he had repeated that claim the day before in Philadelphia. But this threat was too specific, and too well understood. So he snuck into Washington like a thief in the night.
At 7 p.m., the telegraph lines to Harrisburg were cut, and Lincoln began his furtive journey in the company of a small number of bodyguards, disguised only by a “soft wool hat” and an old overcoat. They returned to Philadelphia, where they alighted at one depot, took a carriage to another, and boarded a regular train to Baltimore. Lincoln whispered jokes to his guards during the journey. They transferred again at Baltimore (where they could hear “Dixie” playing in the distance) and finally arrived at Washington at 6 a.m. After being greeted by enormous delegations throughout his 1,904-mile journey, his final receiving line was a single person, his old friend Elihu B. Washburne, an Illinois Congressman. Washburne thought the tall man coming toward him resembled “a well-to-do farmer” coming to the big city. They went in a carriage to the Willard Hotel, and found a room for Lincoln, as the sun was rising.
Pinkerton sent a message in code to his superior: “Plums arrived here with Nuts this morning – all right.” Pinkerton was “Plums,” and yes, Lincoln was “Nuts.” A disappointing secret service nickname was the least of his problems.
Washington awoke slowly to the news of his arrival, then did what it does best. Wild rumors spread around town, most of which were incorrect, and all day a crowd milled around the Willard, doing nothing. John Hay wrote sarcastically, “The number of conjectures which have been hazarded would, if they were dollars, pay the national debt.” Lincoln quietly ate breakfast in his room, alone, then went to the White House with Seward to call on President Buchanan. Around 5:30, he was pleased to see his wife and sons, who had finally arrived on the Presidential Special, less presidential with him already in Washington. They moved into a suite of rooms overlooking the White House.
In the evening, more visitors, including the delegates to the Peace Conference organized by former president Tyler. Their demands were untenable, and Lincoln rejected them, saying, “I cannot agree to that. My course is as plain as a turnpike road.” It was an interesting metaphor, after a journey that had taken him through many twists and turns.
Only 12 days since he left Springfield, and yet how much had changed. Lincoln had given 101 speeches that we know about; many more were delivered on the fly. He had done so under the most difficult conditions – sickness, exhaustion, unpreparedness and a deep disinclination to speak out on issues that were not yet resolved. Josiah Holland, an early biographer with access to Lincoln’s intimates, wrote, “To talk when it was his impulse and his policy to say nothing, was the hardest task of his life.” A Cleveland reporter, watching Lincoln go through what he had to do everyday, wrote simply, “We do not wish to be President!” But he had been a laborer all his life, and did not shirk his duty.
Lincoln never wrote about what it must have been like to be at the center of attention on a scale that no American ever had, the cynosure of millions seen and unseen, his every clod-hop noticed. But his secretary John Nicolay conveyed some of the ups and downs of an emotional journey:
It is hard for anyone who had not had the chance of personal observation to realize the mingled excitement and apprehension, elation and fatigue which Mr. Lincoln and his suite underwent, almost without intermission for the period of nearly two weeks during this memorable trip from Springfield to Washington.
The downs were impressive. Lincoln was relentlessly criticized, and even on the verge of assuming office, struck many sophisticated commentators as less than presidential. The New York World huffed that his journey “after the manner of princes and conquerors, is in bad taste.” A Washington reporter wrote that the “mortification of the republicans increases with every fresh emanation from the presidential tripod.” Another wrote that Lincoln’s Columbus speech was read “amidst irresistible bursts of laughter.”
Others wrote much worse. His features were often lampooned, and even within his entourage, members of the press ridiculed him. Henry Villard thought he possessed “the gawkiest figure, and the most awkward manners.” Lincoln reminded him of “a clodhopper appearing in fashionable society.”
But perhaps that is precisely what made this trip so memorable. And ultimately, so successful. Rarely has a president ever needed to meet his people, up close, as Lincoln did in February 1861. He was still an unknown quantity, despite his fame, and he needed to persuade them that he was fighting for them, just as they would fight for him. He literally reached out to them, shaking hands by the tens of thousands. Even Villard had to admit, “He never refused to respond to a call for his appearance whenever the train stopped.” He achieved all of this while moving faster and farther than any president-elect ever had.
Nicolay continued, “As Mr. Lincoln’s journey progressed, his wisdom in making it one of public oration became apparent.” It was not just the words he came to say, day in and day out, to immense throngs and to tiny clusters of rural families, waving mutely as the train sped past. It was the man himself. They saw him, and felt reassured. By an alchemy that we cannot perceive through any photograph, the physical experience of seeing Lincoln inspired people. Nicolay: “his whole bearing, manner, and utterance carried conviction to all beholders that the man was of them as well as for them.”
Nicolay continued with an observation worthy of Tocqueville:
There is a power of fine discrimination in the eyes and ears of an intelligent American multitude that does not often fail to rightly interpret the personal relation of the official to the constituent. It is an art they have learned at their endless mass-meetings and conventions, if it is not the more subtle, psychological influence permeating human society, which exists though it may baffle all laws of proof and definition. If such a current of electrical communion from the people to Mr. Lincoln be denied or disproven, those who stood near him throughout this memorable journey can give earnest testimony to its presence from Lincoln to the people.
That “electric communion” between Lincoln and his people, forged on this journey, would never wane. It was a political achievement of the highest importance. It worked in both directions, sustaining him as well. That electric communion saved the Union.
At the end of Feb. 23, in his rooms overlooking the White House, he must have known that he had already achieved something enormous. He had come a very long way from Springfield. He had survived everything America could throw at him. And his troubles had just begun.
Sources: William T. Coggeshall, “The Journeys of Abraham Lincoln”; Victor Searcher, “Lincoln’s Journey to Greatness”; Harold Holzer, “Lincoln, President-Elect”; Michael Burlingame, “Abraham Lincoln: A Life”; Michael Burlingame, ed. “Lincoln’s Journalist: John Hay’s Anonymous Writings for the Press, 1860-1864”; John Nicolay, “Some Incidents in Lincoln’s Journey from Springfield to Washington”; Scott D. Trostel, “The Lincoln Inaugural Train” (forthcoming); The Lincoln Log (http://www.thelincolnlog.org)
Note: At the conclusion of this series, I would like to extend thanks to Robert and Joan Hoffman for sharing John Hay’s private scrapbook; to Scott Trostel for sharing his forthcoming book; and to the staff of the John Hay Library at Brown University. I’d also like to express gratitude, 150 years after the fact, that Lincoln’s two secretaries, Hay and Nicolay, were such vivid writers, able to make every stage of this journey come alive for new readers.
Ted Widmer is director and librarian of the John Carter Brown Library at Brown University. He was a speechwriter for President Bill Clinton and the editor of the Library of America’s two-volume “American Speeches.”