No matter where you stand on the environmental spectrum, it's likely you will find something of interest in this month's issue of School Nutrition. That's because "going green" is a trend that driven by more than environmentalism - there are economic factors at work. Prices are rising for fuel and power. And, as fuel prices rise, so do the prices for other goods that your operation needs. It pays to find more efficient ways to do business.
In fact, schools all across the nation are registering for such benchmarking initiatives as the Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design program from the U.S. Green Building Council and the ENERGY STAR for K-12 Schools program from the EPA and U.S. Department of Energy. A new study suggests that schools like these are cost-effective options for new construction and renovations. Learn more about the green schools movement-and its potential benefits-in "Down to Earth."
Next, take a close-up look at specific schools that have incorporated energy-efficient designs. For example, in Wayne, Pa., Radnor Middle School students enjoy their lunches at café-style window seats, where light pours in abundantly. The school is considered green because of the "daylighting" of various classrooms and communal spaces - along with the overall design and the technologies used throughout the school. Discover more details in "Is It Easy Being Green?"
If you aren't able to renovate or start over with a new school building, you might want to replace some equipment, instead. Finding the right energy-efficient equipment means weighing such factors as upfront cost, operating costs, equipment life expectancy, energy savings and performance - which requires doing your homework. Get started with advice from "Eco-Equipment."
Not only can environmentalism bring practical business benefits for the "here and now," it also can help to preserve natural resources for generations to come. "Going Green" explains the personal side of the green movement, from recycling at home to offsetting carbon footprints to buying fair-trade groceries. Step by step, you can help to reduce the harm to this beloved world. As you explore practical options for both your business life and your personal life, School Nutrition magazine is here to help.
Down to Earth
All across America, school districts are turning to “green” building design, technologies and operational strategies. Is it true that going green can save you some green?
Is It Easy Being Green?
Are folks in your school district keen on going green? What will that mean for those on the school nutrition team?
Low-energy, high-efficiency options and features are all the rage in today’s foodservice kitchens.
Step by step, we can reduce the harm we are doing to our beloved planet. But it takes a commitment to change.