St. Udio - Sorry - as I said, my original sources were print materials in old science magazines. I am addicted to reading and sifting through garage
sale boxes - but my storage is limited and I restrain my actual purchases, so can't cite source details. Here's a quick overview of what's on the
1. "Climate is influenced by a host of factors, not all of which are well understood." Major factors known to influence climate change are
"astro-ecological" - includes impacts on the earth by sun variations/cycles (heat, magnetic, radiation, orbital tilt, etc.); changes in dust and
meteor exposure as we orbit through the solar sytem (Milankovich, Muller); and various exposures as the earth and solar system orbit through the Milky
Way (soficrow). In addition, responses and changes on the earth itself create domino-like cascades that influence weather, then larger climate - and
arguably, speed or slow "natural" variations (general).
2. "Climate, like geological time, has it's own subdivisions to distinguish episodes of different climate. In descending order of duration, these
are known as "Eras," "Epochs," "Ice-Ages," and "Periods." Scientists do not know what causes these climate changes to begin, nor what causes
them to end. Changes occur fairly abruptly in Earth's history.
3. Computer models of climate and climate change, while complex and sophisticated have several fatal flaws. First, the science of climate change is
not well enough understood to model accurately (this is a very important factor to consider). Second, even if the science were sufficiently well
understood to model, the computer modeling capabilities would be severely taxed. Third, and perhaps most important, if we understood the science and
could model it accurately, we simply do not have the capacity to collect sufficient data to drive the computer model."
Main Source, 1-3: webcommentary.com...
4. Climate change theories recognize the major impacts of earth's astro-ecological relationship to the sun and/or solar system. According to the
Milankovitch theory, changes in the incident solar radiation, called insolation, in the Northern Hemisphere provide the driving force for global
glacial cycles. Rich Muller has shown that orbital inclination is a better fit to the climate data than is the standard (Milankovitch) theory. No
climate change theory as yet purports to be a 'unifying theory,' or accommodates the many factors influencing climate change. Computer modeling
tries, but fails.
5. While the two main theories regarding Ice Age "forcings" acknowledge the larger astro-environment, neither address our solar system's orbit
through the Milky Way - nor acknowledges this orbit's potential impacts. It takes the sun (and our solar system) roughly 200-250 million years to
orbit once around the Milky Way - and the astro-environment likely changes dramatically from one section to the next - which may help explain the
variations in climate cycles that current theories do not accommodate.
The Milky Way Galaxy
Our Solar System's Location in the Milky Way Galaxy
Policy-makers know that the earth is up for some radical changes. But public policy is driven by business interests committed to keeping the public
uninformed. The issue is manipulated to keep voters out of the real debate - and policy is designed to provide business opportunities, NOT to serve
ordinary peoples' best interests.
The current debate being served up to the public is a distraction. And the question, "Is human activity causing global warming?" - as framed for
public consumption - is a red herring.
The important question is: "What is being done to ensure the survival of the human species, and human culture?"
A second distraction is prepared for those who don't buy the standard global warming debate. Contemporary science shows that rapid warming will spark
an ice age; the counterspin says no, we now are entering longer warming period.
Join the fray, or ask your politicians the important
question: "What is being done to ensure the survival of the human species, and
QUOTE: "...regular recurring epochs of glaciation have dominated the planet for the past million years. Ten times, glaciers have advanced and then
retreated with the duration of retreat (and corresponding warmth) frequently lasting not more than 10,000 years. The Earth has been in a warm period
for about 10,000 years now. (Which means we're due for an ice age. ed) ...Said Muller, "The mechanism proposed by Milankovitch could be adjusted to
explain the cycles of glaciation that occurred prior to one million years ago. However, for the past million years the glacial record is an excellent
match to the cycle of tilt." "
Muller: Astronomical theory offers new explanation for ice ages
4.1 The ice ages and the Earth's climate
Muller: A New Theory of Glacial Cycles
Muller: brief introduction to the history of climate
Orbital Variations and Glacial Cycles: Student Orientation
See: Milankovich Theory
Milankovitch Cycles in Paleoclimate
The Pacemaker of the Ice Ages: Milankovich Cycles in Climate
Basic: The Ice Ages
Climate Change and the Oceans
Geodynamics: PDF: A RE-ANALYSIS OF POLAR WANDER DUE TO ICE-AGE CYCLES
Basic Paleoclimatology: Data, Modeling and Theory
Climate Change Information
Sheet 8: The evidence from past climates
Evidence from U-Th dating against Northern
Hemisphere forcing of the penultimate deglaciation. PMID: 10716440
Wikipedia - Climate Change
Beyond the Cycle
CASCADES on EARTH
Abrupt Climate Change
Will global warming trigger a new ice age?
Also see: yaleglobal.yale.edu...
Innovative Research Proves Gulf Stream Slowed During Last Ice
PDF: Collapse of the California Current During Glacial Maxima
Also see: Abstract
"Dr. Gaspar explains how the Mayan Calendar is based on the two most prominent ice age cycles, thus its 2012 end date will herald in an ice age.
Nostradamus, Revelations, and Native American and other animal symbologies will line up in a perfectly constructed theory to show that the ancient
sages knew about these apocalyptic recurrent cycles. A possible polar axis shift is waiting for us in the next 5-12 years to end global warming."
Also, the "I Ching" may be unravelled to provide a calendar of geophysical and climate cycles, clearly based on ancient, detailed, and relatively
scientific observations and records. (soficrow, unpublished)
]Outlines Warming and Cooling Periods, Epochs, and Eras. Conclusions flawed; most
info good, but incomplete[/url]
"It is not possible to understand the present or future climate unless scientists can account for the enormous and rapid cycles of glaciation that
have taken place over the last million years, and which are expected to continue into the future. A great deal has happened in the theory of the ice
ages over the last decade, and it is now widley accepted that ice ages are driven by changes in the Earth's orbit. The study of ice ages is very
inter-disciplinary, covering geology, physics, glaciology, oceanography, atmospheric science, planetary orbit calculations astrophysics and
Ice Ages and Astronomical Causes
Data, spectral analysis and mechanisms
Series: Springer Praxis Books
Subseries: Environmental Sciences
Muller, Richard A., MacDonald, Gordon J.
1st ed. 2000. 2nd printing, 2002, Hardcover