<<The legend continues after I get a correct (oh, OK, I'll accept any) reply.>>
You shouldn't have asked for any, I tend to babble hehehe. But you asked for it.
<<What does the first part mean? What are we the Children of?
The legend continues after I get a correct (oh, OK, I'll accept any) reply.
Ok, I'll toss a nice, long, boring, and confusing shot or two out here. :oD
Well, from family members, I was always told the name meant "landlord" or something along those lines. So once upon a time today <g>, in a galaxy far far away, I felt the call of the challenge and sniffed around the internet to see if I could get anything out of it. Heheh.
So far, this is the closest I could get to a translation or breakdown of the name and mind you, I'm only using internet resources.
The word for "long" in Polish is "dlugi." I don't know Polish, so I don't know the variations of the words, but the site I used also threw "dlugo" in there. Just as side-note, in both of these words the "l" has a little slash in it that I can't reproduce on my computer.
As to the suffixes, from what I could find, "-ski" usually means "from," and can apply to a place name or such, especially (if I'm getting this right) when attached to certain stems, which is where I'm figuring the "-en" in "ken" is coming from. So, from what I found, "-ski" doesn't necessarily mean "son of" or "child(ren) of" but could quite possibly refer to a place. So, just using Dlugokenski purely for an example, it could mean "from name of a location that is "dlugo" or a variation of it." This gets stickier hehehe. I found it said that the suffix "-ski" was also used to show that the person was of nobility and that this was the main reason for using it. However, about 200 years ago (if I remember the number correctly) a lot of the common people started using "-ski" on their names also, when they were usually just adding it to their existing surname if they had one or the name of their employer or the place they came from. So after awhile, just because someone had the "noble" -ski ending on their name didn't necessarily mean they weren't peasants and were most likely just adding it to the name of the place they came from, whether that be the village or rather the landowner that they worked for.
I can't find anything to do with the "k" though so I'm figuring the spelling of the name changed through time and locations and the "k" was something else or just thrown in there for good looks. :oD
Also, on another note, I found one site where this guy wrote some book about surnames in Poland and that general area I believe. He offers to try and find the "quick and dirty" (his words heheh) origin of surnames, if it's a fairly easy and common name. He lists the ones he's done for people so far. I didn't see Dlugokenski there but I did find one that started with "Dl." He told the person that he can't find any names with that beginning until fairly recently. He said that now there's a whole slew of people scattered with those two letters starting their last name but cannot find anything from before just recently. But then again, like he said himself, he'll only do a quick and dirty search for names. So if it's a rare name, he's obviously not going to kill himself (which I don't blame him for) trying to find a meaning and he was pretty vague on some names.
So, from what I understand, most of the stems of the names (which would be "dlugo" or a variation of it, in this case) would be a word used for a surname (like a lot of names start out as), would be derived from a location where the clan or family lived, or even be a surname used by the servants living on the property. And then, -ski was originally added to the stem to denote nobility but that eventually became irrelevant.
And that folks, is all the research I'm doing for the next week. Heheheh!!
So, John, if I haven't completely put ya to sleep.....was that good enough of a reply to get the legend out of ya? Huh? Eh? Come on. Heheh