India is emerged as a significant destination for medical treatment. The country offers a great value for money in terms of medical treatment for both the developed and the developing countries. Here the cost for many of the health care treatments are lowered by at least 75 - 95% when compared to similar procedure in USA, UK and middle East. Most of the bigger corporate Hospitals in India have state of the art medical facilities, equipments and highly experienced doctors
Cardiothoracic Vascular Surgery
Cardiothoracic surgery is the field of medicine involved in surgical treatment of diseases affecting organs inside the thorax (the chest)—generally treatment of conditions of the heart (heart disease) and lungs (lung disease). Vascular surgery is a specialty of surgery in which diseases of the vascular system, or arteries and veins, are managed by medical therapy, minimally-invasive catheter procedures, and surgical reconstruction. The specialty evolved from general and cardiac surgery.
Dental surgery is the medical procedures that involve artificially modifying dentition, in other words surgery of the teeth and jaw bones.
Emergency medicine is a medical specialty in which physicians care for patients with acute illnesses or injuries which requires immediate medical attention. While not usually providing long-term or continuing care, emergency medicine physicians diagnose a variety of illnesses and undertake acute interventions to stabilize the patient.
Endocrinology is a branch of biology and medicine dealing with the endocrine system, its diseases, and its specific secretions called hormones, the integration of developmental events such as proliferation, growth, and differentiation (including histogenesis and organogenesis) and the coordination of metabolism, respiration, excretion, movement, reproduction, and sensory perception depend on chemical cues, substances synthesized and secreted by specialized cells. Endocrinology is concerned with the study of the biosynthesis, storage, chemistry, Physiological function of hormones and Pathology with the cells of the endocrine glands and tissues that secrete them.
Otolaryngology or ENT (ear, nose and throat) is the branch of medicine and surgery that specializes in the diagnosis and treatment of ear, nose, throat, and head and neck disorders.
Gastroenterology is the branch of medicine whereby the digestive system and its disorders are studied. The name is a combination of three Ancient Greek words gaster (stomach), enteron (intestine), and logos (reason). Diseases affecting the gastrointestinal tract, which includes the organs from mouth to anus, along the alimentary canal, are the focus of this specialty.
Gastroenterology is the branch of medicine whereby the digestive system and its disorders are studied. The name is a combination of three Ancient Greek words gaster (gen.: gastros) (stomach), enteron (intestine), and logos (reason). Diseases affecting the gastrointestinal tract, which includes the organs from mouth to anus, along the alimentary canal, are the focus of this specialty.
Neuro and Spine surgery
Neurosurgery (or neurological surgery) is the medical specialty concerned with the prevention, diagnosis, treatment, and rehabilitation of disorders which affect any portion of the nervous system including the brain, spinal column, spinal cord, peripheral nerves, and extra-cranial cerebrovascular system.
Nuclear medicine is a branch or specialty of medicine and medical imaging that uses radionuclides and relies on the process of radioactive decay in the diagnosis and treatment of disease.
In nuclear medicine procedures, elemental radionuclides are combined with other elements to form chemical compounds, or else combined with existing pharmaceutical compounds, to form radiopharmaceuticals. Treatment of diseased tissue, based on metabolism or uptake or binding of a particular ligand, may also be accomplished, similar to other areas of pharmacology.
Orthopedic surgery or orthopedics is the branch of surgery concerned with conditions involving the musculoskeletal system. Orthopedic surgeons use both surgical and nonsurgical means to treat musculoskeletal trauma, sports injuries, degenerative diseases, infections, tumors, and congenital disorders.
Pediatric Cardiac Surgery
Pediatric cardiovascular surgery is surgery of the heart of children
Pediatric surgery or paediatric surgery is a subspecialty of surgery involving the surgery of fetuses, infants, children, adolescents, and young adults. Pediatric surgery arose when medical doctors recognized that children, especially infants and newborns have different medical and surgical needs compared to that of an adult. This reason for this discovery is because children have lower immunity to viruses compared to that of the adults, so children are more likely to easily catch a sickness. Children also react differently to certain treatments and they tend to need extra care, so pediatric surgery was created especially for the children so that they could be treated faster and they would have more care.
Plastic & Reconstructive Surgery
Plastic surgery is a medical specialty concerned with the correction or restoration of form and function. Though cosmetic or aesthetic surgery is the best-known kind of plastic surgery, most plastic surgery is not cosmetic: plastic surgery includes many types of reconstructive surgery, hand surgery, microsurgery, and the treatment of burns.
Reconstructive surgery is, in its broadest sense, the use of surgery to restore the form and function of the body, although Maxillo-Facial Surgeons, Plastic Surgeons and Otolaryngologists do reconstructive surgery on faces after trauma and to reconstruct the head and neck after cancer.
Sex Therapy and Marital Therapy
Sex Therapy is a form of treatment of sexual problems by modifying and incorporating sexual experiences with the help of psychological methods. In sex therapy specialized clinical skills based on scientific theoretical frame work are used for helping men and women as individuals and/or couples to solve or modify their sexual problems.
Marital therapy is one of the major methods of treatment for marital discord. Marital therapy is based on the frame work of cognitive behaviour therapy.
Urology is the medical and surgical specialty that focuses on the urinary tracts of males and females, and on the reproductive system of males. Medical professionals specializing in the field of urology are called urologists and are trained to diagnose, treat, and manage patients with urological disorders. The organs covered by urology include the kidneys, adrenal glands, ureters, urinary bladder, urethra, and the male reproductive organs (testes, epididymis, vas deferens, seminal vesicles, prostate and penis). Urology is one of the most competitive specialties to enter for physicians
Ayurveda aims to integrate and balance the body, mind, and spirit; and therefore it follows a holistic approach. The basic principle of Ayurveda is to prevent and treat illness by maintaining balance in the body, mind, and consciousness through proper drinking, diet, and lifestyle, as well as herbal remedies. This balance is believed to lead to happiness and health, and to help prevent illness. Ayurvedic medicine also treats specific physical and mental health problems. The chief aim of Ayurvedic practices is to cleanse the body of substances that can cause disease, thus helping to re-establish harmony and balance between the body and mind.
Dr. Mohammed Haleem MBBS, MD
3eggs medical tourism is an interesting concept in the service sector. Read more
Dr. Manoj Kuriakose MBBS, MD, PHD
3eggs medical tourism is a service venture who is looking forward to redefine the way the current system works. Read more