High-Tech on the High Seas
An In-Depth Look at Today's Cruise Ship Safety Standards
Even with their leviathan proportions, today’s cruise ships are arguably the safest that ever sailed, thanks largely to the technological advances incorporated into their design, navigation, and emergency-response systems. Alexander George reports
1 Before any steel has been hammered, architects map the ship and run sophisticated software to simulate crowd movements during an accident so they can address any possible bottlenecks or other problems.
2 Fire shutters, some as high as two decks, can be electronically lowered to contain a blaze and block off damaged areas.
3 In addition to GPS navigation, a ship’s communication with satellites yields sophisticated information on ocean conditions, with details that buoys can miss. Infrared camera readings from space provide data that ensure precise tracking of weather patterns.
4 On some of the newest cruise ships, a dedicated safety center on the bridge (a few yards behind the captain’s chair) controls 17 different systems that allow the captain and safety officers to open and close fire doors and shutters and to control ventilation systems and sprinklers across the vessel. A separate panel displays the status of the ship’s watertight doors, which can be opened and closed remotely with the flick of a switch.
5 Lightweight materials give a modern cruise ship more strength than the icebreakers of yore. Bulkheads (the dividing walls between sections of the ship) are generally made of aluminum, but the integration of composites like carbon fiber enhances structural integrity with less weight and increased energy efficiency. When used in passenger areas, these materials make the ship more stable by keeping it light on the top and heavy on the bottom.
6 Shrinking hardware has been a boon to maritime meteorology. Buoys can provide real-time weather readings that enable highly accurate predictions of a storm system’s movements.
7 Some ships have taken a page from airplanes and integrated quick-inflating safety chutes into their evacuation procedures. After sliding down feet-first, evacuees land in a large raft that can function as a lifeboat.
8 The hull below the waterline is divided into discrete compartments, with watertight doors capable of sealing off any flooding should the thick steel sides of the vessel be breached. Compartments are all monitored with water sensors that relay signals to the bridge and include a complex web of piping that redistributes any floodwater into parallel compartments to maintain balance. (How water spread throughout the Concordia’s watertight compartments has emerged as a key question for investigators.)
9 A screen on the bridge juxtaposes the ship’s GPS location over color-coded charts, displaying in real time the land around, below, and ahead. Nearby, a radar screen shows obstacles above the surface, the contours of land, and any traffic in the area. Meanwhile, a suite of instrumentation provides constant readings on the depth of the water below the ship and the direction and force of wind and currents as well as real-time estimates of how those factors are affecting the ship’s speed and direction. If there is any danger of collision, alarms will sound early enough for the captain to close bulkheads, steer clear, or, at worst, call for passengers to assemble.