A Renewable Green Energy Power conference and exhibition will take place in February 2012. The Solar Power-Gen conference and exhibition will take place on February 14-16 2012 at Long Beach California, USA. This 3 day conference is about Solar Energy, one of the renewable green sources of energy. You may also join me at Google+
According to the EU directive 1999/31/EC the amount of Municipal Solid Waste should be reduced based on the waste landfilled amount that was produced in 1995. The targets were set to 75% by 2006, to 50% by 2009 and to 35% by 2016 (using as a reference year You may also join me at Google+
Renewable Green Energy Excellence awards will once again be given this year in order to recognize project, technologies and programs that run in the area of Renewable Green Energy. The technologies that are involved are: Wind, Solar, Hydroelectric, Geothermal and Biomass. You may also join me at Google+
Solar energy systems are classified into three system categories: Solar thermal, passive solar and Solar Photovoltaic systems (see “renewable energy sources: solar energy systems”). In this article we review the operation of Solar Thermal technologies and You may also join me at Google+
Wind is free, so why don’t we produce our own electricity from our very own home wind turbine. Home wind turbines (also known as residential wind turbines, domestic wind turbines or small wind turbines) harness the power of the wind You may also join me at Google+
Renewable Green Energy has many forms and uses and Hybrid Solar Lighting, HSL, is one of them. Hybrid Solar lighting is a new type of technology that uses the sunlight, energy from sun, to deliver natural light to buildings and thus reduce the waste of other energy sources that are used to deliver artificial lighting.
Waste to energy incineration is a method of producing heat and/or electricity by directly combusting garbage or as their official term is Municipal Solid Waste (MSW). MSW is waste collected by the various local authorities from apartment buildings, offices, households, schools. You may also join me at Google+
In our previous article “renewable energy sources: solar energy systems” we have reviewed that solar energy systems are classified into three system categories: Solar thermal, passive solar and solar photovoltaic systems. In this article we review the basic operation and advantages and disadvantages of Solar Photovoltaic Systems. You may also join me at Google+