With its fresh, delicate taste and flaky texture, salmon is a healthy meal option packed with omega-3 fatty acids and protein. It can be served as the main course, used to top a salad or wedged into a sandwich. Although cooking fish at home can be a bit intimidating, using a meat thermometer to check the salmon’s internal temperature can help prevent undercooking.
The United States Food and Drug Administration recommends cooking salmon to an internal temperature of 145 degrees Fahrenheit. Push the tip of the meat thermometer gently into the middle of the salmon fillet at its thickest part. Ideally, start checking the internal temperature a few minutes before the salmon fillet should be done cooking -- this prevents you from overcooking the fish. Once your salmon is cooked, clean the meat thermometer with hot water and soap to prevent cross-contamination. If you don’t have a meat thermometer available, determine the salmon’s doneness by checking for opaque skin and flesh that flakes easily with a fork. You’ll also want to wash all other utensils and serving dishes that came into contact with the raw fish.
As long as you’re checking the internal temperature, salmon can be prepared in a variety of methods. Poaching the delicate fish involves cooking it in simmering liquid, while broiling and roasting require a lengthy stay in low oven temperatures. Salmon can also be baked and grilled.
Although not all salmon is contaminated with harmful organisms, the risk still exists. Fortunately, cooking the fillets to an internal temperature of 145 degrees Fahrenheit should eliminate that risk by killing the harmful organisms. But if you undercook your salmon, these organisms might remain intact. When contaminated fish is consumed, it can lead to a variety of food-borne illnesses. Symptoms might include abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, flushing, skin reactions and persistent headache. If food poisoning from salmon is suspected, seek medical attention immediately.
Other Safety Tips
When purchasing salmon, choose fillets that smell fresh -- avoid fillets that smell fishy, sour or pungent. The color should be bright and shiny with no discolorations or darkening. When thawing frozen salmon, place it in the refrigerator overnight to allow for a slow thaw. If you need a quick method, seal the salmon fillets in a plastic bag and submerge them in cold water until thawed.
- red salmon image by Andrey Kiselev from Fotolia.com