Grade 12 Global Studies Nutrition & Health HFA 4C Human Development throughout the Lifespan HHG 4M Challenge & Change in Society HSB 4U West & the World History CHY4U / CHY4C Analysing Current Economics Issues CIA 4U Canadian & International Law CLN4U Canadian & International Politics CPW4U HFA 4C Relationship between Nutrition Health •On health at different stages of life & •on global issues related to food production The Role of Nutrition Health Disease Strategies for promoting Food Security Environmental Responsibility Students will learn about Topics Food Preparation Skills Food & Kitchen Safety Food preparation Follow a recipe Adapt a recipe Correct measuring & preparation techniques Cooking Opportunities Breakfast club Staff meetings Bake sales Kougar Kitten playschool Nutrition & Health Nutrients Food Guides Energy Balance Nutritional Status Project – Food for the Breakfast Club Plan & prepare a food item or items to address a specific nutritional deficiency common to Canadians (e.g. a high fibre snack to address a lack of dietary fibre) MARKET RESEARCH Do taste tests & determine what students like Food for the Breakfast Club Create educational advertisements to encourage students to eat breakfast & gain the nutritional deficiency WEEKLY prepare and portion food the breakfast club Topics Nutrition throughout the Lifespan Nutrition & Disease Trends & Patterns in Food & Nutrition Plan & Prepare food for . . . • Kougar Kittens • Age 2-4 years old • A specific health need like diabetes • A trendy food item like . . . Flax seed, high protein pasta, blueberries, chia Topics to investigate Food Security Food Production & supply Food Production & Environment Tour some Farms - Field Trip Apple Farm Organic Farm Learn about the agriculture business in Ontario Harvest fresh produce and cook with it at school! COURSE DESCRIPTION This course offers a multidisciplinary approach to the study of human development throughout the life cycle. Students will study how early brain development are linked to lifelong learning, health and wellbeing. Students will gain practical experience working with children in the playschool. Students will use research skills to learn about human growth and development. UNITS Human Development: An Overview Human Development: Brain Development In The Early Years Human Development: The Early Years Parenthood: The Roles And Responsibilites Throughout The Family Life Cycle Socialization Factors That Influences Human Development DIFFERENT TYPES OF DEVELOPMENT Physical Development Social Development Intellectual Development Emotional Development ASSIGNMENTS Research opinion paper Playschool assignment Brain development assignment Personal reflection paper ISU research assignment HSB 4U Description This course focuses on the use of social science theories, perspectives, and methodologies to investigate and explain shifts in knowledge, attitudes, beliefs, and behaviour and their impact on society. Students will critically analyse how and why cultural, social, and behavioural patterns change over time. Description They will explore the ideas of social theorists and use those ideas to analyse causes of and responses to challenges such as technological change, deviance, and global inequalities. Students will explore ways in which social science research methods can be used to study social change. Topics Social Change Foundations Cause & Effect Technological Change Social Patterns & Trends Demographics Forces that shape social trends Social deviance Global Social Challenges Global Inequalities Globalization Exploitation GR. 12 WEST & THE WORLD CHY 4U / CHY 4C Units: 1. 2. 3. 4. Renaissance & Reformation Enlightenment & Revolution Modern Europe World Wars RENAISSANCE & REFORMATION UNIT TOPICS: Feudalism Renaissance Wars of Religion Age of Discovery Catholicism vs. Protestantism ACTIVITIES: Survey of Renaissance art Create an Artifact from the 17th or 18th century ENLIGHTENMENT & REVOLUTION UNIT TOPICS: Enlightenment & Philosophers Despotic Rulers & Absolutism American Revolution French Revolution Napoleon Bonaparte ACTIVITIES: Salon Assignment – Choose a historical figure of this time period and role them in the classroom Mock Trial of Louis XVI Photo Story – Describes the Enlightenment period through visuals MODERN EUROPE UNIT TOPICS: Industrial Revolution Congress of Vienna Age of Imperialism & Colonialism Slavery & Social Darwinism ACTIVITIES: Children’s Storybook Assignment – research an influential person of the 19th or 20th century; utilize text and visuals to describe the person’s philosophical approach WORLD WARS UNIT TOPICS: World War I Interwar Period World War II ACTIVITIES: Poster Board Exposition – Using visuals and text, describe a person/event from the unit Primary Source Document Seminars – Analyze primary source document of a historical figure and teach his/her ideologies to the class How do we earn that 30% FINAL EVALUATION 15% ESSAY (4U) / MINI ESSAY (4C) You will research and write about a historical topic that is engaging to you: Christopher Columbus – Good or Evil? Are humans inherently selfish? George Washington – Success or Failure? 15% WRITTEN FINAL EXAM This will be based on all the units studied throughout the course ANALYSING CURRENT ECONOMIC ISSUES CIA 4U Description This course investigates the nature of the competitive global economy and explores how individuals and societies can gain the information they need to make appropriate economic decisions. Students will learn about the principles of microeconomics and macroeconomics, apply economic models and concepts to interpret economic information, assess the validity of statistics, and investigate marketplace dynamics. Students will use economic inquiry and communication skills to analyse current economic issues, make informed judgments, and present their findings. Topics Economic Decision Making Economic Stakeholders Self-Interest and Interdependence Economic Institutions Methods of Economic Inquiry &Communication CLU4U This course examines elements of Canadian and international law in social, political , and global contexts . Students will study the historical and philosophical sources of law and the principles and practices of international law and will learn to relate them to issues in Canadian society and the wider world . Students will use critical-thinking and communication skills to analyze legal issues , conduct independent research , and present the results of their inquiries in a variety of ways. Heritage Rights & Freedoms Criminal Law and Procedures Regulation & Dispute Resolution Methods of Legal Inquiry and Communication Visit the Toronto University Court House, as well as the appeals court and divisional court at old city hall Sit in on a variety of court cases, including a few high profile murder cases. This is always a highlight CPW4U is an exciting introduction to the study of politics. Students follow international events, but now this course will help you understand the power structure involved and the complicated world of rights and responsibilities. This course examines Canadian and world politics from a variety of perspectives. Students will investigate the ways in which individuals, groups, and states work to influence domestic and world events, the role of political ideologies in national and international politics, and the dynamics of international cooperation and conflict resolution. This course and unit begins with the topic, A Study of Politics, followed by an introduction to the basic concepts of political science. Students will spend some time on the concept of ideology and search out their own political ideology. This unit begins with an examination of the forms of government and models of political processes. Students will then have a look at how roles in the political process function. Students will be involved in a mock election, mock parliament. You will learn which ideology fit with your global point of view and examine your own bias. •The international system will be introduced and examined in depth. •Students will become familiar with the United Nations and the six international actors. Students learn best when they are engaged in a variety of ways of learning. Canadian and world studies courses lend themselves to a wide range of approaches in that they require students to research & think critically. •Your final grade will be determined based on your comprehension of political terms and concepts. •You will be required to apply theory to real political events of the day and write a major research essay based on a political autobiography.