Regrettably, there's little evidence that the contemporary pagan festival of Samhain (aka Halloween) has the ancient origins claimed for it by many. It seems likely that modern paganism took the idea of the festival being dedicated to the dead and to the ancestors from the Catholic tradition, rather than the other way around. However, at the risk of sounding cavalier, traditions do change and mutate and most of the pagan community will, at this time of year, be undertaking some kind of ritual work that pays respect to the departed. But what does that really mean?
I've been marking the season by reading Steve Mithen's excellent After the Ice, a global look at human history from 20,000 to 5,000BC. Using the narrative device of a time-travelling anthropologist, Mithen's book traverses the world, from the Fertile Crescent to Europe, the Americans and beyond. The impression that the reader gets is both excitingly diverse and depressingly familiar: tales of human ingenuity in the face of extreme climatic shift, but also tales of a widespread tendency to screw up the immediate environment (as with the Mesolithic visitors to Colonsay, who processed hazelnuts in such industrial quantities that the crop never recovered).
A great deal of Mithen's book necessarily relates to burial customs. While there is clear evidence for those burials in the form of bones, grave goods and so on, the beliefs which lay behind them remain obviously opaque: it's difficult enough to try to put yourself in the mindset of, say, a comparatively recent Anglo-Saxon, let alone trying to evaluate the beliefs of anyone this far back. Perhaps one of the most poignant burials – a young mother and her baby from Vedbaek in Denmark, the child laid on a swan's wing – could have a number of interpretations (the child's spirit being carried downriver, up into the sky, or the wing simply forming a mark of respect or a convenient receptacle).
The academic treatment of burials such as these splits the pagan community: there are those who are campaigning for the reburial of ancient remains, such as Honouring the Ancient Dead (HAD), once information has been gleaned from them, and those who feel that those remains are primarily archaeological artefacts which should be retained for study in the event of new data-gathering techniques coming into use. Organisations like Pagans for Archaeology not only question the need for reburial, but are in many cases opposed to it. "Respect," says the PFA's website, "should mean memory, which involves recovering the stories of past people." (They're also against littering ancient sites with tea lights and crystals – even if one has no particular horse in the reburial race, this does seem entirely reasonable.)
I will admit to a bias in favour of the PFA's approach. This is not so much because I'm basically opposed to the ideas championed by HAD, which are commendably nuanced – they're mainly concerned with remains that have no further research potential, do not claim that reburial should be mandatory, and they take on board the need for study. Nor do they claim that they know what kind of rites would originally have been used, or what kind of religious beliefs lay behind any particular form of burial.
HAD's restraint is laudable, but I remain embarrassed by the less sophisticated "arguments" for mandatory reburial that the tabloid press tend to get hold of and which tend to focus around the high-visibility sites of Stonehenge and Avebury – this is where you get people claiming that any uncovered bones are their personal ancestors, or that they're channelling the dead person's wishes – this is a bit of a paper tiger as far as an argument in favour of reburial goes, but it does make a lot of pagans cringe, including me. I don't think anyone's gone as far as claiming that they're a reincarnated version, but it's only a matter of time.
Any attempt to second-guess what ancient people would have wanted is just that: a guess at worst, a hypothesis at best. There is no secure cultural affinity between ancient pagans and modern ones, and the language game issue promoted by Wittgenstein holds: entering someone else's world view, especially across such a span of time is next to impossible. The debate relating to ancestral reburial is significant for what it tells us about our own beliefs, as with all historical research, we learn about ourselves as well as the past. But as far as contemporary paganism goes, our own notions of showing respect for the ancestors remain just that – our own.