Managing the urban water cycle needs to be underpinned by key sustainability principles of water consumption, water recycling, waste minimisation and environmental protection. The integration of urban water cycle management with urban planning and design is known as Water Sensitive Urban Design (WSUD).
One of the key elements of WSUD is the management of urban stormwater, both as a resource and for the protection of receiving water ecosystems. This requires strategic planning and concept designs that are underpinned by sound engineering practices in design and construction.
For each of these methods the manual provides design and maintenance procedures, typical drawings, design checklists, landscape requirements, worked examples and case studies. Additional work sheets and appendices are provided on a CD-ROM which accompanies the manual.
WSUD Engineering Procedures: Stormwater is designed to give practical engineering solutions to all those who need to implement WSUD. It covers:
Aquifer storage and recovery.
Please note amendments to figures on pages 27, 57 and 138 of WSUD Engineering Procedures: Stormwater.
2. Hydrologic design regions of Victoria
3. Summary of water sensitive urban design elements
4. Sedimentation basins
5. Bioretention swales
6. Bioretention basins
7. Sand filters
8. Swales and buffer strips
9. Constructed wetlands
10. Ponds and lakes
11. Infiltration measures
12. Rainwater tanks
13. Aquifer storage and recovery
14. Other measures
Appendix A. Suggested plant species for WSUD treatment elements
Appendix B. Victorian hydrological regions for sizing stormwater treatment measures
Appendix C. Victorian hydrological regions for sizing rainwater tanks
Appendix D. Cyanobacterial growth in constructed water bodies
Planners, urban designers, landscape architects and environmental scientists, engineers, as well as referral agencies who assess Water Sensitive Urban Designs and local government who are responsible for the maintenance of the systems.
The print copy of this book contains a CD-ROM with supplementary material. You can also download a zip file of this material using the link below.
For PC Users
Right click on the Link and choose Save Target (Internet Explorer) or Save Link As (Firefox). For Mac Users
Click and hold on the Link and choose Download Link to Disk (Internet Explorer) or Save this Link as (Firefox). All Firefox Users
Please be aware that due to difficulties with Firefox you must specify which format you wish the file to be saved as. When saving your article choose your file name and add the .zip extension. e.g. Bookname.zip