Production Supporting Skills
FILM 106 The Actor’s Craft in Digital Film Production 3 Units
This workshop course exposes students to the basic techniques of acting for the camera. It distinguishes the differing methods of acting for stage, television, and film. Students will prepare monologues, dialogs, and ensemble pieces. They will be required to act in projects for FILM 104, Introduction to Media Production. Lecture. Prerequisite: none.
FILM 201 Digital Video Editing 4 Units
Students will learn the basic elements of editing using non-linear digital video editing software. Emphasis will be placed on establishing continuity of direction, motion, time, and place. These techniques will be expanded into cutting for rhythm, timing, and storytelling. No experience required. Lecture and lab. Prerequisites: WRIT 111, Academic Writing I; FILM 102, Beginning Digital Filmmaking.
FILM 202 Beginning Screenwriting 3 Units
An introduction to the fundamentals of writing screenplays, using beat analysis techniques. Students will learn and put into practice the principles involved in conceiving theme, plot structure, characters and dialogue for a compelling cinematic story whether it be for features, television or internet, live action, or animation. Study includes analysis of selected classic and contemporary films together with their written screenplays and the sharing/critiquing of each other’s developing scripts. At the completion of the course, students will have written a detailed outline and a fully executed Act One for their own original screenplay or the complete script for a short to be produced in FILM 310. Lecture. Prerequisite: WRIT 111, Academic Writing I.
FILM 203 Sound Recording and Digital Sound Editing 3 Units
An in-depth practicum of recording double system sound for production with a focus on the recording and manipulating of sound to enhance visual communications. Students sharpen their skills in adapting standard recording tools to the requirements of video/film. The class encourages critical thinking about how sounds convey meaning and transform the meaning of the image. Pre-requisite: FILM 102, Beginning Digital Filmmaking.
FILM 204 Cinematography 3 Units
This course focuses on the visual aspects of digital video filmmaking. Students learn important concepts of cinematography including, how to operate and care for cameras and lenses; how to compose the image; lighting techniques; camera operating techniques including panning, tilting, zooming, booming, and dollying; controlling focus; controlling attention of the viewer; shooting to edit; creating camera reports; interfacing with the film labs and post houses; filters for lenses; exposure; and color balance. Prerequisite: FILM 102, Beginning Digital Filmmaking.
FILM 205 Production Design and Art Direction 3 Units
This course explores the aesthetic process for designing and/or choosing color schemes, costumes, makeup, set design, set dressings and decoration, props for both digital film production. Students will view and analyze classics of production design, then develop designs for advanced projects. Prerequisites: ANIM 211, Storyboarding andd FOUN 102, Design and Color Elements I; FILM 102, Beginning Digital Filmmaking, OR permission of instructor.
FILM 306 Directing Actors for Digital Film Production 4 Units
The student will produce and direct two scenes in class using competent, well-rehearsed actors cast and rehearsed by the student director for their roles. Students will be able to choose a script, hold auditions, cast it, rehearse the actors, and present a scene in class, along with a production package, including script notes, scene goals, character analysis, storyboard and shot list. Prerequisites: FILM 105, The Actor’s Craft; ANIM 211, Storyboarding, OR permission of instructor. Portfolio: Two videotaped scenes, post-produced and burned to DVD. These will be critiqued and ranked by faculty and students.
FILM 311 Advanced Screenwriting 3 Units
A seminar in which students work on individual scripting projects of substantial length, using class and instructor for critical analysis. This course may be used to develop either the Senior Thesis project or a feature length script. Portfolio: Finished script must be approved by faculty for development in FILM 304, Pre-Production Planning. Prerequisite: FILM 202, Beginning Screenwriting OR permission of instructor.
FILM 342 Sound Design and Mixing 3 Units
This course is intended to provide students with advanced post production experience. The student will learn industry terminology, crew production skills, and other professional aspects found in the media industry. The students will be encouraged to develop sound design assignments that will enhance their critical thinking skills about the use of sound in cinema. Students will mix Advanced Media Productions. Lecture. Prerequisites: WRIT 112, Academic Writing II, and FILM 104, Introduction to Media Production Filmmaking OR permission of instructor. Portfolio: Complete sound design and mix of digital film project of 10 minute length, burned to DVD. It will be critiqued and ranked by faculty and students.