The recent reports of thousands of dead birds and fish being discovered over the last few months have certainly got people talking. This strange phenomenon might be more easily explained if they were limited to certain areas of our planet, but they have been appearing all over the world.
Here are just a few reports:
There is of course a great deal of speculation as to what may have caused these deaths, including links to: HAARP, Chemtrails, volcanoes, magnetic changes and even BP.
Some have suggested that a Geomagnetic reversal may be imminent (where the positions of magnetic north and magnetic south become interchanged), but this generally happens over a much longer period of time. The last time this happened was believed to be 780,000 years ago, although on average they occur every 300,000 years (so the next one might be overdue?)
According to reports, the overall geomagnetic field is weakening and this trend has accelerated over the last few years (although within the range of normal variation)
The Earth's magnetic north pole is drifting from northern Canada towards Siberia with a presently accelerating rate - 10 km per year at the beginning of the 20th century, up to 40 km per year in 2003, and since then has only accelerated (most recent figures suggest 63 km per year now).
Whether this has any significance, or heralds a coming geomagnetic reversal, is anyone's guess. There is no evidence to show that a reversal will be harmful to life on this planet, unless this change is rapid. Such events have happened many times in Earth's history.
Another theory is that a mysterious "undiscovered" planet called "Planet X" is approaching and this is causing our current climatic changes. If such a planet exists, it could of course have some effect on Earth's magnetic fields.
I wrote an article on this subject almost a year ago which you may find interesting "Planet X Cover-Up? - Now you see it, now you don't!" which mentions the possible sighting of this planet on Google Earth, but the image of the planet is later "blacked-out" for some unknown reason.
There are many hundreds of reasons why we have seen so many birds and fish die in the last few months, and some of the suggestions have been feasible. However, until further information has been obtained, the explanation is likely to remain a mystery.
The only thing we can be sure of is that these events are unusual and it is easy to understand why people connect them to a potential catastrophic event in the future, and maybe the widely predicted "End of Times" in 2012?
Promote your site for FREE by getting involved with the "Web-Factor Challenge". CLICK HERE to find out more!