Rachel reluctantly agrees to take on an assignment from her boss, knowing that arguing won't change his mind. She wants to prove herself as a valuable asset to the industry and get a big story that could launch her career. However, her disappointment turns into insecurity when her boss reminds her to pack appropriately for several weeks at the Vanders' estate, including formal events. Despite feeling confident in her ability to handle herself among the wealthy, Rachel sets out to impress her boss with a story that will make him weep.

Somewhat disappointed, she knows there’s no use arguing with him. When he has made up his mind about something, you may as well take the assignment and move on. She wants so much to get a big story to show she can be an asset to the industry. One great story could propel an author into being a highly valued commodity. The pay raise couldn’t hurt either. “Okay, just give me the details,” she says as she reaches for the packet. She is a little less than enthusiastic as they leave the conference room. 

Hearing the disappointment in her voice, he tells her to come with him. “This is a great opportunity for you.” Opening his office, he says, “I need you to take this assignment seriously, Rachel. You’ve been asking for this chance, and now you have it. It has to have heart and make us see the Vanders as an admired part of New York’s history. Can you do that, Rachel? Can I trust you to put some emotion into this piece? A truly talented writer can make even the simplest story come alive.”

She looks at him and again sees this will be her assignment, whether she wants it or not, so she says, “Yes, of course. When do I start? Has someone informed them I’m coming?”

 “Yes. You will stay at the estate for several weeks, so pack with that in mind. I would take along appropriate attire since there is always an event of some sort. There will be formal dinners, parties, and gatherings, which will require you to have adequate clothing. Go shopping and put your purchases on the Magazine’s account.” He looks at her business attire and gives her some pointers on what she should take.
