Latest News About Stars and Galaxies
Stars are giant, luminous spheres of plasma. Galaxies consist of stars, stellar remnants, dust, gas, and dark matter, bound together by gravity. Learn more about stars and galaxies.
Observations by NASA's Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer (WISE) have revealed a surprise — there are fewer brown dwarfs in our cosmic backyard than previously believed.
A bridge of hydrogen gas has been detected between two neighboring galaxies.
Here are some tips on how to spot deep sky objects in the sky.
Many black holes may roam freely through intergalactic space.
A galaxy whose light has taken 13 billion years to reach us has been sighted.
Research suggests that the CID-42 galaxy collided with another galaxy, their black holes merged and ejected out of the newly formed star system at astonishing speeds. Albert Einstein predicted that this phenomenon is caused by gravitational waves.
Our galaxy will slam into the similar-sized Andromeda, merging to form a single hybrid galaxy.
See how the sky will look when our Milky Way galaxy crashes into the Andromeda galaxy.
ESO Photo Ambassador Babak Tafreshi snapped this remarkable image of the antennas of the Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter Array (ALMA), set against the splendour of the Milky Way in this space wallpaper.
The study should help astronomers understand how galaxies evolve.
Researchers will reveal details of the great collision awaiting the Milky Way.
Researchers are trying to understand the origins of the beautiful planetary nebula Sharpless 2-71.
This cool space wallpaper shows a bow shock is created in space when two streams of gas collide.
This cool space wallpaper shows an outflow of gas from a new star as it jets from a space object dubbed IRAS 21078+5211.
The elliptical Centaurus A galaxy is located about 12 million light-years away.
Galaxies are composed of stars, dust, and dark matter, all held together by gravity. They come in a variety of shapes, sizes, and ages.
A miniscule globular cluster of stars has been found orbiting our galaxy.
A new picture shows about 100,000 stars in a globular cluster called Messier 55.