A World History.
By Mark Kurlansky.
Illustrated. 484 pp. New York:
Walker & Company. $28.
PICK a product, any product: Clorox, Tabasco sauce, Parmigiano-Reggiano. Name a person: Gandhi, Marco Polo, George Washington. Choose a place: Sandwich, Alsace, Salzburg.
Mark Kurlansky picks them all and hundreds more, and finds that a river of salt runs through each of their stories. Liquid bleach was only possible once the chemistry of sodium was unraveled. Tabasco was what the McIlhenny family came up with when their salt-mining business dried up after the Civil War. Parmesan cheese needs weeks of immersion in a salt bath to acquire its characteristic texture and flavor.
It was the salt tax in India that inspired Mohandas K. Gandhi to start the passive rebellion that helped lead to independence. Marco Polo, best known for the noodles he may or may not have discovered in China, also found a sophisticated salt industry there. And the war George Washington led for independence from England was partly incited by salt shortages.
As for the three places, their very names, Kurlansky tells us, mean salt. Any town in England that ends in ''wich'' produced salt. Alsace translates as ''land of salt,'' and Salzburg is literally ''salt town.'' All were sources of a substance as essential to life on earth as water and air.
Kurlansky's dizzying new book, ''Salt: A World History,'' has countless such revelations. This is indeed a world history of salt. But it is also a history of the world as seen through those white crystals. To an almost absurd extent, he finds the salt connection nearly everywhere. The Erie Canal? Built for the sake of salt, which needed to be moved from the upstate Onondaga region to New York City. The West Indian slave trade? Underwritten by sales of salt, even more than by molasses and rum, as most history books have it. The tangled network of roads across North America? Credit the trails animals plodded as they searched for salt licks.
If every history book had such a sharp focus and clear presentation, no schoolchild would ever be left wondering about the when and why of, say, the battle of Bunker Hill. And we might actually have learned our lesson: dependence on foreign salt, like dependence on foreign oil, can lead to trouble.
Any reader who still looks at salt as a dietary demon will come away with a new understanding of the subject thanks to Kurlansky's admirable evenhandedness on the health risks both of too much salt and too little. He notes that salt is present in almost every part of the human body and the fluids it produces, from tears to semen to urine. Sodium is also needed to propel oxygen through the blood and move our muscles, including the heart. Humans simply cannot live without it.
The book is a natural outgrowth of Kurlansky's previous exhaustive study of cod, which of course was preserved with salt and also affected world history. But here he moves well beyond salt's culinary role. In his introduction, he mentions a booklet produced in 1920 by the Diamond Crystal Salt Company of St. Clair, Mich., that listed a mere 101 uses, from ''keeping the colors bright on boiled vegetables'' to ''making ice cream freeze,'' from ''removing rust'' to ''sealing cracks,'' from ''cleaning bamboo furniture'' to ''killing poison ivy.'' And that's not to mention all the medicinal applications, like treating ''dyspepsia, sprains, sore throats and earaches.'' Today, Kurlansky writes, the salt industry can tout 14,000 uses.