Catch up on shows with The Coast On Demand
Friday, July 27, 2012 1:26 PM
Dr Libby explains why fat can be more of a friend than foe.
Nutrition tends to move in cycles. Whether the current focus is on decreasing carbohydrates or increasing protein one thing seems to be remaining constant, we have a fear of fat. Among other health concerns, excessive fat intake is considered a major attributing factor to the obesity epidemic, heart disease, high blood pressure and in the risk of developing colon cancer - it is no wonder people are shunning fats in their droves.
However what is commonly misunderstood is the essential role fats play in our diet - not all fat is created equal. Fats are composed of building blocks called fatty acids, just as proteins are compromised of their building blocks, amino acids. There are three major categories of fatty acids – saturated, polyunsaturated, and monounsaturated. Of concern more recently is the generation of trans fats, found mainly in processed foods. Research suggests that, the type of fat you eat is actually more important than the total amount. I encourage people to consume more fats particularly from plant sources. Consuming adequate fat helps you to manage your mood, stay alert and even assist with weight management. Fats are also needed for helping us absorb essential vitamins like D, E, K, A; as well as for maintaining healthy skin. They are an integral part of our immunity and brain development. Fat is also our most concentrated source of energy, and helps to keep us warm and protect our organs. The Mediterranean diet is high in monounsaturated fats found which are found in olive oil, avocados, nuts and seeds. The Mediterranean diet is linked with low blood pressure and lower incidences of heart disease. It also appears to reduce blood levels of the low-density lipoprotein (LDL) without affecting the levels of our protective cholesterol, high-density lipoprotein (HDL.)
Choose low human intervention foods and you will naturally avoid poor quality fats such as trans fats (mainly food in packaged foods such as baking.) Start adding more fat to your meals, particularly at lunch, in the form of avocado, olive oil, avocado oil, nuts, organic butter, tahini, oily fish and observe if your desire for sweet foods mid-afternoon diminishes. We have become scared of using oils and nuts due to their high-energy content but good fats actually slow down the release of glucose into your blood stream meaning you actually stay full for longer.
We are thrilled to announce to New Zealand for the very first time our NEW one-day event S.H.I.N.E: This unique 1 day event has been designed to give you a thorough understanding of how your body systems work, talk to each other and the role your incredibly powerful mind plays in determining whether health is optimal. The day is structured to give you a strong understanding of the foundations of human biochemistry (explained in Dr Libby’s signature easy-to-understand style), and will cover topics including the digestive system, the endocrine network, the nervous system, detoxification pathways and many more, while just as importantly offering you solutions if dysfunction arises in these areas.
For more information visit http://www.drlibby.com/
For more information about this topic obtain your copy of Dr Libby’s latest book, Rushing Woman’s Syndrome or the best-selling Accidentally Overweight available at www.drlibby.com and all leading bookstores.
Friday, April 26, 2013
Welcome to Coast Kitchen, a place to share and enjoy recipes. The Coast ...
Friday, May 24, 2013
Dan Brown's new novel, Inferno, features renowned Harvard symbologist Robe ...
Friday, May 24, 2013
Listen for your chance to win! This week on Coast, we have TIME, Rod ...