Confucianism is a system of thought based on the teachings of a Chinese man named Kung Fuzi. Which is latinaized as Confucius, he lived from 551 to 479 b. c. e. Confucius claimed that he was not original and neither were his teachings, but believed himself to be a “creative transmitter of wisdom from the past”. He created a moral code on based on ethics, humanity and love. Confucius philosophies emphasize the ideals of order and harmony. With the idea that people should live in harmony both with each other and with nature. To achieve this, Confucius created a system of human relationships and good government. Government to Confucius was the highest profession. He believed that if one had a good government everyone would be happy. In addition, Confucius esteemed
education in high regards believing that through it, one could reach the high standard of a gentleman..
For a religion Confucianism is very different from any other. Due to the fact that the Chinese see religion as a form of education. The purpose of Confucianism was mainly to instill moral values in a person. There is no organized church or structure, no priests, no sects, and no creed for any follow. There is no worshipping or personal relationship with god but did recognize
heaven as a force of human concern. Confucius did believe that men should direct their own destiny. Confucius taught that harmony begins in the family, which was a minuet of society. In which the man of the house was like the emperor or Priest. Confucius believed in a male dominated society were only males could lead the government service. Confucius believe in ancestor devotion. The Ancestor’s names are usually kept in shrines. The duty of the father was to make sacrifices and to report any family concerns to these shrines.
Confucius emphasized five virtues, which are the the ideals of Confucianism. The Confucian virtues are something that should reflect sincerity and inner spirit. The most important one was ren which means “humanity” he thought that should be the ideal for everyone to follow. Then came up with yi, “honesty” zhi, “knowledge” xin faithfulness and li; correct behavior. Confucinism also refers to basic texts which are called the five classics. The book of
poetry which contains the oldest of Chinese poetry that describe common experiences such as love, work, and war. The book of rites, consists of three separate ritual texts. That contains descriptions of how one must behave when attending events, such as weddings, funerals, banquets and sacrifices. The book of history includes decrees, speeches, advice from counselors, and reports on similar government affairs. The Spring and Autumn annals is a brief chronicle of events in Confucius home state. The book of change is a book that consists of divination, or helps the follower to foretell future events and understand the existence of humans and natural happenings.
The Chinese always believed that the universe has always been influenced by two opposing forces the Yin and the Yang. The two forces are always changing in power but each are necessary in order to maintain a balance. Related to this concept also comes the idea that all things are made up of of five elements. Wood, metal, fire, water and earth, like the yin and yang this elements are always influencing each other in the balance of nature. Using this foundation Confucius came to determine how things work together. Later believing that this was the key for living, and maintaining harmony. This way anyone would be able to correct imbalances or disharmony. This idea was used in medecine, nutrition, agriculture, art and
literature, becoming part of Confucianism.
Although Confucianism has evolved and changed, most of its social and governmental ideals have prevailed to remain. They have been useful, and have become the building blocks that have helped the Chinese civilization be such a stable force.
Please do not pass this sample essay as your own, otherwise you will be accused of plagiarism. Our writers can write any custom essay for you!
Confucianism Sample essay topic, essay writing: Confucianism - 608 words
ConfucianismOct 21, 1999 Confucianism is a system of thought based on the teachings of a Chinese mannamed Kung Fuzi. Which is latinaized as Confucius, he lived from 551 to 479 b. c.e. Confucius claimed that he was not original and neither were his teachings, but believedhimself to Confucianism vs. Daoism and legalism “Lead the people by laws and regulate them by punishments, and the people will simply try to keep out of jail, but will have no sense of shame. Lead the people by virtue…and they will have a sense of shame and moreover will become good.” This was the teaching of Confucius. Confucius was the main Comparison between the First Empire and the Han Dynasty The Han Dynasty was far greater than the First Empire, since the Han dynasty destroyed all form of torture and violence towards the non-believers and introduced a good system of education that would stick to people. This was made possible by these three things: education, trade and Confucianism, which made China, grow into a strong Confucius And Lao Tzu Sample essay topic, essay writing: Confucius And Lao Tzu - 572 words
Confucius and Lao Tzu were two highly known scholars in Ancient China. These scholars with their intellectual writings changed the views of the Chinese people. Confucius believed in the moral values and filial piety, he also wanted civic obedience. Lao Tzu was a mystical Confucius Paper According to tradition, Confucius was born in the state of Lu (present-day Shandong Province) of the noble K'ung clan. His original name was K'ung Ch'iu. His father, commander of a district in Lu, died three years after Confucius was born, leaving the family in poverty, but Confucius nevertheless received a fine education. He was married
Need Book Reports, essays, lectures? Save to bookmarks - » Confucianism. Collections of essays on literature!