Century Dictionary and Cyclopedia
- At night; in the night-time; by night.
GNU Webster's 1913
- adv. Archaic In the night time; at night.
“The best typically worked in stretches of no longer than 90 minutes, three times daily, and slept an average of 8.6 hours anight – much more than their less brilliant classmates.”
“By the late 1970s, there were any number of places in San Francisco that gay men could go to have anonymous sex with dozens of partners anight.”
“This is like pointing out the inconsistency of a recovered alcoholic because you can cite evidence of that time when he drank 12 beers in anight.”
“Ginny, her own glasses on her like a mask, set Edgar anight as she might have loosed a hawk.”
“It is not an uncommon thing for one of these horses, after escaping, saddled and bridled, and wandering about for anight or night and day on the plains, to return of its own accord to the house.”
“Our Captaine hearing their talke, and how they did affirme no other passage to be there, would not at that time proceede any further, till he had seene and noted the other lands, and coast toward the North, which he had omitted to see from S. Laurence his gulfe, because he would know, if between the lands toward the North any passage anight be discouered.”
“» There was no anchorage to be found, but the inhabitants appeared more nu - merous than the fmallnefs of the place could fupport, which gave hopes, that there were lands of greater extent not tar diftant, which anight be left difficult of acceut.”
Internet Archive: Biographia navalis; or, Impartial memoirs of the lives and characters of officers of the navy of Great Britain, from the year 1660 to the present time; drawn from the most authentic sources, and disposed in a chronological arrangement
“Wherefore one who has the Inftru&ion of a Prince committed ta his charge, ought often to reflett, That the Child, he has care of, every day comes nearer anight, where truth will abandon him; and fo he ought to make hafte to tell him and imprint in his mind, what - foever may be molt neceflary to guide him in thofe dark mills, which ay a kind of neceflity hisCondition will caft about himC”
““Yu couldn’t git no doctor this time anight,” he said, and without taking the slip of paper turned back to his car.”
‘anight’ hasn't been added to any lists yet.
Looking for tweets for anight.