Eczema is a chronic skin disease characterized by periods of severe aggravations. Many patients see a connection between eczema flare-ups and food disorders. It is very possible because some symptoms are related to food allergies. Let’s talk about how to maintain an eczema-friendly diet making remission periods last longer.
Patients with severe skin symptoms suffer from physical discomfort.They try to find a specialist that can help them.The cause of eczema, in many cases, is related to an allergic irritant in combination with gastrointestinal pathologies:
The first symptoms of eczema can be seen in children at a very early age, after the baby has been exposed to a food allergen. A genetic factor can also play a role in transmission of this pathology from parents to children.
Even the latest and most modern therapies, combined with a balanced diet, cannot provide a full recovery. Diet is a component of the treatment course that will also help you maintain a stable remission.
You can keep a food diary, where you describe your reaction to certain products and understand which of them are triggers. Another option is to pass a screening test to determine the allergen.
Carefully study the ingredients. Some dyes and preservatives (E-103 Alkanet, E-200 Sorbic acid, E 220, 221, 222, 223, 224, etc.) can cause disease aggravation.
Proper nutrition is not only a guarantee of good health, but it also helps the recovery process after eczema flare-ups. Your diet should include all the necessary microelements and vitamins which will strengthen the immune system, increasing the body’s resistance to the harmful factors.
Eczema-friendly foods and cooking methods that are recommended by nutritionists and dermatologists:
Pediatricians recommend breast-feeding for at least 6 months in order to decrease the risk of developing eczema or atopic dermatitis in children. Food should be introduced to the baby carefully and gradually. To determine an allergen, it is better to keep a food diary, where the mother can record her observations after she introduces each new product to the baby.
You can start introducing dairy free grain cereals to your baby, since milk can cause indigestion and skin rashes. Then you can let your child try vegetable and fruit purees, but not red fruits and vegetables. Breastfeeding women should also follow the diet rules to avoid baby’s possible eczema aggravation.
Besides diet therapy and medications, eczema can now be treated with the help of UVB lamps. UV light can help in removing itching and burning, and also speed up the wound healing process.