The great aid debate
As part of the extensive preparations for the Evian Summit, aid ministers from the G8 countries are meeting this week in Paris. Can they find a way to make aid for poor countries more effective?
WRITING cheques used to be a relatively painless way of easing rich countries' guilt about the plight of their poorer neighbours. During the cold war, aid was also a useful foreign-policy tool—a way of keeping hard-pressed but strategically important states on side. Rarely, though, would foreign aid be high on the agenda at international summits: leaders of the world's wealthiest nations, the so-called G8, had far more pressing matters to attend to. Now, though, aid is a regular feature of G8 summits and it will be again at the Evian Summit in June. Development ministers are meeting in Paris on April 24th to prepare the ground.
Several factors have brought the question of overseas aid to the fore. Public opinion is one, helped by some very effective lobbying by pressure groups, especially on the issue of debt relief for the poorest countries. The mess left at the end of the cold war is another: the collapse of the Soviet empire deprived its client states in the developing world of resources and, often, of any social and political cohesion. Ultimately, though, aid has forced its way to the top of the agenda because political leaders have realised that global security and prosperity depend on an inclusive international economy. Letting poor countries fall further behind is dangerous.
One side-effect of aid's new-found prominence is the plethora of summits, organisations and opinions that it has spawned. There is often little correlation between the amount of time spent discussing foreign aid at international forums and the reduction of poverty. First came the Millennium Development Goals, agreed at the United Nations in 2000. These envisage, among other things, universal primary education by 2015 and a substantial reduction in global poverty by the same date. 2002 saw two big international summits: one in Monterrey, Mexico, and another in Johannesburg. Both resulted in big new commitments from the rich donor countries. They also addressed, for the first time at such events, the issue of how to make aid more effective.
Making aid work is now a central but sensitive issue. In the past, both donors and recipients have tended to hijack the debate for their own purposes. Those cheques the donors write might be large in absolute terms—billions of dollars a year—but they are small when compared with the wealth of industrial countries. In 2002, official aid from the main donor countries averaged 0.23% of their gross national income. Following commitments made at Monterrey, that ratio is set to rise to 0.26% by 2006. But when it comes to hard cash, overseas aid still tends to be a low domestic political priority, whatever grand words are spoken at international meetings. And donors have started to emphasise the need for recipient countries to demonstrate that they use the money wisely.
Would-be recipients tend to bristle at the idea that they waste aid money. That accusation, they say, is a distraction from the basic problem that the donors are not generous enough. There is no doubt that rich countries are often reluctant to deliver on their promises to the developing world, whether it be money for aid, or the elusive open markets they continue to argue will help poor countries most.
But there is considerable evidence now—and from a wide range of sources—that suggests that poor countries need to take more responsibility for their own problems and that by doing so they could ensure aid helps deliver what they need. Research by the World Bank has shown that aid can be effective in reducing poverty, but only when given to countries with sound economic management and government institutions. Respect for the rule of law, domestic economic policies targeting poverty reduction, the absence of corruption—all these contribute to making aid work. In countries with weak economic management, the evidence suggests foreign aid does little to reduce poverty.
The need for poor countries to do more to help themselves is backed up by a survey conducted by non-governmental aid organisations (NGOs) in Britain last year. Those surveyed identified corruption as a major obstacle to effective aid, but also agreed that it was important for aid policies and priorities to be set locally. They also identified areas where donors and the aid system itself needed to improve. Some pointed to corruption within the aid system itself as a problem, for instance, and several NGOs surveyed said a lack of co-ordination among donor countries was a big problem.
A recent report on the effectiveness of Australia's aid programme highlighted the need for better co-ordination within individual donor governments. It also drew attention to the difficulty of establishing objectives for overseas aid. Like many other countries, Australia's aid programme is partly aimed at development—reducing poverty and improving prosperity. But it is also concerned with promoting Australia's foreign-policy interests and even boosting trade opportunities. This confusion of aims makes it difficult to ensure value for money. Many NGOs oppose “tied aid”—money given on condition it is spent on imports from the donor country—since it has little to do with development objectives.
But even as rich countries are moving towards a greater emphasis on reducing poverty and increasing the amount of money they provide, albeit on condition that recipients also sharpen up their act, the scope for confusion and wasteful bureaucracy continues to grow. At the Monterrey summit, President George Bush announced substantial increases in aid for countries that adopt sound economic policies and attack corruption. But the funds available from what is called the Millennium Challenge account will be administered by a completely new agency, separate from the US Agency for International Development. That hardly sounds like streamlining.
For their part, recipient countries have begun to accept the need to take responsibility for economic management. The New Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD), launched last year, formally puts the main burden for solving Africa's problems on African governments, working in partnership with donors. NEPAD is on the Evian agenda next month. But the UN's Millennium Goals are already in trouble—and so is the Doha round of world trade talks, long trumpeted as a vital ingredient of world economic prosperity. Recognising that aid needs to be effective is a start: the next stage is turning the theory into practice.