Beginning Programming with Java for Dummies
About Beginning Programming with Java for DummiesOne of the most popular beginning programming books, now fully updated
Java is a popular language for beginning programmers, and earlier editions of this fun and friendly guide have helped thousands get started. Now fully revised to cover recent updates for Java 7.0, "Beginning Programming with Java For Dummies, 3rd Edition" is certain to put more first-time programmers and Java beginners on the road to Java mastery.Explores what goes into creating a program, putting the pieces together, dealing with standard programming challenges, debugging, and making the program work Offers new options for tools and techniques used in Java developmentProvides valuable information and examples for the would-be programmer with no Java experienceAll examples are updated to reflect the latest changes in Java 7.0
"Beginning Programming with Java For Dummies, 3rd Edition" offers an easy-to-understand introduction to programming through the popular, versatile Java 7.0 language.
About Beginning Programming with Java for Dummies
Create A Personal Gift Announcement Card to send to someone special.
You will need a printer connected to the computer in order to print the Gift Announcement Card.
If you would prefer to enter your information by hand after printing, just leave these fields blank and select "Print Gift Announcement".
Other Gift Options
On the Review step during checkout, you will have the option to mail a FREE postcard to the recipient announcing that a gift has been purchased for them. You schedule the date the card will be mailed; send it immediately or hold for perfect timing with a special occasion.
eGift AnnouncementPerfect for last-minute shoppers! On your order confirmation page you will have the option to send a FREE email gift notification. Choose from hundreds of E-Card designs and several delivery options. See an example.
Interested In More Gifts? Visit the Gift Center to discover great gift suggestions for everyone on your list.