"If you don't eat your meat you can't have any pudding!
How can you have any pudding if you don't eat your meat?"
I can scarcely believe that these words which appear on
Pink Floyd's 1979 album "The Wall" have actually been
used by myself to my own children.
There are some very primal instincts at work when feeding
One of the greatest joys there is is seeing your
children eating well and enjoying their food.
Conversely, children not eating well leads to frustration,
anxiety and worry.
And it is important that your children eat a wide
variety of things - they have to eat everything.
If they eat all their meat but not their vegetables
and ask for more meat, that is as equally as annoying
as if they eat all their vegetables but not their
meat and ask for more vegetables.
And of course I feel immensely guilty about making
them eat something that they don't want to eat, but
I am still compelled to do because it is in my
instinct. Some chemical is secreted into my bloodstream
that makes me behave this way.
But what is particularly unfair is that I know exactly
what they feel like. Often I feel like one type of
food and not another. Why is that? If I'm hungry
it means my stomach is empty and I need to fill it.
Why should I be fussy?
Or sometimes I need a variety of foods to satisy me.
Just eating one particular type of food isn't going
to be enough. Again, why is that?
The answer is that like cows and camels, humans have
multiple stomachs. We are not true ruminants because
we do not use our multiple stomachs for chewing the
cud and we do not transfer food from one stomach to
Instead we have different stomachs for different food
types. Meat, vegetables, sweets, drinks all go to
different places. Doubtlessly you will have noticed
that when you've stuffed yourself on a main course
to the point that you can't eat any more, you can
still manage a dessert. That's because your dessert
stomach is still empty.
Or if you're feeling hungry for one particular type
of food - it's because only one of your stomachs is
empty. And how else can you explain the curious
fact that however much food you eat, you can still
Drinks don't even have the advantage that they can
squash up small and therefore squeeze into your
stomach. Look at the size of a pint of beer!
You could be stuffed to the gills on food but that
pint is still going to go down nice and easily,
and plenty more thereafter. Drinks go to a stomach
at the front that can extend outwards almost
The one thing I have yet to find an explanation for
is why this information has been suppressed.
Clearly, anyone in the medical profession has at
some point of their education dissected a body and
seen the true nature of our stomachs. So why the
Indeed, this matter now casts doubt upon anything
else they've told us about our internal organs.
Spleen? What's that then? Could it be that we
are aliens and have taken over the bodies of the
indiginous population of this planet? Or are we
androids and deep inside us is all electronic
components. Afterall, only doctors ever get to
see what's really inside us, and consider this:
how much of what a doctor has ever told you has
actually made any sense to you?
Album cover of Pink Floyd's "The Wall"
Infest the world with pooclub!