Guide to Volcanoes in Hawaii
Hawaii is originally developed from volcanoes about 5 million years ago. Hawaii has many active and dead volcanoes. If you are interested in exploring active volcano, you should visit the Hawaii Volcanoes National Park. You can find volcanoes on the 5 main islands of Hawaii. Some of the popular volcanoes in Hawaii include Mauna Loa, Kohala, Loihi, Kilauea, Mauna Kea, and Mahukona.
Mauna Loa is the largest and longest volcano in Hawaii and the world. In Hawaii, the term Mauna Loa means Long Mountain. The height of the volcano is about 13,681 feet. As the world’s biggest volcano, it is also the world’s most active volcano. Mauna Loa has erupted several times in the past. It is estimated that the first eruption takes place 5 million years ago. The first record eruption takes place in 1843. Later, there are 33 subsequent volcano eruptions.
Kohala volcano has existed since 500,000 years ago. The volcano has a height of about 5,480 feet. This volcano has been inactive a few hundred thousand years ago. It is estimated that the final volcano eruption takes place in 120,000 years ago.
Loihi volcano is a subaqueous volcano located underneath the ocean. The volcano extends to beneath the ocean for about 1,000 meter. Above the surface, the volcano is about 3,000 feet high. Loihi means long in the Hawaiian language. The volcano has an elongated shape so it is named as Loihi. Loihi has erupted since 1996.
Kilauea is a young and active volcano on the southern region of the Hawaii’s Big Island. Many scientists have conducted research on the Kilauea volcano. The volcano is monitored from time to time because it keeps on spew out lava. Kilauea volcano has been spewing lava since 1983. The Hawaiian people worship the Kilauea volcano because they believe it is the home of volcano god, Pele.
Mauna Kea is the tallest volcano in the world. It is about 13,784 feet above the sea level. It also extends up to 15,000 feet underneath the ocean. It is different from other volcanoes because it has many glacial deposits. The glacial deposits of Mauna Kea have formed a few thousand of years ago. Just like Mauna Loa, Mauna Kea receives snowfall during the winter.
Mahukona volcano is situated in the northwestern region of the Hawaii’s Big Island. It is a subaqueous volcano that extends about 3,600 feet underneath the sea level. In the Hawaiian language, Mahukona refers to Leeward steam.