Mrs Gerow has come out of her role as classroom teacher and is in her second year focusing on providing support literacy across the school and its community. This is her page. Interested in FREE AUDIO BOOKS? CHECK OUT http://www.storynory.com/
Check out the webpage for reading tips from students!
What a strong reader does:
1. Activates Prior Knowledge by thinking about what they already know.
2. Reads with a purpose.
3. Makes a prediction and adjusts it when needed.
4. Uses a variety of strategies to help make sense of what they are reading.
5. Asks questions before and while reading.
6. Uses text features (maps, photos, graphs etc) to help make sense of what they read.
7. Makes connections to other books, events around the world or personal stories.
8. Is able to summarize and identify key points of what they read.
9. Is able to explain their process and apply strategies across all subject areas and to life in general.
Good writers .......... express their ideas - they aren't afraid or ashamed. They are risk-takers. They are playful ... they explore .... they get messy.... write often; practice. ... can get stuck; have off days.... understand why they are writing; have established a purpose, a goal, a plan.
... have strategies & tools. ... develop strong introductions - they hook the reader.
... know that they are writing to entertain as well as to inform. ... develop satisfying, interesting endings. ... organize their ideas & present them thoughtfully.... think about voice; they want their personality to shine through. ... choose their words carefully. ... write sentences that are interesting & varied; they have rhythm and flow. ... pay attention to grammar & spelling. ... write & rewrite & rewrite & rewrite; they produce many drafts.... share their creations.... can ask for help.... are open to new ideas; they weigh suggestions carefully, & accept constructive criticism gracefully. (thanks to the students of Fly on the Wall Blog for such a creative description)
6 Assessment For Learning Strategies
1. Making learning intentions clear to students
2. Setting criteria with students
3. Giving descriptive feedback:- What’s working? What’s not? What’s next?
4. Questioning: Who’s asking the questions? Are the questions open?
5. Increasing peer and self-assessment
6. Ownership: Involve learners in showing and talking about their own work