What is allergy testing at the Northwest Center?
Allergy testing at the Northwest Center is using highly-sophisticated blood testing to identify food and environmental allergens that may be the cause of a person’s health problems.
What health problems can be caused by allergies?
Allergies can cause a number of problems from mild to severe. The following is a partial list of what can be caused by allergies:
General: Fatigue, anxiety, depression, insomnia, hyperactivity, food cravings, obesity
Infection: Recurrent colds, urinary tract infections, sore throats, ear infections, yeast infections
Ear, Nose & Throat: Chronic nasal congestion, postnasal drip, fluid in the ears, Meniere’s syndrome
Gastrointestinal: Irritable bowel syndrome, constipation, diarrhea, abdominal cramping, bloating ulcerative colitis, Crohn’s disease, and gallbladder disease.
Cardiovascular: High blood pressure, arrhythmia, and angina.
Dermatologic: Acne, eczema, psoriasis, canker sores (apthous ulcers), and hives.
Rheumatologic: Muscle aches, joint pain, arthritis.
Neurologic: Migraines and other headaches, numbness.
Miscellaneous: Asthma, frequent urination, teeth grinding, bedwetting, and infantile colic
Is allergy testing easy?
Yes, a simple blood test is all it takes. Although allergy testing was historically performed with “prick” or “scratch” testing, these methods are archaic when compared to current blood testing technology that is more convenient, more cost effective, and less painful! Results are available in around 3-4 weeks, and allergy testing is readily affordable.
Why hasn’t my regular doctor ordered allergy testing?
Although the relationship between immune dysfunction and disease is rapidly being documented, and we have been on the forefront of helping patients in this arena, many doctors are not well-versed in this model. We are working hard to educate others about the relationship between food allergy and chronic disease.
How can I find out if allergies are causing my problems?
You can schedule an appointment with one of our doctors. He or she will help you figure out if allergy testing would be a good step for you.
To find out more about allergy testing, and to schedule an appointment, call us at (360) 651-9355.