KEREBAN Langit Temple is located at Pekandelan hamlet, Sading, Mengwi, Badung. In this temple lies a cave about 15 meters deep. Vug of the cave is large enough so that visitors can feel the sun despite being in the cave as if the cave is open to sky (the word kereb means shade or roof). The word is closely related to the naming of the temple. A spring can be found in the cave believed to be capable of exuding holy water of the Lord Vishnu. However, the spring will flow to the surface very rarely only when the lord deigns. Similarly, another spring also flows from the cave drained to Pancha Rishi shower for panglukatan or purificatory rite.
According to temple priest of Kereban Langit, Jero Mangku Sweden, there were no written records on the history of the temple. However, based on the story from the elders, the temple was mentioned to have been named around 923 AD. Establishment of the temple was closely related to the story of the twin kings Masula-Masuli. Once upon a time, the King of Klungkung wishing a child got a guide from deity Toh Langkir to search for tirtha selaka. For that purpose, a priest was then assigned to do it.
In his quest, the priest passed around the river located near the cave that is now becoming the Kereban Langit temple. The priest met a hermit from Sading. It was said the hermit had been meditating in the cave for several months. In that encounter, the priest expressed the intention of his journey to the hermit. The hermit then provided him with an instruction to invoke holy water in the cave where he meditated. Having got the holy water, it was then presented to the queen. Unexpectedly, the queen finally could get pregnant.
Later, the queen gave birth to twin children named Sri Masula-Sri Masuli. Since the king felt indebted, he then erected a temple in the cave. Later on, the temple was handed over to Mengwi Palace and then to Sading Palace. The structure of Kereban Langit temple is very simple. In the innermost courtyard lie some shrines like the Ratu Gede Lingsir, Ratu Made and Ratu Ayu. In front of the padma (lotus) shrine stand some guard statues and terracotta statues. Meanwhile, a padma shrine lies in the middle courtyard. Then, in the outermost courtyard near the riverside stand the representative shrines such as that of Ida Batara Ratu Gede Dalem Ped and Ida Batara Ratu Bolong.
Jero Mangku Sweden said that no shrine was reed or palm fiber roofed. Besides, there was no ceremony in this temple officiated over by high priest because the deities had been Shiva self-manifested. Even, the local temple priest did not use holy bell when leading the ceremony. Then, the piodalan or temple anniversary fell on Buda Cemeng Ukir. (BTN/kmb)
Oongan Dam is a favorite tourist object for Balinese people in the 1980s. Every holiday such as Galungan, Kuningan, Ngembak Geni, New Year and other holidays, the dam area is…Read more
One more unique tradition owned by Karangasem County is the mesantalan ritual procession or Ketupat War at Apit Yeh village, Manggis subdistrict became an interesting cultural attraction. This tradition was…Read more
Hindu community in Bali has a unique performing art known as Calonarang. The performing art poses a dance-drama whose artists should master the elements of dance, music and vocal. A…Read more
Graduate Program (PPS) of the Ngurah Rai University (UNR) Denpasar hosted the comparative study for students from the University of Haluoleo Kendari. Aside from having the same faculty, the success…Read more
As having been aspired and armed with the hobby and passion to get involved in accounting field, Siti...08 June 2013 Read more...
Merthasari Temple located approximately 1.5 km to the south of Negara town is one of the Dang Khayangan...08 June 2013 Read more...