The bay area renaissance festival at MOSI in Tampa arrives February 23, 2013. Each weekend, rain or shine, time travel to the time of the middle ages takes place at MOSI until April 7, 2013.
The medieval town created will be filled with peasant, royalty, games, entertainment, food, drink, jousting and Knights in shiny armor. Re-enactors and guests alike will be in authentic clothing and enjoying authentic fun.
Six weekends of entertainment include a pub crawl, renaissance smoker, and a queen’s tea daily. The bay area renaissance festival begins February 23 with wine, chocolate & romance!
The Bay Area Renaissance Festival
February 23, 2013 – April 7, 2013
Open Friday March 22, 2013 for festival Friday
Rain or shine 10am to 6pm
11315 North 46th Street
Tampa, Florida 33617
What is the renaissance?
Medieval renaissance came in three stages of history. The Carolingian renaissance occurring in the eighth and ninth century, Ottonian renaissance occurring in the tenth century, and the renaissance of the twelfth century.
The Carolingian renaissance:
The Carolingian renaissance during the eighth and ninth century was a time of intellectual and cultural revival during the Carolingian Empire. The Carolingian dynasty took place in the early Middle Ages during the realm of the Franks. It began with the crowning of Charles the great and ended with the death of Charles the fat. The Carolingian dynasty is credited with founding France and Germany.
The Ottonian renaissance is known for limited economy and art in central and southern Europe. The Ottonian renaissance took place in the tenth century during the Saxon dynasty. Successors to the Franks the Saxon dynasty is the dynasty of the German kings. During this time reigned the first three emperors: Otto I, Otto II, and Otto III.
The renaissance of the twelfth century:
The renaissance of the twelfth century began at the end of the High Middle Ages reviving Greek and Roman culture into Western Europe. This was a time of great development of the past, future, and of worlds far apart.
During the High Middle Ages the invention of the windmill, the spinning wheel, the magnet compass, the manufacturing of paper, and the invention of eyeglasses took place. Influence of Muslim and Jewish religions on the Christian controlled rule opened minds. A search for Knowledge began and universities were opened.
In the midst of a fast growing population social changes began to take place. The world was divided into nobles and peasants, however, after the crusades the small world began to enlarge. Spices were introduced to foods, non-Christian thoughts were introduced, and status became more important than money during the renaissance of the twelfth century.
Renaissance is a word meaning a renewal of life, vigor, interest, rebirth, and revival. In the interest of the knowledge sought for during this period the bay area renaissance festival is here to share the fun of this invigorating and changing time.