Disunion follows the Civil War as it unfolded.
Count Adam Gurowski cut a striking figure as he stormed about Washington in a broad-brimmed hat, flowing overcoat and colored spectacles. The Polish exile, who had lived in Berlin, St. Petersburg and Paris before coming to the United States in 1849, was the author of 1854’s “Russia As It Is,” a work praised as “original and striking.” The son of Count Wladyslaw Gurowski, who fought alongside Tadeusz Kosciuszko in the failed attempt to free Poland of Russian influence in 1794, Adam, according to his obituary in The New York Times, “imbibed the revolutionary spirit possessed by his father, and carried his patriotism to such an extent as to render himself obnoxious to the ruling powers.” When war broke out, Gurowski took a minor position in the State Department.
Whatever his role as a reader of Continental newspapers and a translator (he was reputed to know 14 languages), his real vocation seemed to be spewing invective. Navy Secretary Gideon Welles said “he is by nature a grumbler, ardent, earnest, rash, violent, unreasonable, impracticable.” Lincoln’s secretary John Hay called him “venomous.” The New York lawyer George Templeton Strong declared that he was “universally abominated for his bearishness and petty malignities.” Senator Charles Sumner compared him to one of P. T. Barnum’s whales in a tank. It is possible, if we believe Ward Hill Lamon, the marshal of the District of Columbia, that Lincoln feared for his safety around Gurowski.
It was his words, not his actions, that made Gurowski so menacing. If his diary is any indication, he held nothing back in conversation and his caustic opinions shocked listeners. His diary is scathing, idiosyncratic and original. It was a tell-all in an age that valued propriety and decorum. And he had no qualms about sharing it with others. Published in three volumes, the first covered March 1861 through October 1862 and appeared at the end of the year; the second covered November 1862 through November 1863 and was published in 1864; and the third, covering part of 1863 and all of 1864 and 1865, appeared in 1866.
The publication of the first volume, in December 1862, created a scandal. Few other diarists of the period displayed such raw emotion and or expressed such severe judgments. Reviewers feared that the tone, particularly his disappointment with Lincoln, antipathy toward Secretary of State William H. Seward and hostility toward Gen. George B. McClellan, might prevent anyone’s taking his views seriously. One reviewer snorted that “one seems to be overhearing the gossip of a gang of Washington scandal mongers, standing in a dirty barroom and drinking bad whiskey as they chatter.” Another reviewer, however, felt that “neither Count Gurowski’s overweening conceit of himself, nor his savage criticism should lead us to overlook the fact that he is a man of great culture, intelligence, and, above all, independence.”
In June 1861, Gurowski recorded his initial reflection on Lincoln: “Perhaps it may turn out that Lincoln is honest, but of not transcendent powers.” “Mr. Lincoln is pulled in all directions,” Gurowski wrote in September. “His intentions are excellent and he would have made an excellent President for quiet times. But this civil war imperative demands a man of foresight, of prompt decision, of Jacksonian will and energy.” In February 1862, he was lamenting that “Lincoln belittles himself more and more. Whatever he does is done under the pressure of events, under the pressure of the public opinion.” Mocking Lincoln’s reputation for telling jokes and recounting anecdotes, Gurowski reported that Jefferson Davis “is making history and Lincoln is telling stories.”
Gurowski went into his most severe paroxysm when discussing McClellan. In his diary, starting as early as October 1861, he kept up a steady screed against the general. After meeting McClellan, he called him “altogether unmilitary and inexperienced. It made me sick at heart to hear him, and to think that he is to decide over the destinies and the blood of the people.” His animadversions grew even harsher thereafter. In January 1862, he wrote, “McClellan is either feeble as a reed, or a bad man.” Observing the Peninsula Campaign, Gurowski concluded that if French, Prussian or Russian military leaders showed such incompetence “they would be condemned as unfit to have any military command whatever.”
It drove Gurowski mad that all McClellan did was ask for more troops and dig entrenchments: “If McClellan could know anything, then he would know this — that nothing is so destructive to an army as sieges, as diggings, and camps, and nothing more disciplines and re-invigorates men, makes them true soldiers, than does marching and fighting.” Denouncing the general as a “mud mole” intent only on executing a “bloodless strategy,” Gurowski wondered why Lincoln kept him on for so long and concluded that it was because of an “unnatural, vacillating, dodging policy” that failed to “perceive other, more awful, signs of the times.”
Perhaps because of his experiences in Europe, Gurowski saw more clearly than others what lay ahead. In May of 1861 he predicted “this war — war it will be, and a terrible one” would “generate new social and constitutional necessities and new formulas.” Emancipation, he believed, was the immediate step that needed to be taken to crush this “insurrection of the slave-drivers,” but he was to be disappointed time and again by the administration’s dawdling movement in that direction.
In July he denounced the idea, spreading in Republican circles, that emancipation could be justified as a military necessity. “The emancipation of slaves is spoken of as an expedient,” he sneered, “but not as a sacred duty, even for the maintenance of the Union. To emancipate through the war power is an offence to reason, logic, and humanity.” He was as critical of radical Republicans as he was of the cautious policy of the administration: “The question of emancipation is not clear even in the heads of the leading emancipationists; not one thinks to give freeholds to the emancipated. It is the only way to make them useful to themselves and to the community. Freedom without land is humbug, and the fools speak of exportation of the four million of slaves, depriving thus the country of laborers, which a century of emigration cannot fill again. All these fools ought to be sent to the lunatic asylum.”
Even when, on Sept. 22, 1862, Lincoln issued a preliminary Emancipation Proclamation, Gurowski found no joy: “The conditional is the last desperate effort made by Mr. Lincoln” to save slavery. “Poor Mr. Lincoln was obliged to strike such a blow at his mammy!” The proclamation, he wrote, “is written in the meanest and most routine style; not a word to evoke a generous thrill, not a word reflecting the warm and lofty comprehension and feelings of the immense majority of the people on this question of emancipation.”
Only after January 1863, with McClellan finally relieved of command the previous November and an Emancipation Proclamation that allowed for the enlistment of black soldiers officially issued did Gurowski begin to modulate his relentless criticism. On repeated occasions he would now effuse, “Hurrah for Lincoln!”
But the publication in December 1862 of the first volume of the diary, covering the period March 4, 1861 to Nov. 12, 1862, brought Gurowski trouble. Seward not only sacked him but also encouraged William Hunter, chief clerk of the Department of State, to sue him for libel. Throughout the diary, Gurowski portrays Seward as the power behind Lincoln and blames him for a policy of leniency toward the Confederacy that would leave slavery intact. He called the secretary of state “ignorant,” “foolish,” “dictatorial” and “rude.” He also said at one point that while Seward “has many excellent personal qualities,” he thought him unfit for the serious matters that faced the nation. Being called “an intriguer and an imbecile” was too much for Seward to read. He used Hunter as a surrogate means by which to retaliate.
Hunter accused Gurowski of libeling him by claiming that the clerk had prematurely revealed plans for a blockade to the British ambassador and committing other diplomatic indiscretions. The criminal libel trial began in Washington on Oct. 9, 1863, but the judge, a radical Republican, suggested that it might be appropriate for a State Department employee to communicate publicly sensitive information. The judge also ruled that the libel could not be proved from the printed version of the book alone. A flabbergasted district attorney then demanded that Gurowski produce the manuscript. But Gurowski was too smart to “convict himself,” as one account had it, and the audience laughed heartily as the judge dismissed the charges.
The publication of Gurowski’s second volume caused less of a stir, and the count settled into the role of political pundit, stalking the lounges of Willard’s Hotel and other guest houses. By then, his brash behavior had provoked, tormented and finally alienated even his strongest admirers. “I am aware that my temper and character make me impossible,” he confessed in 1865. “But what can I do; I can break but not bend; I never could.” He lived to see war’s end and some of his earlier predictions come to pass, dying of typhoid fever at age 61 in 1866. One can only imagine what more he would have contributed to the annals of invective had he lived through the tumultuous years of Reconstruction.
Sources: Adam Gurowski, “Diary, from March 4, 1861, to November 12, 1862” and “Diary, from November 18, 1862 to October 18, 1863”; Robert Carter, “Gurowski,” Atlantic Monthly, November 1866; Julia Ward Howe, “Reminiscences,” 1819-1899; LeRoy H. Fisher, “Lincoln’s Gadfly, Adam Gurowski.”
Louis P. Masur is professor of American studies and history at Rutgers University and author of “Lincoln’s Hundred Days: The Emancipation Proclamation and the War for the Union.”