This CD contains action songs and games. The activities are varied, balanced and flexible. They are educationally worthwhile experiences, involving a variety of learning strategies and including both fine and gross motor movements.
Basic addition and subtraction facts are presented in a cheerful and lyrical style. Students will enjoy singing the songs and learning the basics. Musical response quizzes add to the participation and interactivity. Sums to 18. For Grade 1.
This fun-filled sprightly album helps primary grade children and ESL students acquire essential vocabulary and make it their own through singing and total movement participation. This new recording features call and response songs, listening, opposites, counting, and color reinforcement.
A rich assortment of songs about animals and how they move encourages children to explore a wide range of creative movements: from the slow turtle to the quick rabbit; from the light, delicate butterfly to the heavy hippopotamus.
Update your Rhythm Instrument programs and movement activities with Hap's original music and guide. Activities are suggested for each selection. Brighten up old routines and create new ones with this easy-to-use musical assortment.
These four Hap Palmer videos not only entertain and fascinate children but they also provide movement activities that are highly regarded by early childhood specialists! Each video has received many awards including the Parents Choice, Kids First, Cindy, NY Festivals, and others!
Children explore basic motor skills in an enjoyable, relaxed way. These activities are easy enough for very young children while suggested challenges stimulate older children. Skills include: balance, locomotor and axial movements, eye-hand coordination, spatial and body awareness, and relaxation.
Another delightful production from Hap Palmer. Sammy, has been delighting children for more than twenty years. Now Sammy and other favorites from Getting to Know Myself come to life in this movement participation video - featuring a rainbow of children stretching, jumping discovering the joy of movement! Great for all ages.