Century Dictionary and Cyclopedia
- n. Loss, either partial or entire, of the glassy or vitreous condition, or the process by which this result is attained. The most conspicuous illustration of devitrification is the production of “Réaumur porcelain” from glass by the long-continued action of heat. (See
porcelain.) The term devitrification is much employed by lithologists in describing the changes which have taken place in rocks consisting originally, either wholly or in large part, of glass. (See lavaand obsidian.) It may be the result of cooling, during which crystalline products have developed themselves in the glass in greater or less perfection; or it may have taken place in consequence of the action of water, either with or without the aid of heat, after the rocks had become solidified. Pressure is also regarded by many as being an agent of high importance. The changes thus indicated may be begun in a rock during its consolidation, and afterward continued under the combined influence of heat, water, and pressure, even to the entire obliteration of its original vitreous character, the result being the production of a purely lithoid structure. The minute forms developed in the process of devitrification, which are incipient crystals, or glass beginning to lose its unindividualized character, have received various names from lithologists, according to their shape and manner of grouping. See microlithand globulite.
GNU Webster's 1913
- n. The act or process of devitrifying, or the state of being devitrified. Specifically, the conversion of molten glassy matter into a stony mass by slow cooling, the result being the formation of crystallites, microbites, etc., in the glassy base, which are then called
“I've already tried encasing it in both Ink Blue and CIM's Crocus which not only takes away any devitrification concerns, but is also quite yummy.”
“It might be imagined that the devitrification would disappear when the glass is heated to the fusing point; and so it does to a great extent, but for many operations one only requires to soften the glass, and the devitrification often persists up to this temperature.”
“The phenomena presented by devitrification, and by the formation of steel by cementation and casting -- the transition of the fibrous in the granular tissue of the iron, from the action of heat* and probably, also, by regular and long-continued concussions -- likewise throw a considerable degree of light on the geological process of metamorphism.”
Looking for tweets for devitrification.