Tag: "spread" at biology news
Disease-free mosquito bred to disease-carrier can have all disease-free progeny
...n a lab to the tens of millions of mosquitoes that spread
disease worldwide" Researchers from Virginia Tec...outcome so that all off-spring lack the ability to spread
disease. However, these experiments have been hampered by the inability to express foreign genes in ...
Borlaug is golden
...e first time. Word of what had been done in Mexico spread
to Pakistan and India n the 1960s where grain shortages threatened mass starvation. The wheats from Mexico found a home on the Indian sub-continent and together with the right growing practices resulted in massive gains in the regions wheat productio...
Scientists to make news at Computational Biology Conference
...ves bioinformaticians and whose "laboratories" are spread
across chips and measured in terabytes. Several of these reputed scientists will be available to present the highlights of the seven-day event at a press conference to be held on Sunday, July 22, at 10:00 A.M., in Room 02 A350 of the Austria Cente...
Immune system 'escape hatch' gives cancer cells traction
...e the bodys immune system, allowing the disease to spread
unchecked. In a report published in the July 1 issue of the journal Nature Medicine, the Hopkins team, along with researchers from Florida and Nebraska, describe how myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs), which normally keep the immune system ...
Scientists take next step in understanding potential target for ovarian cancer treatment
...ate detection, often after the disease has already spread
to remote organs. Identification of an early warning signal and a new therapeutic agent for the disease should lead to improved survival rates....
Californians urged to help reduce spread of Sudden Oak Death
...Minn. (July 13, 2007) - An update on the increased spread
of Sudden Oak Death, a plant disease devastating m...ion on what Californians can do to help reduce its spread
will be presented during a news conference on plant diseases that are of importance to California's ...
Citrus greening continues to spread in citrus growing areas
...l, Minn. (July 10, 2007) - The latest on the rapid spread
of citrus greening within Florida and its potential to spread
into California and other citrus growing areas will be presented during a news conference on plant d...
A compound from olive-pomace oil gets 80 percent slowing down of HIV spread
...he extracellular environment and, consequently, to spread
the infection into the whole body. These scientists from Granada determined that the use of olive-pomace oil can produce an 80% slowing down in AIDS spreading in the body. Maslinic or crataegolic acid is a pentacyclic terpene with antioxidant and a...
Neutral evolution has helped shape our genome
...n the genome will either get eliminated quickly or spread
to the whole population quickly. Katsanis propos...ergence 54 million years ago, they accumulated and spread
through the small early primate populations precisely because they were not detrimental enough to be...
New way to target and kill antibiotic-resistant bacteria found
...- Putting bacteria on birth control could stop the spread
of drug-resistant microbes, and researchers at the...ic-resistant bacteria in patients, and to halt the spread
of resistance in clinical settings, said Matt Redinbo, Ph.D., senior study author and professor of c...
Rapid evolution of defense genes in plants may produce hybrid incompatibility
... that the microbe cannot use them to replicate and spread
to the rest of the plant. These types of genes h...o lessen the probability that harmful genes can be spread
to other species. ...
Biocontrol of invasive water hyacinth contributes to socioeconomic and health improvements in Africa
... in the world. A native of South America, it was spread
throughout the tropics and subtropics in the last century, mostly by humans. While the plant can potentially be used for sewage treatment and biofuel production, it can also cause severe environmental and socioeconomic damage. Dr. James Ogwang...
Soil particles found to boost prion's capacity to infect
...disease and scrapie persist in the environment and spread
efficiently in animal populations. "We found a huge difference between infectious agent alone and infectious agent bound to these soil particles," says Aiken, the senior author of the new study and a professor of comparative biosciences in the UW-M...
Study advances vCJD prion detection
...tory tests, to prevent further examples of disease spread
through infected blood....
Malaria-resistant mosquitoes battle disease with 'molecular warhead'
...ed by parasites of the genus Plasmodium, which are spread
to humans through mosquito bites. A mosquito picks up the parasite via infected human blood. The parasite then embeds itself in the mosquitos gut wall and reproduces, eventually passing to the salivary glands. The mosquito then infects new people dur...
Amoebae control cheating by keeping it in the family
...n the stalk. Foster and Mehdiabadi found cheater A spread
readily within low-related colonies, and exacted a... cheats when relatedness is low cannot and has not spread
in the wild because of natural relatedness," Queller said. Gilbert said, "Our results answer the b...
Variant CJD -- Prion amplification breakthrough brings new insights and hopes for a blood test
...here are also fears that the disease might also be spread
by certain kinds of surgery. One way to protect blood recipients from this threat is to screen blood donations for prions, but efforts to develop such a test have proven difficult, partly because of the very low level of prions that are likely to b...
Tick-related disease thrives on cholesterol, study suggests
...f Ixodes scapularis, or deer tick. Deer ticks also spread
Lyme disease, and are found primarily in the upper Midwest, New England, parts of the mid-Atlantic States and northern California. The disease attacks immune cells called granulocytes, which the body normally uses to destroy infectious pathogens. ...
Cell receptor may lead to new 'biomarker' for pancreatic cancer
...aintained in metastases, the areas that the tumors spread
to, explains Waltz, associate professor and director of the oncology research program in UCs surgery department. The team found that the RON receptor was active in 93 percent of what is known as pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia, an early form o...
UCF professor finds bacterial pathogen may be key to understanding cancer development
...important in helping to understand and control the spread
of bacteria that are a cause of potentially fatal food poisoning. Ireton said the bacteria can live outside animal hosts. Sources include dead plant matter, fruits and vegetables, unpasteurized diary products and meats that have not been properly coo...
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10