[awr-guh-nahyzd] /ˈɔr gəˌnaɪzd/
affiliated in an , especially a union:
having a formal or structure, especially to coordinate or carry out for widespread activities:
organized medicine; organized crime.
[awr-guh-nahyz] /ˈɔr gəˌnaɪz/
verb (used with object), organized, organizing.
to form as or into a whole consisting of interdependent or coordinated parts, especially for united action:
to organize a committee.
to organize the files of an office.
to give structure or character to:
to organize the elements of a composition.
to enlist or attempt to enlist into a labor union:
to organize workers.
to enlist the employees of (a company) into a labor union; unionize:
to organize a factory.
Informal. to put (oneself) in a state of mental competence to perform a task:
We can’t have any slip-ups, so you’d better get organized.
verb (used without object), organized, organizing.
to combine in an organized company, party, or the like.
to form a labor union:
Management resisted all efforts to organize.
to assume organic structure.
planned and controlled on a large scale and involving many people: organized crime
orderly and efficient: a highly organized campaign
(of the workers in a factory or office) belonging to a trade union: organized labour
to form (parts or elements of something) into a structured whole; coordinate
(transitive) to arrange methodically or in order
(transitive) to provide with an organic structure
(transitive) to enlist (the workers) of (a factory, concern, or industry) in a trade union
(intransitive) to join or form an organization or trade union
(transitive) (informal) to put (oneself) in an alert and responsible frame of mind
1590s, “furnished with organs,” past participle adjective from organize (v.). Meaning “forming a whole of interdependent parts” is from 1817. Organized crime attested from 1929.
early 15c., “construct, establish,” from Middle French organiser and directly from Medieval Latin organizare, from Latin organum “instrument, organ” (see organ). Related: Organized; organizing.
organize or·gan·ize (ôr’gə-nīz’)
v. or·gan·ized, or·gan·iz·ing, or·gan·iz·es
noun 1. all workers who are organized in labor unions. 2. these unions considered as a political force.
noun 1. a former military organization functioning under both state and federal authority.
[awr-guh-nahy-zer] /ˈɔr gəˌnaɪ zər/ noun 1. a person who , especially one who forms and a group. 2. a person whse job is to enlist employees into membership in a union. 3. a person who or schedules work: You would get this job done sooner if you were a better organizer. 4. a multiple folder […]
- Organ meat
noun the entrails and internal organs of a butchered animal, i.e. heart, kidneys, liver, sweetbreads; variety meat Examples Almost all organ meat is high in Vitamin B12. Word Origin by 1958 Usage Note cooking