HISTORY OF FLIGHT: Use your browsers 'back' function to return to synopsisReturn to Query Page
On June 9, 1993, at 0845 central daylight time, an Eagle DW-1, N8808Z, was destroyed near Goree, Texas, when it impacted terrain in an uncontrolled descent, following a loss of control while maneuvering. The commercial pilot sustained fatal injuries. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed throughout the area for the local personal flight.
On the morning of the flight, the airplane was full of fuel with the hopper empty, and the pilot had been cleared by the company pilot to taxi the airplane (single seat) until he felt comfortable. He was then to takeoff and land a couple of times, and fly around the area to become familiar with the airplane in flight. He completed the 2 takeoffs and landings following the practice taxiing. The airplane departed the pattern at the Munday, Texas, airport, in an easterly direction at approximately 0830.
Witnesses reported the airplane was observed in level flight in an easterly direction when it pitched up/pulled up, dropped the left wing and nosed downward. Witnesses reported that the airplane entered what they deciphered as a spiral. Estimate of airplane altitude when the maneuver occurred varied from 100 to 500 feet. Witnesses reported the descent as vertical or near vertical.
During interviews conducted with the owner and operator, by the investigator in charge, they stated the pilot had been employed by the company as a loader and an airplane mechanic, with the knowledge that he could work into flying the Eagle DW-1 as an agricultural pilot for the company. The company pilot conducted ground training, on the Eagle DW-1, with the pilot. This training, as stated by the operator, was not limited to but included flight characteristics with the long wings and the roll rate, taxi, performance, takeoff, landings, slow flight, turning maneuvers, fueling, and weight and balance on the airplane. Company personnel stated to the investigator in charge that the pilot had never flown the Eagle DW-1. Relatives stated to the investigator in charge, during a telephone interview, that the pilot had no previous experience in agricultural spraying or in a bi-wing airplane. Relatives further stated that the pilot wanted very much to fly cropdusters.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION:
The airplane came to rest inverted on a measured magnetic heading of 200 degrees. Cable flight control continuity was established. The elevator control rod was separated. Fuel continuity to the engine was present and an examination of the engine did not reveal any anomalies that would have contributed to the loss of control.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION:
The autopsy was performed by The Southwestern Institute of Forensic Sciences in Dallas, Texas. Toxicological findings were negative.
Binocular microscopic examination of the elevator control rod end bearing assembly by a NTSB metallurgist (report enclosed) revealed overstress separation.
The airplane was released to the owner following the investigation.