Student Teachers: Jessica DeMaria & Andrea Beck
Project Children L.E.A.D. Director: Dr. Vincenne Revilla Beltran
Subject Area: Diversity, Language Arts, Art, Citizenship, Social Science, Science, Music
Grade Level: Kindergarten (Ages 5-6)
Length of Lesson: 60 minutes
PA Standards: Pre-K-K
1.3 Reading, Analyzing, and Interpreting Literature:
A. Respond to and discuss a variety of literature through read-alouds and shared reading.
1.4 Types of Writing:
A. Describe role of people, places, and things in a story.
1.5 Quality of Writing:
A. Write, draw or use pictures to depict specific experiences, stories, people, objects or events.
2.3 Measurement and Estimation:
C. Name and order the four seasons and days of the week.
9.1 Production, Performance, and Exhibition of Dance, Music, Theatre, and Visual Arts: 9.1.3
A. Know and use the elements and principles of each art form to create work in the arts and humanities.
After reading the book on families and completing our activity, the students should be able to view that everyone's house and families are different. We will assist the student's behavior by asking questions, observing their activities, and by their insightful comments suggested throughout the lesson.
Materials and Equipment Needed:
Book- "Family," by Todd Parr
Long white paper (to make a mural)
Pre-drawn triangles and squares on same sheet of construction paper (make triangles and squares thick enough with permanent marker so the students can cut the shapes)
Weather Bear/Board with all four seasons with matching items to each season
Map of the World
Arrows (to identify the countries where the students originated from)
CD entitled "Favorite Silly Songs!" by kid genius
Candy/Treat bag including stickers and pencils
Adaptations and Accommodations to Differentiate Instruction:
For students who can not hear well, the reader of the story will show the pictures so the student's can have an idea of what the book is about. For the students who can not really get down on the floor to draw their house, a sheet of paper can be given and they can draw their neighborhood on that sheet and the teacher can glue their section to the mural. If a student's fine motor skill is not developed fully, an aide can assist the student with gluing, cutting, drawing and coloring.
Review: The teacher will introduce the book, "Family," by Todd Parr. The teacher will ask the students if they think they know what the book is about just from looking at the front cover. After the introduction, the teacher will read the book (Language Arts), showing pictures on each page. After reading the book the teacher will ask the student, "Does anyone have a family like the one from the book?" Having a discussion about their family, the students are encouraged to ask questions or tell a short story about their family.
Introduce: After a discussion about their families, the students are then told the instructions for the next activity. Asking the student's where their families are from, the teacher will place a mark (arrow) on the world map so the students can view that families come from all around the world (Social Science-Geography). Moving from circle time to the activities table, music, regarding people and places, will be played in the background (Music). The teacher will tell the students, "Families live in a house which is in a neighborhood. What we are going to do now is create our neighborhood (Art). Think very hard about the streets around you and what your house looks like."
The teachers pass out the pre-drawn triangle and square paper. On the center of the student's tables should be scissors and crayons. The students are told to color their house, and to place windows and doors on wherever they find appropriate to the house. Each house will be different because not everyone's house is the same.
With the help from the aide's, the students will cut their triangle and square out. The teacher will then place a long sheet of drawing paper on the table.
The students are instructed to stand on both sides of the paper (three on one side, three on the other). Bringing their cut outs to the paper, with help from the aide's, the students are to glue their house together (square on the bottom and triangle on top to create a house- where the students want their house is up to them). Ask the students what else is on their house, some might say a chimney, some might say wires etc.
Once the student's houses are finished, the teacher or aide puts the students name under their house, (example: Shawn's House). The teacher will then ask the group if there are any streets by their house. With the help from aides, have the students draw a few streets they mention. Ask them if there is a stop sign, fire hydrant, etc located in their neighborhood.
After everyone completes their house and streets, the teacher will ask, "What else is in a community?" Get the students to answer the question with answers such as, "Police Station," "Fire Station," "School," "Park," (Citizenship) and so forth. Once there are enough items mentioned for the neighborhood, assign an item to each student so they can draw something else that belongs in the neighborhood.
Hang the neighborhood mural in the class for everyone to see. The teacher at this time should make a banner saying "Our Town."
Once the neighborhood mural is created and hung, ask the students to dance and sing back onto the floor. Here the teachers will ask the students questions such as, "What are the four seasons?" "What are some fun activities do you participate in when it is cold out?" "Do you jump in the leaves with your neighborhood friends when it is chilly?"
Show the students the weather board (Science). Point to each season and ask them what the weather is like when it is winter, spring, summer and fall.
On the board will be the different seasons. On the opposite side will be articles of clothing or items related to that season. Asking one student at a time to come to the board, the student should match the season with the correct item or article of clothing.
After the matching is complete ask the students if this is what their neighborhood looks like during these seasons.
After the neighborhood is created ask the students why the fire station and police station are important (Citizenship). Ask the students why their family is important and who their hero is in their family. Encouraging students to talk to the teachers will be an excellent source to know if they understood a little about families and neighborhoods.
After the activities are successfully completed, the students will be able to understand that everyone does not have the same family, and they should understand that there are people in their neighborhood that are there to help them and not hurt them. (The firemen, policemen, etc.)
In closing, ask the students if they have any more stories about their families. Ask the students if everyone has the same family structure. By asking questions related to the lesson established, the students will be able to develop an understanding about families and how important their neighborhood is.
Fischer, Aimee, David Jacobi. (2003) "Songs 'bout People and Places." Favorite Silly Songs. Major Groove Music Company.
Parr, Todd. (2001). "The Family Book." Library of Congress Cataloging - in- Publication Data.