All the pictures of Lakshmi Devi, show gold coins streaming from her hands. The Vedic Sri Suktham, tells us that Lakshmi is she who causes/is a stream (srajaa) of brilliant (rajata) good colour (su-varna) and that she is herself the colour of hiraNya ( gold, deer).
Throw a little visible light or ultraviolet light on some metals. And observe at what minimum frequencies electrons shoot out and what the energy is of the fastest particle that shoots out at that energy, or read up the experimental results and conjectures of people who have done these experiments.
It appears that that the electrons can receive energy from light only in multiples of hf , where h is the planck’s constant and f is the frequency of the light that you shine on the metal.
So electromagnetic waves (light) can give energy to matter particles (electrons).
But when electrons get sufficient energy to escape from an atom, they escape and move off with some velocity.
But if there is a change in the velocity of the electron, its momentum must change too!
But momentum must be conserved in the universe.
So the momentum (mv) of the incident light must also change?
How can you change the momentum of something that has no mass?
If the incident light can lose hf energy, then it can lose some momentum.
If we were as smart as Einstein and lived at his time, we would say, “Hey! It looks like energy has an equivalent mass (m)!”.
Then we would do some maths and balance units on both sides of an equation and do something like this? (Of course FAR MORE RIGOUROUSLY)!
E = hf = 0.5 mvv = 0.5mcc, since the velocity of light in vaccuum is c.
Ah! energy is proportional to m times c-squared.
So the equivalent mass of a bit of light energy is proportional to hf/cc.
(Then people smart enough to do so, would make an atomic fission bomb, and the people who were dumb enough to use it would use it! So I think its best to approach the study of light with reverence and s’raddha).
So mass which is the amount of matter in a thing, can be converted to energy and energy could be converted into mass. And masses have an equivalent energy and energies have equivalent masses.
That is vyakta (differentiated) to avyakta (undifferentiated) and avyakta to vyakta, and the “vyakta – avyakta” equivalence.
A sat – s’akti equivalence. And we did work out previously that cit was a form of s’akti and devi was cit swaroopi. So we have a sat-cit equivalence.
I have never discussed “aum tat sat” in detail before on this web-site., but roughly it means, ‘that’ (brahman) is ‘that which is’ (reality).
And suddenly we have tat, sat, sakti all as different apparent forms of the same “It” or “That”. What Richard Bach cheerfully called the “Is”.
And suddenly, it feels like Sankaracharya was bang on with his Advaita philosophy,
“brahma satyam, jagat mithyam, jivo brahmah na parah!” : “Brahman is the reality, the moving world is an illusion, and the jiva is the brahma, none other”
And if I have got the concept right, then the bliss or ananda of knowing this, gives rise to the the term sat-cit-ananda.
Authorship and Copyright Notice : All Rights Resrved : Satya Sarada Kandula
- Time : Past, Present and Future : Bhuta Bhavya Bhavan Nathah Vishnuh
- Time : Why study time ? : “Kaalah Aham – I am Time” – Krishna
- Time : Kalakantha, kalamurthi, kalagni, kalanasana, Siva : Markandeya : Maghamahatmya
- Time and Space : Are Time and Space “side-effect” of matter? Is Space empty? or full of some”thing” else?
- Time, Matter, Energy and Consciousness : Kaala, Sat, Sakthi, Purusha/Devi
- Life : Pranadah, Pranah, Jivanah, Vishnuh! : What is Life? In science and sanskrit texts : Eating.
- Consciousness : Pragnya, Chitta, Purusha/Devi : in Science and Sanskrit Texts
- Time : Movement : Motion: : Jagat : Charaachara : Understanding Devi and Purusha as Movement and Time.
- Light : Lakshmi : Vishnu
- Light : Bits of Light Energy (Photons) : suvarna rajata srajaa Lakshmi : mass energy equivalence, sat sakti equivalence, advaita, sat cit ananda