NOTE: The numbers in brackets, e.g. (8451-torah) refer to Strong's Concordance and the word given is the original Greek or Hebrew word. In this example the word translated 'law' is Strong's reference number 8451 and comes from the Hebrew word 'torah', which is made up of the first five books of the old testament.
by Rick Drake, age 19,
college student at Weimar College
In this day and age the Law of God is becoming more and more of an interesting subject. Some state that all of God’s Laws were nailed to the cross. Others insist that the Ceremonial Laws were nailed to the cross. Still others say that nothing was nailed to the cross. Since there is much confusion on the subject, this paper is to try to clear up the muddied waters. But some very important questions need to be answered. So What? Who cares? The Law of God really isn’t important anyway! Is it? Well, this subject is important and it does matter. In order to understand why the Law of God is important, we need to understand the purpose of God’s Law.
The Purpose of God’s Law
God’s Law reveals His character. “By His life and death Christ taught that only in obedience to God's commandments can man find safety and true greatness. 'The law (8451-torah) of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul.' Psalm 19:7. God's law is a transcript of His character. It was given to man in the beginning as the standard of obedience. In succeeding ages this law was lost sight of. Hundreds of years after the Flood Abraham was called, and to him was given the promise that his descendants should exalt God's law” (8T pg. 207).
Did you notice that ‘God’s law is a transcript of His character’? Therefore, the one who studies the Law of God will gain a knowledge of the character of God. Would you agree that it is important to know what God is like? Especially since we are going to have the same character!
God’s Law defines what sin is. “Therefore by the deeds of the law there shall no flesh be justified in his sight: for by the law(3551 - nomos) is the knowledge of sin” (Romans 3:20). “Whosoever committeth sin transgresseth also the law: for sin is the transgression of the law” (1 John 3:4). “Because the law worketh wrath: for where no law (3551 - nomos) is, there is no transgression” (Romans 4:15). Notice that ‘by the law is the knowledge of sin,’ since ‘sin is the transgression of the law.’ Therefore ‘where no law is, there is no transgression.’
God’s Law is our manual for life. It shows us the way in which we need to walk and is a mirror so we can see the defects in our own character. “But be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own selves. For if any be a hearer of the word, and not a doer, he is like unto a man beholding his natural face in a glass: For he beholdeth himself, and goeth his way, and straightway forgetteth what manner of man he was. But whoso looketh into the perfect law (3551 - nomos) of liberty, and continueth therein, he being not a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the work, this man shall be blessed in his deed” (James 1:22-25).
“The first step in reconciliation to God is the conviction of sin. "Sin is the transgression of the law." By the law is the knowledge of sin." 1 John 3:4; Romans 3:20. In order to see his guilt, the sinner must test his character by God's great standard of righteousness. It is a mirror which shows the perfection of a righteous character and enables him to discern the defects in his own” (GCpg 467).
“Many neglect to look at themselves in the mirror which reveals the defects in the character; therefore deformity and sin exist, and are apparent to others, if not understood by those who are in fault. The hateful sin of selfishness exists to a great degree, even in some who profess to be devoted to the work of God. If they would compare their character with His requirements, especially with the great standard, God's holy law, they would ascertain, if earnest, honest searchers, that they are fearfully wanting. But some are not willing to look far enough or deep enough to see the depravity of their own hearts. They are wanting in very many respects, yet they remain in willing ignorance of their guilt” (GW pg. 275).
Since God’s law shows us where we are defective, and causes us to realize that we are ‘fearfully wanting,’ it is used by God to help us realize our need for a Saviour - Christ. Therefore, “The law(8451-torah) of the LORD is perfect, converting the soul: the testimony of the LORD is sure, making wise the simple” (Palms 19:7).
Results of Attacking God’s Law
Since ‘God’s law is a transcript of His character,’ attacking God’s law would be attacking the Character of God. A person who attacks the Character of God is attacking God. Therefore, those who reject God’s law reject God Himself! This is serious business, since all who reject God will be destroyed!
Attacking and changing God’s law would be attacking and changing the definition of sin. Changing the definition of sin would cause people to sin without remorse. People would think that they were all right and not realize that they were sinful. This will cost the salvation of many people!
Attacking God’s law would result in the destruction of the ‘mirror’ that we look into to see our own defects. Therefore, attacking God’s law blinds people to what sin is. This in turn blinds people to their need for a Saviour. People who have no need for a Saviour will be lost! There really is no way around this fact!
God’s Law – Love
Matthew 22 records men trying to entrap Jesus. In vs. 36 a lawyer asks the question “Master, which is the great commandment in the law (3551 - nomos)?” Jesus answers the lawyer in vs. 37 saying, “Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the first and great commandment.” Jesus was quoting straight from Deuteronomy 6:5 which says, “Thou shalt love the LORD thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might.”
Jesus went on to say in vs. 39, “And the second is like unto it, Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself.” Again Jesus quoted from the Old Testament, Leviticus 19:18, which says “Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself:” In vs. 40 Jesus wrapped up His thought saying, “On these two commandments hang all the law (3551 - nomos) and the prophets.” Therefore, the whole law falls into two categories; love to God and love to man. This statement includes the Ten Commandments. The first 4 commandments tell us how to love God, and the last 6 commandments tell us how to love men. But God decided to go even farther, and made the 10 Commandments even clearer.
“After giving the ten commandments, the Lord more explicitly enlarged upon them, laying down the principles that should be carried out in the practical life. These specifications are called judgments, or statutes, because the magistrates were to give judgment according to them. God did not speak them with an audible voice to the Israelites, but gave them to Moses, who communicated them to the people” (Sermons and Talks, Volume 2, p. 185-186).
The statutes were given to Moses, and they amplified the 10 Commandments. See the pattern? Love = 10 Commandments = Statutes!
What Ceased At The Cross?
What really ceased at the cross? Was it the whole law? Was it the Ceremonial Law? Or did nothing cease at the cross? These questions are vital, since an incorrect understanding of what ceased at the cross could lead people to think that more ceased at the cross than what really ceased. Nailing more to the cross than what was really nailed will lead people to attack the law of God and therefore attack God Himself!
The first concept that needs to be recognized is that the Bible is to interpret itself! The second concept that needs to be realized is contained in Amos 3:7 which says, “Surely the Lord GOD will do nothing, but he revealeth his secret unto his servants the prophets.” This means that God will tell His servants the prophets about major events before they come to pass. It is reasonable to conclude that God would tell one of his servants the prophets exactly what ceased at the cross. Since the New Testament prophets came after Christ, we have to look to the Old Testament to find out what ceased at the Cross. The answer is given in Daniel 9:27. “And he shall confirm the covenant with many for one week: and in the midst of the week he shall cause the sacrifice and the oblation to cease.” We know that this text is referring to Christ, who died in the midst of the week. This text clearly tells us what ceased at the cross. It was the “sacrifice” and “oblation.” The word ‘sacrifice’ comes from the Hebrew word ‘zebach’, which means to “slaughter…an animal” (Strong’s #2077). The word ‘oblation’ comes from the Hebrew word ‘minchah’ which means “a sacrificial offering (usually bloodless and voluntary)” (Strongs # 4503).
From Daniel 9:27 we clearly see that the only thing that was done away with at the cross were the sacrifices and the oblations. We must not add anything else to this list, for in Revelation 22:18 a solemn warning is given. “If any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the plagues that are written in this book.” This is a quote from Deuteronomy 4:2 which says, “Ye shall not add unto the word which I command you, neither shall ye diminish ought from it.” We must not add to what God has clearly given us!
The Devil Attacked God’s Law!
So why is the teaching so widespread that more than just the ‘sacrifice’ and ‘oblation’ were nailed to the cross? Because the devil has deceived “the whole world” (Revelation 12:9). In Daniel 7:25 we see that the little horn power, controlled by Satan, “shall speak great words against the most High, and shall wear out the saints of the most High, and think to change times and laws.” What are these times and laws?
The word ‘times’ comes from the Hebrew word ‘zeman’ which means “an appointed occasion:-season, time.” (Strong’s # 2166, 2165) Therefore the word ‘times’ can be translated as ‘appointed season’ or ‘appointed time’. The Hebrew word ‘moed’ can also be translated as ‘appointed season’ or ‘appointed time’ (Strong’s # 4150). The word ‘moed’ can be translated as ‘congregation.’ It makes sense that the devil would indeed change ‘moeds’ for we see God speaking about the devil in Isaiah 14:13 saying, “For thou hast said in thine heart, I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne above the stars of God: I will sit also upon the mount of the congregation (moed - 4150) in the sides of the north.” Therefore, Satan will think to change God’s moeds, which are His appointed times!
The word ‘laws’ comes from the Hebrew word ‘dath’, which can be translated as “statute:-commandment, commission, decree, law, manner” (Strong’s # 1882, 1881). So the statutes, and commandments, which are all contained in the Torah, were attacked by the devil.
We know that the little horn power did indeed try to change laws. This power deleted the second commandment, which deals with graven images (Exodus 20:4). The Sabbath commandment was shortened to “Remember the sabbath day, to keep it holy,” and the tenth commandment was split in two.
The little horn power also changed ‘times,’ or ‘moeds’. In Leviticus 23 the first ‘moed’ is listed. “Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, Concerning the feasts (moed - 4150) of the LORD, which ye shall proclaim to be holy convocations, even these are my feasts (moed - 4150). Six days shall work be done: but the seventh day is the sabbath of rest, an holy convocation; ye shall do no work therein: it is the sabbath of the LORD in all your dwelling” (Leviticus 23:2,3). We know that the Sabbath was changed to Sunday. However, the Catholic Church claims to have done away with more than just the first moed, the 7th-Day Sabbath.
“The Catholic Church abolished, not only the Sabbath, but all the other Jewish festivals.” (T. Enright - 1905) This quote was taken from the same letter that offers a $1,000 dollar award to anyone who can prove that keeping Sunday is in the Bible. “The new law has its own spirit…and its own feasts which have taken the place of those appointed in the law of Moses. If we would know the days to be observed…we must go to the Catholic Church, not to the Mosaic law” (From a Catholic Catechism as quoted in Signs of the Times, Nov. 4, 1919). So what did the devil choose to replace the moeds with?
The Devil’s Substitution For God’s Moeds
The Following Quote was taken from The Convert’s Catechism of Catholic Doctrine Pages 55 and 56.
“The First Precept”
“Q. What is the First Precept?
A. The First Precept is: To hear Mass on Sundays and Holydays of Obligation.
Q. Why did the Church institute Holydays?
A. The Church instituted Holydays to recall to our minds the great events in the life of our Lord and the Saints.
Q. Which are the Holydays of Obligation in the United States?
A. The Holydays of Obligation in the United States are:
1. The Circumcision of our Lord, January 1st
2. The Ascension of our Lord, the fortieth day after Easter Sunday
3. The Assumption of our Lady, August 15th
4. All Saints, November 1st
5. The Immaculate Conception of Our Blessed Lady, December 8th
6. The Birth of our Lord, December 25th
Q. How should we keep Holydays of Obligation?
A. We should keep Holydays of Obligation as we should keep Sundays.”
Merwin H. Abbott, Author of Paul the Sabbath-Keeper? And the National Easter Sunday Law, makes some interesting statements. “A Holyday is a Sabbath Day - a day set apart. No servile work is to be performed. How many SDA’s work on Jan 1st or on Dec. 25th? Don’t we teach that we pay homage to the power that establishes a holy day when we acknowledge the day as a holy day? These days are false Annual Sabbaths!”
The Statutes Are Still Valid
Since the ‘sacrifice’ and ‘oblation’ were the only things that ceased at the cross, it is reasonable to conclude that the statutes are still valid. This is in total agreement with what Ellen White said. “After giving the ten commandments, the Lord more explicitly enlarged upon them, laying down the principles that should be carried out in the practical life. These specifications are called judgments, or statutes, because the magistrates were to give judgment according to them. God did not speak them with an audible voice to the Israelites, but gave them to Moses, who communicated them to the people. In several instances difficult cases had arisen upon which Moses felt incapable of rendering a decision. He had supplicated the Lord to decide them for him. The Lord now gave general statutes that would govern decisions in these particular cases” (Sermons and Talks, Volume 2, p. 185-186).
“The precious time of probation is passing, and few realize that it is given them for the purpose of preparing for eternity. The golden hours are squandered in worldly pursuits, in pleasure, in absolute sin. God's law is slighted and forgotten, yet every statute is nonetheless binding. Every transgression will bring its punishment” (4T, pg. 147).
"The teaching which has become so widespread, that the divine statutes are no longer binding upon men, is the same as idolatry in its effect upon the morals of the people. Those who seek to lessen the claims of God's holy law are striking directly at the foundations of the government of families and nations. Religious parents, failing to walk in His statutes, do not command their household to keep the way of the Lord. The law of God is not made the rule of life....A reformation in this respect is needed -- a reformation which shall be deep and broad. Parents need to reform; ministers need to reform; they need God in their households” (Patriarchs and Prophets, pg. 143).
“The great God has a law by which to govern His kingdom, and those who trample upon that law will one day find that they are amenable to its statutes. The remedy for transgression is not to be found in declaring that the law is abolished. To abolish the law would be to dishonor it, and to cast contempt upon the Lawgiver. The only escape for the transgressor of law is found in the Lord Jesus Christ; for through the grace and atonement of the only-begotten Son of God, the sinner may be saved and the law vindicated. The men who parade before the world as wonderful specimens of greatness, and at the same time trample down the revealed will of God, robe man with honor and talk of the perfection of nature. They paint a very fine picture, but it is an illusion, a flattering deception; for they walk in the sparks of their own kindling” (Fundamentals of Christian Education p. 331).
"From the rising of the sun unto the going down of the same the Lord's name is to be praised" (Ps. 113:3). . . . "All his commandments are sure. They stand fast for ever and ever" (Ps. 111:7, 8). The sacred statutes which Satan has hated and sought to destroy, will be honored throughout a sinless universe” (God’s Amazing Grace p. 370).
“Fathers and mothers who claim to be Christians, and who have not been doers of the words of Christ, who have not educated and trained their children in correct habits, have not brought them up to love and fear God, as God has directed them to. The words of Moses to Israel, concerning the statutes and judgments of the Lord, are also the word of God to us; he says: "Keep therefore and do them; for this is your wisdom and your understanding in the sight of the nations, which shall hear all these statutes…” (The Signs of the Times, 03-21-95).
“In every generation and in every land the true foundation for character building has been the same--the principles contained in the word of God. The only safe and sure rule is to do what God says. "The statutes of the Lord are right," and "he that doeth these things shall never be moved." Psalms 19:8; 15:5. It was with the word of God that the apostles met the false theories of their day, saying, "Other foundation can no man lay than that is laid." 1 Corinthians 3:11” (Acts of the Apostles p. 475).
“The Holy One of Israel has made known to us the statutes and laws which are to govern all human intelligences. These precepts, which have been pronounced "holy, and just, and good," are to form the standard of action in the home. There can be no departure from them without sin, for they are the foundation of the Christian religion” (Child Guidance p. 506).
“In consequence of continual transgression, the moral law was repeated in awful grandeur from Sinai. Christ gave to Moses religious precepts which were to govern everyday life. These statutes were explicitly given to guard the ten commandments. They were not shadowy types to pass away with the death of Christ. They were to be binding upon men in every age as long as time should last. These commands were enforced by the power of the moral law, and they clearly and definitely explained that law” (The Review & Herald, May 6,1875).
“The apostasy of Israel had developed gradually. From generation to generation, Satan had made repeated attempts to cause the chosen nation to forget "the commandments, the statutes, and the judgments" that they had promised to keep forever. Deuteronomy 6:1. He knew that if he could only lead Israel to forget God, and to "walk after other gods, and serve them, and worship them," they would "surely perish." Deuteronomy 8:19” (Prophets and Kings p. 296).
“The Saviour said nothing to unsettle faith in the religion and institutions that had been given through Moses; for every ray of divine light that Israel's great leader communicated to his people was received from Christ. While many are saying in their hearts that He has come to do away with the law, Jesus in unmistakable language reveals His attitude toward the divine statutes. "Think not," He said, "that I am come to destroy the law, or the prophets"” ((Thoughts From the Mount of Blessing pp. 45-48) Reflecting Christ p. 67).
“There must be no withholding on our part, of our service or our means, if we would fulfill our covenant with God. “This day the LORD thy God hath commanded thee to do these statutes and judgments: thou shalt therefore keep and do them with all thine heart, and with all thy soul”(Deut 26:16). The purpose of all God’s commandments is to reveal man’s duty not only to God, but to his fellow man. In this late age of the world’s history, we are not, because of the selfishness of our hearts, to question or dispute the right of God to make these requirements, or we will deceive ourselves, and rob our souls of the richest blessings of the grace of God. Heart and mind and soul are to be merged in the will of God. Then the covenant, framed from the dictates of infinite wisdom, and made binding by the power and authority of the King of kings and Lord of lords, will be our pleasure. God will have no controversy with us in regard to these binding precepts. It is enough that He has said that obedience to His statutes and laws is the life and prosperity of His people” (MS 67, 1907).
“Men in this age of the world act as if they were at liberty to question the words of the Infinite, to review His decisions and statutes, endorsing, revising, reshaping, and annulling, at their pleasure. If they cannot misconstrue, misinterpret, or alter God's plain decision, or bend it to please the multitude and themselves, they break it. We are never safe while we are guided by human opinions; but we are safe when we are guided by a "Thus saith the Lord." We cannot trust the salvation of our souls to any lower standard than the decision of an infallible Judge. Those who make God their guide, and His Word their counselor, follow the lamp of life. God's living oracles guide their feet in straight paths” (Reflecting Christ p. 113).
Did you notice in the preceding quotes that the “statutes” were not spoken “with an audible voice to the Israelites,” but were given to “Moses, who communicated them to the people”? Did you notice that the “statutes” “more explicitly enlarged” upon the “Ten Commandments”? Did you notice that the “statutes” were explicitly given to “guard the Ten Commandments,” and were “not shadowy types” that ended at the cross, but were to be “binding upon men in every age as long as time should last”? Did you notice that Ellen White says that “every statute is nonetheless binding”? Did you notice that God's words to Moses concerning the “statutes and judgments” are also the “word of God to us”? Did you notice that there must be “no withholding on our part” if we would “fulfill our covenant” with God? Did you notice that the “teaching” which has become so common, that the “divine statutes” are no longer “binding upon men” is the same as “idolatry” in its effect upon the “morals of the people”? It is very clear that we are to keep all the statutes!
The Fear Of The Lord
Now how does the Fear of the Lord fit in to this study on the Law of God? Very simply! “The fear of the LORD is to hate evil” (Proverbs 8:13). How do we hate evil? “My son, if thou wilt receive my words, and hide my commandments with thee…then shalt thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God” (Proverbs 2:1,5). “And it shall be with him, and he shall read therein all the days of his life: that he may learn to fear the LORD his God, to keep all the words of this aw (8451-torah) and these statutes, to do them:” (Deut 17:19) The Fear of the Lord is to hate evil. In order to hate evil, we need to receive God’s words to us, which is the law. Then we need to memorize the law, so that we can keep the law when we are tempted to break it. Notice that the ‘law’ (Deut 17:19--‘Law’ is Strongs # 8451, Torah) is the torah! The Torah is the first 5 books of the Old Testament and includes the statutes. “And the LORD commanded us to do all these statutes, to fear the LORD our God, for our good always, that he might preserve us alive, as it is at this day” (Deuteronomy 6:24). Notice that God commanded the statutes. “That thou mightest fear the LORD thy God, to keep all his statutes and his commandments, which I command thee, thou, and thy son, and thy son’s son, all the days of thy life; and that thy days may be prolonged” (Deuteronomy 6:2). Please notice that in these verses the words ‘commandments’ and ‘law’, meaning torah, are interchangeable. In other words, God commanded the torah to Moses. “Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter: Fear God, and keep his commandments: for this is the whole duty of man” (Ecclesiastes 12:13). The foundation for the Fear of the Lord is the keeping of His Torah. We also know that the Fear of the Lord is part of the 1st Angel's Message. “Saying with a loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to him; for the hour of his judgment is come: and worship him that made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters” (Revelation 14:7). Makes sense - we need to keep the Torah, because the ‘hour of his judgment is come’. This is particularly true for us, since we are living in the antitypical Day of Atonement!
The Holy Spirit
“During the loud cry…the light of present truth will be seen flashing everywhere….the Word declares….'I will put My Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in My statutes.’ This is the descent of the Holy Spirit, sent from God to do its office work…
As men, women, and children proclaim the gospel, the Lord will open the eyes of the blind to see His statutes, and will write upon the hearts of the truly penitent His law.” Ellen White, The Review & Herald, “The Closing Work.” October 13,1904
Ellen White was quoting from Ezekiel 36:26-27 which says “A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you: and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an heart of flesh. And I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments, and do them.”
Part of the role of the Holy Spirit in the Time of the End is to take away the people’s blindness to the statutes. This is clearly an end-time message! This is why Malachi 4:4 says “Remember ye the law (8451-torah) of Moses my servant, which I commanded unto him in Horeb for all Israel, with the statutes and judgments.” Malachi 4:4 is clearly set in the End of Time.
The message to us is that we need to be keeping the law of Moses! We need to heed the instruction of Malachi 2:6-7, “The law (8451-torah) of truth was in his mouth, and iniquity was not found in his lips: he walked with me in peace and equity, and did turn many away from iniquity. For the priest’s lips should keep knowledge, and they should seek the law (8451-torah) at his mouth: for he is the messenger of the LORD of hosts.”
It is my prayer that we would not fall into the category of Malachi 2:8-9 which says, “But ye are departed out of the way; ye have caused many to stumble at the law (8451-torah); ye have corrupted the covenant of Levi, saith the LORD of hosts. Therefore have I also made you contemptible and base before all the people, according as ye have not kept my ways, but have been partial in the law.” (8451-torah)
It is interesting to note that those who ‘depart out of the way’ cause ‘many to stumble at the law’ which is the Torah! God allows those who depart from the Torah to become ‘contemptible and base’, or corrupt! Do we see corruption in the world? How about in the churches? How about in our church?
Blessings To Statute Keepers
The Bible has recorded many blessings to those who keep the statutes. Consider Leviticus 26:3-13, “If ye walk in my statutes, and keep my commandments, and do them; Then I will give you rain in due season, and the land shall yield her increase, and the trees of the field shall yield their fruit. And your threshing shall reach unto the vintage, and the vintage shall reach unto the sowing time: and ye shall eat your bread to the full, and dwell in your land safely. And I will give peace in the land, and ye shall lie down, and none shall make you afraid: and I will rid evil beasts out of the land, neither shall the sword go through your land. And ye shall chase your enemies, and they shall fall before you by the sword. And five of you shall chase an hundred, and an hundred of you shall put ten thousand to flight: and your enemies shall fall before you by the sword. For I will have respect unto you, and make you fruitful, and multiply you, and establish my covenant with you. And ye shall eat old store, and bring forth the old because of the new. And I will set my tabernacle among you: and my soul shall not abhor you. And I will walk among you, and will be your God, and ye shall be my people. I am the LORD your God, which brought you forth out of the land of Egypt, that ye should not be their bondmen; and I have broken the bands of your yoke, and made you go upright.”
Deuteronomy 28:1-14 also includes some wonderful promises. “And it shall come to pass, if thou shalt hearken diligently unto the voice of the LORD thy God, to observe and to do all his commandments which I command thee this day, that the LORD thy God will set thee on high above all nations of the earth: And all these blessings shall come on thee, and overtake thee, if thou shalt hearken unto the voice of the LORD thy God. Blessed shalt thou be in the city, and blessed shalt thou be in the field. Blessed shall be the fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy ground, and the fruit of thy cattle, the increase of thy kine, and the flocks of thy sheep. Blessed shall be thy basket and thy store. Blessed shalt thou be when thou comest in, and blessed shalt thou be when thou goest out. The LORD shall cause thine enemies that rise up against thee to be smitten before thy face: they shall come out against thee one way, and flee before thee seven ways. The LORD shall command the blessing upon thee in thy storehouses, and in all that thou settest thine hand unto; and he shall bless thee in the land which the LORD thy God giveth thee. The LORD shall establish thee an holy people unto himself, as he hath sworn unto thee, if thou shalt keep the commandments of the LORD thy God, and walk in his ways. And all people of the earth shall see that thou art called by the name of the LORD; and they shall be afraid of thee. And the LORD shall make thee plenteous in goods, in the fruit of thy body, and in the fruit of thy cattle, and in the fruit of thy ground, in the land which the LORD sware unto thy fathers to give thee. The LORD shall open unto thee his good treasure, the heaven to give the rain unto thy land in his season, and to bless all the work of thine hand: and thou shalt lend unto many nations, and thou shalt not borrow. And the LORD shall make thee the head, and not the tail; and thou shalt be above only, and thou shalt not be beneath; if that thou hearken unto the commandments of the LORD thy God, which I command thee this day, to observe and to do them: And thou shalt not go aside from any of the words which I command thee this day, to the right hand, or to the left, to go after other gods to serve them.”
God has promised to bless us beyond our imagination if we are just willing to do what He says! Why don’t we test His promises? Why don’t we keep His statutes and ALL of His commandments?
Malachi 4:4 says that we need to remember the laws of Moses, the Torah. We are given lots of proof that we need to keep the Torah. Perhaps that is why Ellen White says that we will be judged by the statute books! “Where shall we find laws more noble, pure, and just than are exhibited on the statute books wherein is recorded the instruction given to Moses for the children of Israel? From what other source can we gather such strength or learn such noble science? What other book will teach men so well how to love, fear, and obey God? What other book presents to students more ennobling science, more wonderful history? It clearly portrays righteousness and foretells the consequence of disloyalty to the law of Jehovah” (Counsels to Parents, Teachers, and Students, Page 428).
“After the saints are changed to immortality and caught up together with Jesus, after they receive their harps, their robes, and their crowns, and enter the city, Jesus and the saints sit in judgment. The books are opened--the book of life and the book of death. The book of life contains the good deeds of the saints; and the book of death contains the evil deeds of the wicked. These books are compared with the statute book, the Bible, and according to that men are judged.” (Early Writings, Page 52)
Did you notice that the ‘statute books’ record the ‘instruction given to Moses’ for Israel? Did you notice that our records are going to be compared to ‘the statute book’? Do we not claim to be Spiritual Israel? Perhaps we should keep the laws contained in the Torah, since we love God, and since we are going to be judged by the laws of Moses!
Read Leviticus 26:14-46 and Deuteronomy 28:15-68. God loves His people so much that He has done His best to discourage His people from disobeying His statutes! He has done this since we will be judged by the statutes, and He does not want us to be lost!
The New Covenant
Christ has made a covenant with us. This is called the New Covenant. But what is this covenant? It is very simply explained in Hebrews 10:16,17. “This is the covenant that I will make with them after those days, saith the Lord, I will put my laws(3551 - nomos, which is the Greek word for Torah or Mosaic law) into their hearts, and in their minds will I write them; And their sins and iniquities will I remember no more.”
This new covenant is a beautiful promise. We know that sin is the transgression of the law (1 John 3:4). Christ has promised to put his laws in our hearts and He is going to cause us to keep them. Therefore Christ is going to keep us from sinning – if we will let Him!
It is interesting to note that Hebrews 10:16,17 is a quote from the Old Testament. “But this shall be the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel; After those days, saith the LORD, I will put my law (8451-torah) in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts; and will be their God, and they shall be my people” (Jeremiah 31:33).
Since God has promised to write the Torah in our hearts, both in the New and Old testaments, it is safe to conclude that He will help us keep the Torah if we will let Him. The hardest part of the battle is letting God write his law on our hearts. The rest is easy!
If a person refuses to allow God to write the Torah in his heart he is rejecting the New Covenant. If a person rejects the New Covenant, then he rejects God Himself! If God is rejected, He will not be able to cleanse the heart! A person who rejects God’s laws is in effect allowing the devil to be his leader. This is why it is VERY crucial that we do not nail too much to the cross! If we nail to much to the cross, then we are attacking the law of God and Satan becomes the leader!
Isaiah 8:20 suddenly makes a lot of sense. “To the law (8451-torah) and to the testimony: if they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them.” A person who does not speak according to the Torah has no light in him! This is why God has told us to remember the Torah in Malachi 4:4. “Remember ye the law (8451-torah) of Moses my servant, which I commanded unto him in Horeb for all Israel, with the statutes and judgments.”
The New Testament
We know that the New Testament is in harmony with the Old Testament since both of them were inspired. Since they are in harmony, we would expect to see that the New Testament instructs us to keep the Torah. This is exactly the case. Jesus said, “Think not that I am come to destroy the law (3551-nomos), or the prophets: I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill. For verily I say unto you, Till heaven and earth pass, one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the law (3551-nomos), till all be fulfilled. Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least commandments, (1785-entole) and shall teach men so, he shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven: but whosoever shall do and teach them, the same shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven”(Matt. 5:17-19).
The word law comes from the Greek word ‘nomos’ which is the New Testament’s counterpart to the Hebrew word ‘torah’. Matthew 5 is teaching us that the ‘nomos’, or ‘torah’, was not destroyed by Christ, but fulfilled, or kept. Note that the word ‘commandments’ is referring to the law. It is reasonable to conclude then that the word ‘commandments’ that originate from the Greek word ‘entole’ are all referring to the ‘nomos’, or Torah.
1st John 2:4 says, “He that saith, I know him, and keepeth not his commandments (1785-entole), is a liar, and the truth is not in him.”
Revelation 14:12 says, “Here is the patience of the saints: here are they that keep the commandments(1785-entole) of God, and the faith of Jesus.”
Revelation 22:14 says, “Blessed are they that do his commandments (1785-entole), that they may have right to the tree of life, and may enter in through the gates into the city.”
It is clear that we are to keep the Torah! That is why Malachi 4:4 says “Remember ye the law (8451-torah) of Moses my servant, which I commanded unto him in Horeb for all Israel, with the statutes and judgments.” Notice that God ‘commanded’ to Moses the Torah, which contains the statutes and judgments.
Some people may be wondering about Colossians 2 and Ephesians 2:15 right about now. After all, do they not teach that the law was done away with? Let’s take a look and find out.
“Blotting out the handwriting of ordinances that was against us, which was contrary to us, and took it out of the way, nailing it to his cross; 15And having spoiled principalities and powers, he made a show of them openly, triumphing over them in it.
16Let no man therefore judge you in meat, or in drink, or in respect of an holyday, or of the new moon, or of the sabbath days: 17Which are a shadow of things to come; but the body is of Christ” (Colossians 2:14-17).
In ancient Israel, when a person brought charges against another person in court, the person pressing the charges wrote them down on a piece of paper and placed it in the middle of the court. Anyone could then come and look at the charges to see why the person was being taken to court. The charges that were written down were called the ‘handwriting of ordinances’. The word ‘way’ in Colossians 2:14 comes from the Greek word ‘mesos’ which literally means ‘middle’ (See Strongs Concordance).
With this information in mind, it is easy to see that Colossians 2:14 says “Blotting out the (charges) that was against us, which was contrary to us, and took it out of the (middle of the court), nailing it to the cross.”
Colossians 2:16 is simply saying that we should not let any ‘man’ ‘judge’ us in how we ‘eat’, or ‘drink’, or for keeping a ‘holyday’, or for keeping the ‘new moon’, or for keeping the ‘Sabbath.’ It is a popular belief that the ‘sabbath days’ refer to Annual Sabbaths which are holydays. However, it would not make sense for Paul to say “Let no man therefore judge you in meat, or in drink, or in respect of an holyday, or of the new moon, or of the holyday.” Therefore ‘sabbath days’ have to refer to the Seventh Day Sabbath. This makes sense considering that the word ‘days’ was added by the translaters!
Colossians 2:17 says “Which are a shadow of things to come; but the body is of Christ.” The word shadow is referring to the Annual Sabbaths and the Weekly Sabbath. Some take this to mean that the Annual and Weekly Sabbath were shadows that pointed to the cross, and were therefore done away with at the cross. This is WRONG! Please notice that Paul is writing this AFTER the cross. The words ‘are’ and ‘to’ are future tense. It is then reasonable to conclude that the Weekly and Annual Sabbaths point forward from the cross into the future. If this were not so, then Colossians 2:17 would read “Which were a shadow of things to come.” But it doesn’t! It says, “Which are a shadow of things to come.”
Ephesians 2:15 says, “Having abolished in his flesh the enmity, even the law (3551-nomos) of commandments contained in ordinances; for to make in himself of twain one new man, so making peace.” Please notice the italicized words. They were added by the translators. This text really says “Having abolished in his flesh the enmity, the law (3551-nomos) of commandments in ordinances; for to make himself of twain one new man, making peace.” The word ‘enmity’ comes from the Greek word ‘echthra’ which means “a reason for opposition:-enmity, hatred” (Strongs Concordance). This text is really saying “Having abolished in his flesh the (reason for opposition to; hatred for) the law(3551-nomos) of commandments in ordinances; for to make himself of twain one new man, making peace.” What a beautiful text! Christ took away our hatred for the Nomos, or Torah!
The Annual Sabbaths
Since the Sacrifice and Oblation were the only things that were done away with at the cross, (Daniel 9:27) it is reasonable to conclude that the Annual Sabbaths were not done away with at the cross, but are still valid. Is there proof for such a statement? Yes!
In Leviticus 23 the Feasts, or Annual Sabbaths, are called statutes. Speaking of Firstfruits, Leviticus 23:14 says “it shall be a statute for ever throughout your generations in all your dwellings”
Speaking of Pentecost, Leviticus 23:21 says, “it shall be a statute for ever in all your dwellings throughout your generations.”
Leviticus 23:31 says that the Day of Atonement “shall be a statute for ever throughout your generations.” Tabernacles “shall be a statute for ever in your generations” – Leviticus 23:41.
Clearly in Leviticus 23 the Annual Sabbaths are called statutes! Remember what Ellen White said about statutes? She said that the “statutes” were explicitly given to “guard the Ten Commandments” and were “not shadowy types” that ended at the cross, but were to be “binding upon men in every age as long as time should last.” Ellen White said, “every statute is nonetheless binding.” She also said that God's words to Moses concerning the “statutes and judgments” are also the “word of God to us.” She said that there must be “no withholding on our part” if we would “fulfill our covenant” with God! She also stated that the “teaching” which has become so common, that the “divine statutes” are no longer “binding upon men” is the same as “idolatry” in its effect upon the “morals of the people”! We are to keep all of the statutes! This includes the Annual Sabbaths!
Another popular misconception is that since special sacrifices were done on the Annual Sabbaths, they were part of the ceremonial law that was done away with at the cross. Please remember that the term ‘ceremonial sabbaths’ is not a biblical term, but is simply a term coined by man. The teaching that the Annual Sabbaths were done away with at the cross because special sacrifices were done on them does not hold water because the 7th Day Sabbaths had special sacrifices offered on them. (See Numbers 28:9,10; 1st Chronicles 23:31; 2nd Chronicles 2:4; 2nd Chronicles 8:13, 31:3; Nehemiah 10:33; Ezekiel 45:17) We wouldn’t want to nail the Sabbath to the cross, would we? Absolutely not!!!
Genesis 1:14 says, “And God said, Let there be lights in the firmament of the heaven to divide the day from the night; and let them be for signs, and for seasons, and for days, and years.” The word ‘seasons’ comes from the Hebrew word Moed (Strongs # 4150). Moed can also be translated as ‘holydays,’ or ‘feasts.’ This is reasonable, since we know that before the flood there were no seasons as we know – fall, summer, winter, spring. So these Moeds have been around since creation, just like the Sabbath. However, these Moed’s can be traced before creation! The feasts are clearly called statutes. We see that "Satan claimed to be able to present laws which were better than God's statutes and judgements, and he was expelled from heaven. He has made a similar attempt upon earth" (Ellen G. White, The Review and Herald, Volume 2, page 404, June 17, 1890).
We know that the Sabbath is God’s seal, and that keeping Sunday will become involved in the Mark of the Beast. The statutes were given to amplify the 10 commandments. Which statutes would amplify the Sabbath?
“Again the people were reminded of the sacred obligation of the Sabbath. Yearly feasts were appointed, at which all the men of the nation were to assemble before the Lord, bringing to Him their offerings of gratitude and the first fruits of His bounties” (Patriarchs and Prophets pg. 311).
Since the Annual Sabbaths amplify and guard the Sabbath, we would expect that the Annual Sabbaths are called signs, as the Sabbath is a sign. This is the case. Exodus 13:9 states, “And it shall be for a sign unto thee upon thine hand, and for a memorial between thine eyes, that the LORD’S law may be in thy mouth: for with a strong hand hath the LORD brought thee out of Egypt.” This text is talking about the Feast of Unleavened Bread (vs. 6,7). The Annual Sabbaths are a sign between us and God – just as the 7th Day Sabbath! Consider Exodus 31:13. “Speak thou also unto the children of Israel, saying, Verily my sabbaths ye shall keep: for it is a sign between me and you throughout your generations; that ye may know that I am the LORD that doth sanctify you.” Did you notice that the word “sabbaths” is plural? Ezekiel 20:12 is plural also. “Moreover also I gave them my sabbaths, to be a sign between me and them, that they might know that I am the LORD that sanctify them.” Perhaps this is why Ellen White stated that “The mark of the beast is exactly what it has been proclaimed to be. Not all in regard to this matter is yet understood, and will not be understood until the unrolling of the scroll” (8T pg. 159). The breaking of the Annual Sabbaths are connected with the Mark of the Beast! This is reasonable because we’ve always taught that disobedience to the 7th Day Sabbath will be connected with the Mark of the Beast.
However, there is more to the Sign of God. Deuteronomy 6:8, which is talking about the commandments contained in the Torah says, “And thou shalt bind them for a sign upon thine hand, and they shall be as frontlets between thine eyes.” The breaking of the Torah is also part of the Mark of the Beast! So the three parts to the mark of the beast are (1) Breaking the Sabbath (2) Breaking the Feast Days (3) Breaking the Torah.
The Feast Days clearly have future fulfillments. Speaking about Passover, Haskel said, “The work typified by the Passover extends on down through the ages, and will not have fully met its antitype until the children of God are forever freed from the power of the enemy of all righteousness” (The Cross and Its Shadow pg. 98). “During the seven days following the Passover, the people ate unleavened bread. Seven, denoting a complete number, was a fitting type of the life that should be lived by the one who claims Christ as his Passover, and has the blessed assurance that his sins are covered by the blood of the Saviour. Leaven is a type of malice and wickedness; unleavened bread represents sincerity and truth. He whose past sins are hidden, (Rom. 4:7,8) and who realizes what it is to have the condemnation of his old life lifted from him, enters into a new life, and should not return to his life of sin, but live in all sincerity and truth. All this was symbolized by the seven days Feast of Unleavened Bread, following Passover” (The Cross and Its Shadow pg. 106,107). “Not only was unleavened bread used in the feast, but no leaven was allowed in the homes during the entire week following the day of the Passover.
This is a very beautiful emblem of the Christian, who, while claiming to be sheltered by the blood of Christ, should not only keep his mouth from speaking evil, but his heart also should be free from the leaven of malice and wickedness” (The Cross and Its Shadow pg. 94-95).
Pentecost follows the Feast of Unleavened Bread, and has future fulfillments as well. “Pentecost, so called because it was held fifty days after the waving of first-fruits, was the last of the annual feasts held in the first half of the year. This feast was called the Feast of Weeks, on account of seven weeks intervening between it and the Passover feast. It was also called the Feast of Harvest, as it came at the close of the harvest” (The Cross and Its Shadow pg. 116).
Pentecost was a joyous occasion, for the harvest had been brought in. The people had God’s bountiful blessings in their possession, and at this time they presented gifts to God. In the parable of the tares and the wheat we find that wheat represents God’s people. While here on earth Christ sowed good seed and at Pentecost, after the crucifixion, a great harvest of people were brought into the Christian Church as a result of Christ’s work. However, before the great harvest of people were brought in, the disciples had to prepare.
“They needed to study the Scriptures, to put aside every difference, and become of one accord, that they might receive the outpouring of the Holy Spirit, which would enable them to know how to care for the great harvest of three thousand souls that was awaiting them as the result of the Saviour’s ministry. They also needed this special outpouring of the Spirit to prepare them to carry forward the wonderful work begun on the day of Pentecost, until every creature under heaven should hear the glad news of salvation” (The Cross and Its Shadow pg. 118, 119).
This is why Pentecost was connected with the outpouring of the Holy Spirit. Haskell also points out that, “This great harvest of souls at the antitypical Feast of Harvest was only a beginning of the greater harvest that will be gathered before the end of the world” (The Cross and Its Shadow pg. 119).
Therefore it is reasonable to conclude that, “Those who enter into the spirit of the latter rain will, like the early disciples, lay all upon the altar to be used by the Lord in the great closing work.
“As the seed sown by the Son of man during His earthly rain, so the good seed sown by Christ’s ambassadors who faithfully scatter the printed page filled with the gospel message, and by voice and life teach the saving truth, will yield a bountiful harvest in the time of the latter rain, when God’s Spirit is poured out upon all flesh. Then will be gathered the fruit of what each one has sown in the field. He which soweth sparingly shall reap also sparingly, and he which soweth bountifully shall reap also bountifully, (2 Cor. 9:6) is the divine promise” (The Cross and Its Shadow pg. 119).
Haskell also comments about the Feast of Trumpets. “God designed that every blast of the trumpet blown by His people, whether for joy or for sorrow, for worship or for war, should be a memorial, or reminder, of the power of God to comfort, sustain, and protect His people” (The Cross and Its Shadow pg. 202).
“In the type the trumpets were blown throughout Israel, warning all of the near approach of the solemn day of atonement. In the antitype we should expect some world-wide message to be given in trumpet tones, announcing the time near when the great antitypical day of atonement, the investigative judgment, would convene in the heavens” (The Cross and Its Shadow pg. 204).
We know that this is the case, for around 1833-34 the sound was made for the cleansing of the world in 1844. It was widely proclaimed that the hour of His judgment is come. It is also interesting to note that Joel connected the closing work of the gospel with the blowing of trumpets. For in Joel 2:1 he writes, “Blow ye the trumpet in Zion, and sound an alarm in My holy mountain: let all the inhabitants of the land tremble: for the day of the Lord cometh, for it is nigh at hand.” It is my personal belief that God will send the 7 Trumpets in Revelation 8 & 9 to wake us up to the fact that the end of the world is here, and that God is about to begin the judgement of the living. And then when Jesus comes, “The whole earth will resound with the tread of the innumerable company of the redeemed, as the living and the resurrected saints gather to meet their Lord in answer to the welcome summons of the last trumpet call that will be given on this sin cursed earth” (The Cross and Its Shadow pg. 207).
We obviously know that the Day of Atonement has not been fulfilled. The judgment is still going on, for probation has not yet closed.
Speaking about the Feast of Tabernacles, Ellen White states that, “The Feast of Tabernacles was not only commemorative but typical. It not only pointed back to the wilderness sojourn but ... it celebrated the ingathering of the fruits of the earth, and pointed forward to the great day of final ingathering, when the Lord of the harvest shall send forth His reapers to gather the tares together in bundles for the fire, and to gather the wheat into His garner. At that time the wicked will all be destroyed” (Patriarchs and Prophets, page 541).
“Well would it be for the people of God at the present time to have a Feast of Tabernacles” (Patriarchs and Prophets, pages 540-541).
All of the Feasts have future fulfillments. Matthew 5:17-18 says, “Think not that I am come to destroy the law, or the prophets: I am not come to destroy, but to fulfil. For verily I say unto you, Till heaven and earth pass, one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the law(3551-nomos), till all be fulfilled.” Since the Feasts have not been fulfilled, they have not passed away from the law, the ‘nomos’!
We as Adventists often state that we need to follow Jesus’ example in keeping the 7th Day Sabbath. Jesus also kept the Feast of Tabernacles (John 7) as well as the Passover. “Now when he was in Jerusalem at the passover, in the feast day, many believed in his name, when they saw the miracles which he did” (John 2:23). Keeping these days would be following Christ’s example as well.
In teaching that the Sabbath was not done away with, we point out that the apostles kept the Sabbath after the cross. This allows us to state that since the apostles kept the Sabbath after the cross, it was not done away with, for the Apostles understood what was done away with at the cross. It is interesting to note that the apostles also kept the Feast Days. Paul “bade them farewell, saying, I must by all means keep this feast that cometh in Jerusalem: but I will return again unto you, if God will. And he sailed from Ephesus” (Acts 18:21). There are more places in Acts where it is recorded that the apostles kept the feasts – like Pentecost etc… People are quick to state that Paul was still a Jew and he was just trying to prove to the Jews that he was still one of them by keeping their feasts. However, other churches use the same reasoning for why Paul kept the Sabbath. Was he really just trying to identify himself with the Jews? No!
Not only did Paul keep the feast of Passover and Unleavened Bread, but he kept them with his Gentile converts.
“At Philippi Paul tarried to keep the Passover. Only Luke remained with him, the other members of the company passing to Troas to await him there. The Philippians were the most loving and true hearted of the apostle’s converts, and during the eight days of the feast he enjoyed peaceful and happy communion with them” (AA 390, 391).
If the only reason for Paul to keep the Feasts was to identify himself with the Jews, then why did he keep Passover and Unleavened Bread with the Philippians, who were Gentile converts?
“Paul did not bind himself nor his converts to the ceremonies and customs of the Jews, with their varied forms, types, and sacrifices; for he recognized that the perfect and final offering had been made in the death of the Son of God... The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit” (Sketches From the Life of Paul pg. 105).
Ellen White clearly states that Paul did not bind himself nor his converts to that which was done away with at the cross. Therefore, since Paul kept the Feasts and taught the Phillipians to do so as well, who were Gentile converts, the Feasts cannot be done away with! Paul not only taught the Phillipians to keep the Feasts, he told us to keep them as well! “Therefore let us keep the feast, not with old leaven, neither with the leaven of malice and wickedness; but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth” (1 Corinthians 5:8).
Did the early Christians keep the Feasts? In the book The History of the Church, Eusebius quotes Polycrates who was speaking about the apostles.
“All of these (apostles) kept the fourteenth day of the month as the beginning of the Paschal Festival, in accordance with the Gospel, not deviating the least, but following in the rule of Faith. Last of all I too, Polycrates, the least of you all, act according to the tradition of my family, some members of which I have actually followed; for seven of them were bishops and I am the eighth, and my family have always kept the day when the people put away the leaven. So I, my friends, after spending sixty-five years in the Lord’s service and conversing with Christians from all parts of the world, and going carefully through all Holy Scripture, am not scared of threats. Better people than I have said: ‘We must obey God rather than men’” (The History of the Church. Eusebius, pg. 231).
Polycrates clearly kept Passover and Unleavened Bread, which is when the leaven was put away. Polycrates was a Bishop in the early Christian Church, and carefully studied the Scriptures. He was not convinced that Passover and Unleavened Bread were done away with, but came to the conclusion that he needed to continue keeping them. It is interesting to note that Polycrates stated that all of the apostles kept the Feast.
Why did the Christian Church stop keeping these feast days? Because the Catholic Church abolished the Feast Days at the same time they did away with the Sabbath. This was clearly prophesied in Daniel 7:25. However, the Catholic Church was not satisfied with just abolishing the Sabbaths, but substituted other days to be kept. Sabbath was changed to Sunday. God’s Feast Days were thrown out, and Christmas, Easter, Halloween, New Years, and other days were observed.
The Feast Days are going to be a major issue in the End Times. In Revelation 16:16, we find the word Armageddon. The word Armageddon is a Hebrew word (Rev 16:16) and comes from two Hebrew words; ‘HAR’ and ‘MEGEDDON’. The word “HAR” in Hebrew translates to “MOUNTAIN” (See Strong’s # 2022). According to the SDA Bible Commentary, Vol. 7, page 846 the word MEGEDDON is from the word mo’ed. In Isaiah 14:13-14 we see the same ‘mountain’ of the ‘moed’ used. Speaking of Lucifer, God says “For thou hast said in thine heart, I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt my throne above the stars of God. I will sit also upon the mount of the congregation (Strongs # 4150 Moed) in the sides of the north. I will ascend above the heights of the clouds; I will be like the most High.” Har being ‘mountain’ (Strong’s 2022), mo’ed in this text being interpreted “congregation” (Strongs’s 4150). Ellen White clearly states that "Satan claimed to be able to present laws which were better than God's statutes and judgements, and he was expelled from heaven. He has made a similar attempt upon earth." (The Review and Herald, Volume 2, page 404, June 17, 1890). The Feast Days (moed) are Statutes (Lev 23). When Satan claimed that he had better statutes, that included the Feast Days. Isaiah 14 agrees with this, saying that Satan was going to ‘sit’, or ‘establish’ (Strongs #3426), his own Feast Days (moeds). Ellen White said that “He has made a similar attempt upon earth.” This is why there is Easter, Halloween, Christmas, etc… Satan was “expelled from heaven” over this issue. Why would God treat us any differently? He doesn’t! Psam 119:118 says that God "has trodden down all them that err from thy statutes: for their deceit is falsehood." (Psalm 119:118) Clearly Armageddon is going to be over the Feast Days (moed). This includes the Sabbath vs. Sunday issue. This also includes all of the other Feast Days! Ellen White saw this battle, and stated that,
“In seeking to cast contempt upon the divine statutes, Satan has perverted the doctrines of the Bible, and errors have thus become incorporated into the faith of thousands who profess to believe the Scriptures. The last great conflict between truth and error is but the final struggle of the long-standing controversy concerning the law of God. Upon this battle we are now entering--a battle between the laws of men and the precepts of Jehovah, between the religion of the Bible and the religion of fable and tradition” (Great Controversy p. 582).
Which side are you going to choose? Are you going to keep God’s Feast Days, or the Devil’s Feast Days? It is my prayer that you will choose God’s side!!!!!!
This issue about God’s law and His Feast Days cannot be side stepped! Some state that Ellen White didn’t keep these Feasts, so why should they? Ellen White stated that, “Greater light shines upon us than shone upon our fathers. We cannot be accepted or honored of God in rendering the same service, or doing the same works, that our fathers did. In order to be accepted and blessed of God as they were, we must imitate their faithfulness and zeal, -- improve our light as they improved theirs, -- and do as they would have done had they lived in our day. We must walk in the light which shines upon us, otherwise that light will become darkness. God requires of us to exhibit to the world, in our character and works, that measure of the spirit of union and oneness which is in accordance with the sacred truths we profess and with the spirit of those prophecies that are fulfilling in these last days. The truth which has reached our understanding, and the light which has shone on the soul, will judge and condemn us, if we turn away and refuse to be led by them” (Testimonies for the Church Volume One, Page 262).
It is my prayer that you will now study this topic out thoroughly for yourself. It is vital that every person be convinced in his own mind. God does not want robots, but rather a people who love Him on their own free will! Don’t let traditions, or friends, or anything mold your thinking. Go only on a “thus saith the Lord!”