Are Hives Dangerous?
Are Hives Dangerous?
Hives on the outside don’t harm us. They are not damaging inside organs like kidneys, liver or lungs. The only danger is if the tongue swells or the back of the throat swells severely. Since this can cause difficulty in breathing, this is a symptom that needs to be taken seriously. Urgent medical treatment is required if this occurs. Hives are rarely due to a nasty underlying disease.
Most people consider hives to be more annoying than dangerous; however a hives rash can indeed be deadly if not treated properly! This is especially true if your hives outbreak is accompanied by a fever, swelling in the throat, wheezing, or shortness of breath. In fact, around 33% of hives suffers can also have swelling of the tongue and throat, which is known as angioedema, and is caused by swelling beneath the skin instead of on the surface. This type of swelling beneath the skin can also cause stomach pain and cramps which is typically quite painful. If you find that your hives rash is causing your breathing to become difficult and labored, you should seek immediate emergency treatment.
Know more about hives
Hives impose danger and can kill when breathing passages are all blocked. If you know you are subject to this kind of reaction, you should be under doctor’s care and have a readily available supply of epinephrine.
Epinephrine is a hormone that is chemically identical to the adrenaline produced by the body, and the names of the two are often used interchangeably to some extent. When produced naturally by the body, it helps us respond effectively to short-term stress. Epinephrine is also used as a drug to treat cardiac arrest, asthma, and allergic reactions, especially those which could be fatal if left untreated. The first time that epinephrine was produced artificially was in 1895 by a physiologist from Poland, named Napoleon Cybulski.
Skin issues such as rashes, itching and the presence of hives can all be dangerous, and it is typically advisable that a medical professional be contacted if someone taking benzonatate experiences such symptoms. Difficulty swallowing or slowness or difficulty breathing are also signs that need medical evaluation. People with chronic hives longer than six weeks or with severe acute hives should also see a doctor.