16 May 2013 - News
13 May 2013 - News
01 May 2013 - News
29 Apr 2013 - News
What is the HBEP?
The Healthy Built Environments Program (HBEP) is an exciting initiative of the UNSW BE, with funding of $1.5 million over 5 years from the NSW Ministry of Health, that brings the built environment and health together. As Australia faces increasing health costs from rising rates of obesity, diabetes and other lifestyle diseases, health workers are seeking to influence the design of cities to make them more supportive of healthy ways of living. Recent research has demonstrated links between modern epidemics and the way of life in cities. Car-dominated transport, reduced opportunities for exercise, increased fast food availability and lack of social connection are all implicated. Increasingly the health sector is focusing on prevention and to be effective, health professionals need to work in collaboration with other professional groups, such as those from the built environment.
The HBEP aims to revitalise the relationship between the built environment and health professions so that together we can create built environments that support people being healthy in their everyday lives.
Click on the links below to view our LuminoCity posters on the HBEP.
The Healthy Built Environments Program vision is that built environments will be planned, designed, developed and managed to promote and protect health for all people.
HBEP Focus Areas
The HBEP has three main areas of focus:
- Research – the HBEP fosters interdisciplinary research which is policy relevant. A major scholarly literature review has been completed which identifies gaps in current knowledge. A research strategy to prioritise key research questions has been developed.
- Education and Workforce Development – the HBEP delivers innovative, cross disciplinary education and capacity building. Workshops, seminars and interactive forums are delivered to health professionals in NSW. E-learning modules are provided. Educational approaches also build on the Faculty of the Built Environment's ‘Healthy Planning’ and 'Healthy Built Environments' courses. Postgraduate research students are engaged in significant healthy built environment projects.
- Leadership and Advocacy – the HBEP advocates for closer links between health and the built environment. This involves government and non-government agencies, the private sector and the community. There has been an emphasis on education through scholarly publications disseminating the latest research, popular media articles, talks and events.