August 16, 2010 |
MANGALORE: There are no surprises here. The fitness level among urban children is less than their counterparts in the rural set up. A pilot study done by the department of physiotherapy, Fr Muller Medical College , among 680 children has revealed that urban children spend more time in sedentary activities like watching television and playing video games than rural children, which has resulted in many ailments, chiefly obesity....
April 5, 2002 |
new delhi: with sedentary lifestyle figuring as one of the ten leading causes of death and disability in the world, who officials and experts from india on friday called the governments to focus on perpetuating healthy life styles. "every year globally about two million deaths can be attributed to physical inactivity and according to a who study, sedentary lifestyle increases mortality and doubles the risk of cardiovascular diseases, type 2 diabetes, and obesity," dr uton muchtar rafei, who regional director for south-east asia region, told reporters here ahead of the world health day, coming sunday.
October 11, 2010 |
CHANDIGARH: There are times when it is difficult to tuck in one's t-shirt as the bulging abdominal belly cannot allow it room for the same. It might not cause alarm at first, but it could go on to become a cause for concern. And the concern grows all the more when the waist to hip ratio exceeds 0.95 in case of men and 0.8 in women's case. Intake of fatty food, lots of cholesterol and lack of vitamins and minerals are the dietary factors that could cause the problem. A sedentary lifestyle could aggravate it. According to World Health Organization (WHO)
October 20, 2012 |
PUNE: More number of women suffer from osteoporosis than men. But considering it solely as a 'woman's disease' would not be wise, as it can be a significant threat to men's mobility and independence as well. Doctors say osteoporosis progresses silently without symptoms until a fracture occurs. Hence the causes, such as smoking and alcohol consumption, in men should not be ignored for a longer period. "Osteoporosis develops less often in men than in women because men have larger skeletons.
May 18, 2002 |
DHANBAD: For the first time in India, a doctor of Jharkhand has put the extensive resource material on diabetes prevention and cure in Hindi on the Mahaportal of Indian languages, run by Reliance group's website. Log on to www.netjaal.com and enter the homepage of Mahaportal of Indian languages. Then log on to www.hindi.netjaal/health/diabetes and know all about diabetes--its history, prevention and cure. "The need for first Hindi website on diabetes was long felt, particularly in our country, in view of the disease assuming epidemic proportions," pointed out Dr N K Singh, senior divisional medical officer, Eastern Railway, Dhanbad divison, who belongs to Jharkhand.
March 28, 2013 |
Impotence is emerging as a major cause of divorce in India, says a recent study, adding that around 20-30 per cent marriages in India are breaking up for want of satisfaction in sexual life. The study, conducted by Alpha One Andrology Group, an association of doctors dealing in sex-related problems in men, took into account nearly 2,500 Indian men suffering from erectile dysfunction or impotence. The study found that erectile dysfunction affects 50 percent of men over the age of 40 and 10 percent of men below 40. "The analysis revealed that of the 2,500 men suffering from erectile dysfunction, one in five were divorced while the marriages of one in 10 were on the verge of breaking over their physical health," Anup Dhir, a reconstruction surgeon and andrologist, said.
June 14, 2010 |
PUNE: Twenty-five-year-old Siddharth suffered from frequent diarrhoea that led to weight loss. His doctor found that he was gluten sensitive and advised him to shun wheat-related products and switch to jowar and bajra-based food. Gluten is a special protein found in wheat, rye and barley. A gluten sensitive person who may lose out on the goodness of wheat can get the benefits from brown rice, rice bran and millets like jowar and bajra, buckwheat and breads made from these products.
November 6, 2012 |
BANGALORE: If you love junk food, junk it. It's one of the primary reasons why heart diseases are striking the young. Thirty is the new 40, where cardiac ailments are concerned, according to a recent study by a team of Cardiological Society of India (CSI). The age of getting heart attacks has fallen from 40 to 30 in the last decade, revealed the study, 'Breaking the unbreakable plateau' . Apart from poor eating habits, a sedentary lifestyle and lack of exercise are the triggers for heart diseases . "Not only college students, even working professionals have adopted the ways of the modern lifestyle, and this has proved to be the instigator of heart diseases.
May 17, 2013 |
Health authorities from across the globe suggest that walking 10,000 steps a day helps keep the body & mind fit without the need for additional exercise. Walking is the best and most inexpensive form of exercise. It can help you lose weight, improve your blood circulation, uplift your mood and help you to sleep better. So ideally, between the first steps to the bathroom in the morning, to the last as we hit the sack at night, we should walk at least 10,000 steps which converts to approximately 8 kilometers.
January 30, 2009 |
Waking up feeling as exhausted as the night before? Slept eight hours, and still feeling tired? It may be because you're not getting enough "good sleep". Sleep is the body's recovery mechanism against daily wear and tear. The importance of getting sound and restful sleep can't be emphasized enough. Tossing, turning and waking up more than once during the night are signals that your body is not getting the kind of sleep it needs. To wake up feeling refreshed and calm each morning, try these easy tips to get out of the disturbed sleep rut. Bed basics : Opt for a comfortable bed. Dr Jayashree Rana, general physician, recommends, "Your bed should be firm, yet soft.