The following is extracted from an article in the Vermont Historical Gazetteer, vol. 4, part 2, pp. 883-884. Many of the names of the original patentees of the town of Worcester, VT (originally NH) in 1763 are found in the colonial history of Westfield, NJ, and the surrounding area. It appears that the colonial governor of NH had the authority to issue the patents, since Vermont wasn't separate at that time. What is less clear is why there would have been a grant of land to residents of NJ to found a town in VT, and what might have transpired to prevent the settling of the town until about 1803.
BY CHARLES C. ABBOTT.
in the N. W. of Washington Co., lat. 44 24', long. 4 25', is bounded N. and W. by
Elmore and Stowe, in Lamoille Co., S. by Middlesex, and E. by Calais. Who were
the first white men that visited the town is unknown. The French and Indians
passing from Canada to the older settlements on the Connecticut river, are said
to have had their trail through this town, but have left no record of their
names or of the place where. The town, with its present name and limits, was
chartered June 8, 1763, by Gov. Wentworth of N. H., to grantees: Joshua Mason
Joseph De Camp
Samuel De Camp
Isaac Noe, Jr.
Hon. James Nevin
Nathaniel Barrell, Esq.
Joseph Newmarsh, Esq.
Col. Samuel Barr
Maj. Joseph Blanchard
The charter was for 6 miles square, to be divided into 69 rights, or lots of 4 divisions each. The 1st division 1 acre, the 2d div. 3 acres, the 3d div. 38 acres, the 4th 7 acres. The 1 acre lots were laid out in the center of the town and are comprised in the farm now owned by Wm. H. Kellogg; the 7 acre lots, around this one, mostly on the west; the 38 acre lots on the west side of the town, adjoining Stowe. The Governor's right in the S. W. corner, and the 300 acre lots comprised the rest of the town. There is now no record of any meeting of the original grantees to be found, nor any conveyances from them; and there was much litigation in regard to land titles in the early history of the town. Much of the land is now held under titles from "tax collectors," having been sold for taxes.
Return to home page