The study found that the genetic sequencing data demonstrates that the Iceman had a very specific genetic mutation, namely that he was homozygous for the minor allele (GG) of rs10757274, located in chromosomal region
Two gene variants in a chromosomal region
known as 17q21 also marked out these children as more likely to be prescribed antibiotics as infants.
One chromosomal region
containing the dystrophin gene was found to be associated with the syndrome.
Conversely, if a chromosomal region
was commonly deleted, then a tumor suppressor gene was selected as the target of the FISH probe.
The loci of malignant osteopetrosis should fall on a homozygous chromosomal region
because the parents are consanguineous.
Those FZ progeny that contain donor DNA in the chromosomal region
of interest (identified using marker-assisted methods) are backcrossed to animals of the background strain.
A series of in situ carcinomas (ISCs) was also studied by separately assaying the benign adenomatous portion as well as the malignant portion to compare the frequency of LOH of this chromosomal region
in the 2 stages of the evolving neoplasm.
Men with a gene variant from each chromosomal region
plus a family history were 9.
Scientists in California homed in on a chromosomal region
previous studies had suggested might be involved in BMD regulation.
It is to be noted that although the terms 'genetic sequence', 'nucleotide sequence', 'genome sequence' and any other term involving or referring to DNA are retained in this discussion to match the usage in contemporary scientific literature, they should be taken to imply a chromosomal region
or a chromosomal sector, but not specifically the DNA structure that stores a program bit.
The next step is to look gene by gene through this very complicated chromosomal region
to figure out which specific one may be involved with autism.
The purpose of this research then is to explore GPR50, a gene located in chromosomal region
Xq28, for its possible involvement in X-Linked Mental Retardation (XLMR).