Current Events and News
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Provides publications, statistics, and information on diseases and other health topics.
Find out if a clinical trial exists for a topic of interest. Use the advanced search to limit to geographical area, type of study, age group, and more.
DIRLINE – Directory of Health Organizations
This is a searchable directory of health organizations.
Includes numerous links and completed evidence-based clinical reports on cancer and blood disorders, kidney conditions, lung conditions, dietary supplements, and more.
Provides access to databases, medical dictionaries, a medical encyclopedia, health and medical journals, and more.
National Guideline Clearinghouse
Includes evidence-based clinical practice guidelines.
National Institutes of Health
Provides links to all of the government health institutes. Of particular interest are the National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases (NIAMS) , the National Institute on Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering (NIBIB) , the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD) , and the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS).
Office of Rare Diseases
Provides access to current events and archived news articles, general information, genetics information, research and clinical trials, and research resources.
World Health Organization
Click here for a list of health topics for which information is provided. Includes international medical statistics here.
General Medical Information
Also see the government resources.
Centre for Evidence-Based Medicine
Includes downloadable PowerPoint presentations, evidence-based medicine tools, downloadable research articles, and information on courses and events.
Medscape Reference (formerly eMedicine)
Free registration allows one to view over 6,300 articles on diseases and conditions, over 2,100 drug monographs, more than 650 clinical procedures articles, and 70 anatomy articles.
CDC: Data and Statistics
This clearinghouse includes interactive tools, publications, vital statistics, statistics by topic, and an annual report on trends in health statistics.
HIT: Health Information Tennessee
Includes reports, tables, vital statistics, health facilities data, and county profiles.
National Center for Health Statistics
This statistical arm of the CDC provides vital statistics and statistics on disease classification, healthy people, minority health, injuries, and aging. Additional data is culled from data collection systems which include the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES), the National Health Care Survey (NHCS) , the National Health Interview Survey (NHIS), the National Survey of Family Growth (NSFG), and the State and Local Area Integrated Telephone Survey (SLAITS).