Special to The Sun
Golden eagles and pronghorn antelope, vultures and jackrabbits, cowboys and cattle herds, Paiute Indians and wild mustangs -- they were all part of the Old West. They didn't all fade away with the sunsets.
Malheur National Wildlife Refuge in Central Oregon is a big chunk of the West -- 185,000 acres. One of the prize jewels in the refuge system's collection, its size and diversity draw an eclectic mix of outdoor lovers. Birds have been the refuge's main attraction since it was established in 1908. Today it enjoys an international reputation among birdwatchers.
Malheur is south of Burns, Oregon. When you look at a map, you see a lot of unmarked space in the region. Harney County is big, the ninth largest county in the 48 contiguous states. It encompasses 10,000 square miles and has a population of 7,000. If you're looking for a place to get away from it all, if you want to see and feel what the Old West was like, look no further.
Malheur Refuge is an oasis in an otherwise arid landscape. It includes Malheur, Mud and Harney lakes, and the upper Blitzen River Valley. The river is fed and replenished by Steens Mountain. Malheur was originally set aside to protect a nesting colony of egrets, herons, cormorants and ibis. These birds with the long, flowing feathers were victims of the millinery trade. Their plumes were used to trim ladies' hats.
Today the refuge is rimarily managed for nesting and migratory birds. It is made up of large deep-water marshes, grassy meadows, alkaline lakes, greasewood flats, manmade ponds, sagebrush and juniper uplands, and basalt cliffs. This mix of habitat is excellent for ducks, marsh birds, sandhill cranes, pelicans, shorebirds, trumpeter swans, raptors and songbirds. In short, Malheur is a birdwatcher's paradise.
Refuge Headquarters is 32 miles south of Burns, 45 minutes away. It is impossible to drive it in less than an hour; two would be better. When we drove it, our car kept coming to sudden stops. A Swainson's hawk was perched on a roadside utility pole. Willetts kept flying up on either side of the road, sometimes joined by a long-billed curlew. Yellow-headed and red-winged blackbirds topped every fence post. California quail and killdeer claimed territorial rights above the roadside ditches.
Overhead, turkey vultures rode the morning thermals while strings of white-faced ibis flew in all directions, as if they couldn't decide where they wanted to go. Just as the Headquarters' buildings came into view, a family of great
horned owls were spotted sitting on an old log near the road. Only the knowledge that warblers, tanagers and who knows what else were feeding in the trees around the distant buildings kept us going.
The attractive stone buildings were built in the '40s by CCC (Civilian Conservation Corps) employees. In addition to the offices and maintenance buildings, a small museum houses a collection of mounted birds and animals found on refuge lands. Plans are under way for an interpretive center, including a boardwalk through the large marsh overlooked by the offices.
Malheur's natural beauty and abundant wildlife are entwined with the area's history. Not only did the riproaring days of the Old West have a hand in its creation, but the region's ancient history affects today's refuge
Sand dunes near Harney Lake cover a major archaeological site. Refuge archaeologists working in the dunes walk in and supplies are carried on horses. No vehicles are allowed on the fragile ground. This is one of many such sites known do exist on the refuge.
Malheur is possibly he best of our wildlife refuges when it comes to archaeological finds. Native Americans have lived in this part of Oregon since 10,000 B.C., and today
refuge personnel and the Burns Paiute are working together uncovering ancient campgrounds and burial sites. Where cattle once grazed, they now are restricted. Grajing isn't allowed on or near archaeological digs.
You can't set foot on Malheur Refuge without eventually hearing the name Peter French. He settled in the Blitzen Valley in 1872, weathered droughts and storms, fought Indians, and grew rich on his herds of cattle and horses. Today, his 132,000-acre P Ranch is a large chunk of the refuge. A bullet ended French's life in 1897, but remnants of his colorful era can be seen today in the hamlet of Frenchglen.
There's no television, no phones, and no alarm clocks at the Frenchglen Hotel. Guests are awakened by crowing roosters. Early morning birdwatchers gather for breakfast around two long oak tables laden with enough food for a three-day cattle drive. The largest cowboy coffee pot ever made makes the rounds among those gathered on the cookhouse benches.
Birders are joined by fishermen, hikers and bikers, outdoor photographers, wildflower students and others who come to enjoy the magnificent views and vistas this region
is famous for.
Hitching rails scattered on either side of the road through Frenchglen attest to the fact that this is still cowboy country. "Open Range" signs shouldn't be ignored as it isn't uncommon to encounter a local rancher's cattle drive. An old country store, small schoolhouse, and a handful of houses complete Frenchglen's image. It has been described as the "end of the road." It's really a stop on the highway that takes you into the Steens Mountain region and the high mountain Alvord Desert.
Like the Refuge, the Steens is a major attraction for this region. There is a 66-mile Steens Mountain Loop Road that is an all-day trip. It begins and ends at Frenchglen. Its highest point is reached at 9,700 feet above sea level, making it Oregon's highest mountain road. You pass through eight distinct vegetation zones on the way. The wildflowers, birds, animals and views create the perfect adventure for anyone loving unspoiled landscapes and wide open spaces. Whether in a car, on a bike or hiking, visitors will see arid sagebrush, western juniper, mountain mahogany, mountain big sagebrush, quaking aspen, sub-alpine meadow, snow cover zone and sub alpine grassland.
This is the land of golden eagles, turkey vultures, hawks, mule deer, pronghorn antelope, California bighorn sheep and Rocky Mountain elk. The region also includes the South Steens Wild Horse Herd Management Area. This part of Oregon is the home of the Bureau of Land Management's (BLM) Wild Horse Adoption Program. The Steens Herd is known for its colorful pintos and palominos.
Because of snow and spring rains that create muddy road conditions, the entire Steens loop isn't passable before July 4. This year was no exception. Eastern Oregon's six-year drought came to an end. Both Malheur Refuge and the surrounding environs are green, green, green, and snow still caps the Steens.
When the entire loop isn't open, it is possible to drive close to the mountains from the backside, 10 miles south of Frenchglen. On this part of the loop, you drive through mountain sagebrush country and the Steens seems close enough to touch.
One factor only limits your enjoyment of Malheur and this part of Oregon -- time. The days go too fast. There is always more to see, more to photograph, and at the same time, everything says, "relax, go slow, stay awhile and enjoy nature." More than once during your stay, you will stand on some cliff, butte or mountain, and gaze at a vast sweep to the West, flowing to the distant horizon.
Vultures ride the thermals above and below you, wildflowers tremble in the breeze. In the juniper trees and along the red cliff walls, the wind moans as it has forever. There is a quiet untouched by artificial sounds.
Malheur, a special place in the Northwest, is easy to get to. Once there, the rest of the world is thousands of miles away.