Anger is a normal human emotion!
It can be caused by anything from a friend’s annoying behaviour to worries about personal problems or memories of a troubling life event.
When handled in a positive way, anger can help people stand up for themselves and fight injustices. On the other hand, anger can lead to violence and injury when not addressed positively
What is anger?
Anger is an emotional state that can range from mild irritation to intense fury and rage. Feelings of anger actually produce physical changes in the body such as increased heart rate, blood pressure, and adrenaline. When does anger become a problem?
Laws, social norms, and just plain common sense tell us not to lash out physically or verbally every time something irritates us. Otherwise, we could hurt others and ourselves.
What are some ways to deal with anger?
Some people choose to ignore or bottle up anger, but this approach may actually cause more harm because the root problem is never addressed. Instead, try to manage anger so it can become a more positive emotion.
Here are some ideas:
Relax. Breathe deeply from your diaphragm (your belly, not your chest) and slowly repeat a calming word or phrase like "take it easy." Think of relaxing experiences, such as sitting on a beach or walking through a forest.
Think positively. Remind yourself that the world is not out to get you, but rather you’re just experiencing some of the rough spots of daily life.
Problem-solve. Identify the specific problem that is causing the anger and approach it head-on––even if the problem does not have a quick solution.
Communicate with others. Angry people tend to jump to conclusions. Slow down and think carefully about what you want to say. Listen carefully to what the other person is saying. At times, criticism may actually be useful to you.
Manage stress. Make sure to set aside personal time to deal with the daily stresses of work activities, and family.
Listening to music
Writing in a journal
Talking about your feelings with someone you trust.
Change the scene. Maybe a change of environment would help reduce angry feelings. For example, if your friends are angry frequently and/or make you angry, consider making some new ones who may contribute more to your self-confidence and well-being.
Counselling, Hypnotherapy and Emotional Freedom Technique really can make a huge difference. It helps you understand why you behave the way you do. What your particular triggers are and helps you find a solution, so that anger does not dominate your life or the life of people around you. This leads to better relationships and better health.