Our Fiction collection's imaginative and inspirational works tell tales of human culture--The people, places, and events that define humanity. Why Fiction
We generally define “fiction” as a literary creation based on imagination rather than fact. However, the word derives from an ancient Latin root that means “to make by shaping.” So it is that fiction, in the guise of allegories and parables, is commonly used by spiritual masters to direct their cultures toward enlightenment. The bible is filled with such fables. Campfire teachings of aboriginal wise ones also relied on the power of myth to convey essential precepts to their students.
Surely, the shaping of society would be better accomplished through serious discourse than via flights of fancy.
Or would it? You see fiction’s power lies in its implausibility. In order to engage in a fictional tale, we must first suspend our culturally imposed assumptions of what is true. Thereafter, we listen with unfettered ears. We see through untrammeled eyes. And our hearts embrace possibilities that are otherwise unthinkable when perceived through the limitations of fact-based “reality.” Thus unhindered, the human soul is free to peruse the extraordinary.
It’s no wonder, then, that our most heroic aspirations spring from this medium of conscious disbelief… that our greatest inventions come from the realms of “what if”… and our highest visions for humanity often begin with “once upon a time.” Dare I suggest that today’s fiction may be tomorrow’s promise?
Award Winning Author
— Kitty Roxanna Connell
The Last Guardian
Run away… run away and hide! the voice in her head screamed. Summoning every ounce of power and courage Mienya possessed, she manipulated her own energy to flare around her. Learn more
Add to Cart
Lorcan's Bane: a tale of peril & the right use of magic
Kitty Roxanna Connell
Eight hundred years ago and half a world away, Mirren gives little thought to the new religion. She is a healer and mystic for whom magic is the natural result of her kinship with Earth
Out of Print
Cries of a Dying Nation
The nations of Atlantis prepare for the impending arrival of the warrior race from Anu. Forewarned by the spiritual beings that protect and guide the world of Gaia Learn more
Add to Cart
Gift of the Lotus Flower
The Saga of the last thirty years of Atlantis continues as the temple children enter into the awkwardness and insecurity of adolescence. The nations of Gaia have grown desperate Learn more
Add to Cart