The Stereo Pair 3D Measurement process allows you to select a common point from two stereo images and calculate an elevation value for that point.There are three steps in creating a DEM that are crucial to generating acceptable results: epipolar image creation, image matching, and DEM geocoding.
Epipolar Image Creation - The creation of epipolar images is an essential processing step in DEM extraction. Epipolar geometry describes the geometrical constraint between two frame images of a stereo pair. It represents the fact that a ground point and the two optical centers lie on the same plane. This means that for a given point in one image, its conjugate point in the other image must lie on a known line in the second image. By creating epipolar images, the search space for finding corresponding image points in automatic image matching is reduced. For information about building epipolar images for the use with DEM Extraction Wizard, see Building Epipolar Images.
Image Matching - Image matching finds the conjugate points on both the left and right images which correspond to the same ground feature. The output of the image matching procedure is called a parallax image, in which the x-coordinate difference (along epipolar lines) between the left and right image is stored and is used to build the DEM. Thus, the quality of image matching largely determines the quality of the output DEM.
DEM Geocoding - DEM geocoding re-projects the DEM from the epipolar projection to the user-specified output map projection and units. This step involves the filling of failed pixels and the resampling to a pixel spacing specified by the user. When GCPs are provided, the absolute orientation of the computed terrain model is performed in this step.
Tererra Incorporated has integrated newest hardware technologies together with custom operating system enhancements to deliver an accelerated storage solution that is very cost effective. Many companies would like to invest heavily in 10G, 40G, or even 56G network topographies in 2015 and 2016. This customer demand also requires a cost effective storage solution which can handle these speeds. Switch manufacturers are making this a cost effective investment with newest pricing strategies and affordable switches and network cards. Storage manufacturers however, are not effectively targeting cust..
The Tererra Network provides enhanced ISP services, and provides a single fully integrated connectivity solution. The Tererra Network is a world spanning Ethernet/IP network that runs over our privately managed network infrastructure along with its other network products including StratofLash storage, Stratorender GPU rendering, SDN/MPS, Ethernet and Wave Division Multiplexing services.
The Tererra Network works as a community of interest network, enabling all its members to predictably control the distribution of data delivery between customer sites in a way that would otherwise only be ac..
We are pleased to announce the complete and 100% cloud free data over all of the European Union in 2016. The data has been amassed through five years of mapping and project work. It is delivered as GeoTIFF on more than 10TB of hard drives, with a WGS84 and Geodetic datum and projection. We can grid-n-tile the data as you like, in a variety of geospatial file formats.
EarthOnDrive/WavGen have recently partnered with Battlespace Simulatons Inc., to provide a rich geospatial data environment using 15m Landsat Imagery, and very high resolution CONUS aerial imagery for tactical and ground based military and defense simulations. GIS-enabled: Pan, Scale or Zoom anywhere on Earth. Support for all the most common GIS formats, including NGA's aeronautical charts (GNC, JNC, ONC, TPC) in CADRG format; GeoTiff and Vector formats (VPF and SHP).
BSI provides world-class, PC-based simulation solutions, including MACE, the flagship product providing computer g..