The idea was spearheaded by a number of individuals who have been working with Victoria's Principal Larry Elwell to make plans a reality for several weeks.
Once completed, the garden will be used as a teaching tool to encourage pupils to eat healthfully, learn how to maintain a garden, serve low-income families and feed the school's student body, said organizers.
The garden - 83 x 83 feet - was going to be done by participants in Victoria's afterschool program.
But once Sherry Edwards, district liaison for the THINK Together after school program for the Redlands Unified School District, saw its condition, plans were sent into another direction.
"I had no idea how bad a shape it was until we were there. And it's big and it's way overgrown," she said.
Edwards and others behind the project reached out to a few friends for support, including Larry Jacinto, owner of Jacinto Farms.
The longtime business owner and friend of the community will provide the project with removal services, while a member of Americorp and Jacinto's grandson, Jacob Orland, also will lend a hand.
Orland, a 14-year-old Redlands East Valley High School student had been looking for a garden project to earn his Eagle Scout project.
His mom and Jacinto's daughter, LaRee, asked those working with the project and asked if Jacob could help.
Since the garden's needs did not meet the Eagle Scout project requirements - the project was too big of a task to undertake by the teen himself - his Scout troop agreed that if he worked on a portion of the garden he would be eligible to earn the Eagle Scout ranking.
"When it gets to the point when the land is glad, that's when his project starts," said LaRee.
"His project is to put in the underground plumbing, irrigation, spread all the mulch and plant a few orange trees," his mom said.
LaRee said she is impressed her dad and her son and others are working to restore the garden.
After his grandson's work is complete, Jacinto will return to the garden and plant additional plants she said.
"I'm impressed (Jacob) is taking on such a big task. It ended up being a bigger deal than we thought it would be, but he's excited to work on it with his grandpa," LaRee said. "I'm amazed how well he's catching on with the steps he needs and the amount of organization. He's on it."
Jacob said he had one additional goal for the garden - he wants it to be a place where students can go, sit and be in nature and learn.
The teen will be in charge of delegating responsibilities to volunteers when his time comes around. He is not allowed to pick up a shovel and plant, per Eagle Scout requirements.
"The whole challenge is you have to lead everyone else to do it," Jacob said. "I have to oversee that my plan is going into action. I'm excited and it's going to be interesting to see how it turns out when I'm done."
Also lending a hand with the effort is Victoria Seventh-day Adventist Church in Loma Linda and local chef Lee Burton, Edwards said.
Burton will teach children how to prepare healthful meals using the vegetables and additional resources from the garden, and a nutrition expert with Loma Linda University Medical Center will work with them on the nutrition side of things, she said.
"I can't begin to tell you how fortunate we are, seeing more and more people come together," Edwards said. "I've never been so excited to get my hands dirty."
Those organizing the project are also seeking donations - both time and monetary - as well as grants from local organizations and stores.
A clean-up effort will be held on Oct. 27 at the school as part of National Make a Difference Day.
Volunteers are being sought and can call 909-503-1070 ext. 7108 to sign-up.
Victoria Elementary is at 1505 Richardson St. in San Bernardino, and is part of the Redlands Unified School District.
Reach Kristina via email, call her at 909-793-3221, or on Twitter @TheFactsKris