Kid’s Dental of Colorado believes children and teens can benefit from the enamel-strengthening properties of regular fluoride treatments. Fluoride is a mineral medically endorsed by the dental community for treating and reversing the adverse effects of tooth decay. Working fluoride into a dental plan can significantly reduce the risk of cavities in your child.
What Is Fluoride?
Fluoride is an element found naturally in the earth, in food and in water. It is commonly added to community water supplies in the United States and drastically improves the dental health of the members of those communities. Fluoride also is added to toothpaste and mouthwash products, due to its beneficial effects.
How Does Fluoride Help Teeth?
During the day, children consume all types of foods and drinks. Many of these substances contain sugar and become stuck on or in between teeth. If it is not removed quickly, the sugar feeds bacterial growth on the surfaces of teeth, creating plaque and acids that eat away at the enamel that protects the inner parts of each tooth. This process is called demineralization and leads to tooth decay.
Fluoride can stop demineralization in its tracks. When fluoride is consumed or applied directly to the decayed area, it rebuilds the enamel protection. This is called remineralization. It is best to use fluoridated products before tooth decay occurs to help prevent the chance of damage, but fluoride consumed at any point in the decay process can restore children’s teeth to good health.
Who Benefits from Fluoride Treatments?
Everyone benefits from the added support and protection fluoride provides, but children with severe tooth decay or a family history of repeated cavities will see the most drastic difference. As children’s teeth develop, fluoride is a useful ally in preserving both primary and adult teeth as they erupt and grow.
Explore Our Treatment Options
Kid’s Dental can apply fluoride topically to your children’s teeth in either a foam or gel in our office during regular cleaning appointments. Chewable fluoride tablets can also be prescribed to increase the child’s daily intake of the mineral.
Our dental team will offer recommendations as to the best fluoridated toothpaste and mouthwash, depending on your child’s age and needs. Fluoride is completely safe when administered in moderate, select amounts, according to the condition of the teeth. Trust Kid’s Dental to provide excellent fluoride treatment service for your family throughout their growing years.