Battle of Fornost
|Battle of Fornost|
|Conflict: Angmar War|
|Date: T.A. 1975|
|Place: In the plain between Nenuial and Fornost, and later somewhere north near the lands of Angmar|
|Outcome: Decisive victory for the Allies, and the complete destruction of Angmar's forces|
Elves, Men, and a few Hobbits
Orcs, Evil Men, Trolls, other creatures
Orcs, Evil Men, Trolls, and other evil creatures
Total destruction of the Angmar forces, except the Witch-king
In T.A. 1409, the Witch-king of Angmar invaded the kingdom of Arnor. After centuries of conflict, in 1974, Arthedain (the last remnant of Arnor) was destroyed in the Fall of Fornost by the Witch-king's armies. Its remaining forces fled west over the river Lune into the realm of Lindon, and its last king, Arvedui, perished in the Icebay of Forochel in 1975.
However, in T.A. 1973 messages were sent to King Eärnil II of Gondor that they were in great straits, and that Angmar was preparing its final assault. The King sent his son Prince Eärnur, with a fleet of ships to Lindon to aid the northern Dunedain. But it was too late. Before the fleet reached Lindon, two years later, Arthedain had fallen and its people were taking refuge in the Grey Havens.
When Eärnur reached the Havens there was much joy and wonder among Elves and Men. So many ships came that the fleet could barely find harborage, even after filling Forlond, Harlond, and the Havens; and from them issued a host of Gondor. To the Elves and Men of the north seemed like a vast host, when in fact it was just a small force compared to the full might of Gondor. Not just Gondorian soldiers came, many were also from the realm of Rhovanion with their horses from the Vales of Anduin. Círdan, Lord of Lindon, summoned all who would fight from both his realm and the remnants of the Dúnedain of the North. When all the preparations were finished this allied host of Gondor, Lindon, and Arthedain marched east across the river Lune to challenge Witch-king. He was dwelling in Fornost, which was populated with his minions, usurping the house and rule of the kings.
News of their march soon came to the Witch-king. In his pride he sent his men out to meet them instead of waiting for battle within the fortress-like city, thinking he could drive them back over the Lune as before. The Allies had passed over the southern Hills of Evendim and they met the forces of Angmar on the plains between Nenuial and Fornost. A great battle ensued. When Angmar forces began to retreat back to Fornost out of the north came the main body of the Allies' horsemen, which had passed around the hills to come down and scatter the enemy in a rout. The Witch-king, with all that he could rally, fled north to the lands of Angmar. Before he could make it safely to his old fortress of Carn Dûm he was overtaken by the cavalry of Gondor with Prince Eärnur at its head. Simultaneously a force led by Glorfindel came up out of Rivendell. These two forces so utterly crushed the host of Angmar that not single a Man or Orc of that realm remained west of the Misty Mountains.
However, when all was lost the Witch-king appeared, singled out Eärnur, and rode upon him with a cry. The Prince could have withstood him but his horse was so frightened that, while baring him, fled far away before he could master it. As the Witch-king laughed at this, Glorfindel rode up on his white horse, and in mid laugh the Witch-king fled into the darkness of the night. After hundreds of years the war was over. Eärnur returned, and the Elf-lord said: "Do not pursue him! He will not return to this land. Far off yet is his doom, and not by the hand of man will he fall".
The North was freed from the evil of realm of Angmar. But since Arthedain had been destroyed those Dúnedain that remained became the Rangers of the North, with their first chieftain being Aranarth son of King Arvedui.
The Witch-king eventually made it to Mordor in 1980, where he gathered the Nazgûl. In T.A. 2000 they besieged Minas Ithil and two years later took it. In 2043, the Witch-king sent a challenge to Eärnur who had become king that same year, but the challenge was ignored. Years later in 2050 a second challenge was sent, and this time Eärnur accepted. He rode alone to Minas Ithil, now Minas Morgul, and was never seen again. Following the loss of this last king the realm of Gondor was then ruled by the Stewards.
- ↑ J.R.R. Tolkien, The Lord of the Rings, "Prologue", "Concerning Hobbits"
- ↑ 2.0 2.1 J.R.R. Tolkien, The Lord of the Rings, Appendix B, "The Third Age"
- ↑ 3.0 3.1 J.R.R. Tolkien, The Lord of the Rings, Appendix A, "The Númenorean Kings", "Eriador, Arnor, and the Heirs of Isildur"
- ↑ 4.0 4.1 J.R.R. Tolkien, The Lord of the Rings, Appendix A, "The Númenorean Kings", "Gondor and the Heirs of Anárion"