This is a drawing of the interior of Uranus.
Image from: The New Solar System
A Look at the Inside of Uranus
The Giant planets do not have the same kind of layers inside that the earth-like planets do. The history of the giant planets was so different that they formed with much more gas on the inside.
Uranus is made of ice.
Motions inside Uranus help form the magnetosphere of Uranus. Heat from within Uranus helps to make unusual winds in the atmosphere.
Shop Windows to the Universe Science Store!
Our online store
includes issues of NESTA's quarterly journal, The Earth Scientist
, full of classroom activities on different topics in Earth and space science, as well as books
on science education!
You might also be interested in:
The giant planets have definitely changed since their formation. But how much remains to be seen. Most of the original air of the giant planets remains in place. (The earth-like planets lost most of their...more
Motions in the interior of a planet help carry heat from the inside to the outside. The drawing to the left illustrates the kind of movements that happen in interior of a planet. Material rises from the...more
The picture shows places on Jupiter which are hot. Jupiter is a very warm place, as shown in the picture, sort of like a warm log in the fireplace which gives off heat. Unlike Jupiter, Uranus is like a...more
Motions in the interior of a gas-giant planet such as Uranus may be very different from the motions within the Earth. A second idea for the motions in the interior of a gas-giant planet is shown in this...more
Uranus' atmosphere is made of methane, a medium sized molecule. At the uppermost reaches of the atmosphere, methane gas breaks apart due to energy from the sun and from the magnetosphere. The remins of...more
The plain bluegreen face of Uranus shows that Uranus is made of of only one thing. Beside clouds, there is also smog. Uranus' atmosphere is still forming. Motions in the cloud patterns indicate that, like...more
Uranus has // Call the moon count function defined in the document head print_moon_count('uranus'); interesting moons and a ring system. At Uranus there is even a half ring, or "ring arc". The moons are...more
The Giant planets do not have the same kind of layers inside that the earth-like planets do. The history of the giant planets was so different that they formed with much more gas on the inside. Uranus...more