|Origin:||crédit, from Italian, from Latin creditum 'something given to someone to keep safe, loan', from credere; CREDENCE|
cred‧it1 S2 W2
an arrangement with a shop, bank etc that allows you to buy something and pay for it later
Most new cars are bought on credit.
stores offering interest-free credit (=credit with no interest charges)
a credit agreement
What's the credit limit on your Visa card?
credit facilities (=the opportunity to buy something on credit)
approval or praise that you give to someone for something they have done
Credit for this win goes to everybody in the team.
They never give Gene any credit for all the extra work he does.
take/claim/deserve etc (the) credit
She deserves credit for trying her best.
to somebody's credit (=used to say that someone has done something good)
To Jamie's credit, he remained calm.
Credit must go to Fiona for making sure everything ran smoothly.
3 also do somebody/something credit
to behave so well or be so successful that your family, team etc are proud of you:
She's a credit to her profession.
Your children really do you credit.
to have achieved something:
She already has two successful novels to her credit.
if you are in credit, there is money in your bank account:
There are no bank charges if you stay in credit.
a list of all the people involved in making a film or television programme, which is shown at the beginning or end of it
used to talk about the good things about someone or something:
On the credit side, the book is extremely well-researched.
used to say that someone deserves to be praised for the good things they have done
(give) credit where credit is due
a successfully completed part of a course at a university or college:
I don't have enough credits to graduate.
an amount of money that is put into someone's bank account or added to another amount [≠ debit]:
amount of money[countable]
The company promised to provide credits to customers who had been charged too much.
the belief that something is true or correct:
The witness's story gained credit with the jury.