The military district in Tennessee which shows on most historical maps is actually District #2–along the Cumberland River where it first crosses the present TN-KY boundary all the way west to the spot where the Cumberland turns north back into KY.
At the time District #2 was created, the Tennessee-Kentucky boundary line did not exist as it does today. Tennessee extended well north and included the areas that would eventually become Allen, Simpson, and Warren counties (among others) in Kentucky. Actually, the TN-KY line was not finalized until many years later, when TN citizens discovered that they now lived in KY and were given a choice which state they wanted to conduct their legal business in.
This district includes the Red River with branches beginning across the current KY boundary line in old Simpson county, as well as in Sumner county TN. These branches join to form the Red River. And it eventually empties into the Cumberland in present-day Montgomery county TN (originally Davidson county).
Military District #1 was created in 1780 as a military reserve by North Carolina to award lands in lieu of pay to soldiers who served from NC in the Revolutionary War. It lay between the Powell and Holston Rivers along the Clinch in East Tennessee and may have originally crossed the current Virginia boundary line. These rivers joined to form the great Tennessee River.
District #2 was created in 1783 by North Carolina for two reasons:
- Military District #1 was inadequate to supply enough land to fill all the claims that were submitted.
- A substantial area in District #1 became involved in what is known as the Glasgow Land Frauds and grants ceased for a time, to allow for investigation into the charges and claims arising from those charges.
See my Genealogy News Sheet Blog on Genealogy Evidence, Monday August 21, 2006: Exact Proof: Little-Known and Never-Used Military Records for more details and a short bibliography of source materials to document your ancestors in these military districts. There is also a checklist of Bounty-Land Records, revised in my blog of 28 Feb 2008.
Your favorite Tennessee genealogist, Arlene Eakle http://arleneeakle.com
PS Watch for my cute and clever tee shirts, mugs, and tote bags–you will surely want something with my picture on it! HA!