Flora refers to
the plant life that can be found in a specific region. There are many different kinds of flora from the six different
Natural Regions in Alberta. The climate and geography of each Natural Region
defines what will grow in it.
The Boreal Forest exists as a nearly continuous belt of
trees across Alberta. Aspen and Balsam Poplar
are the dominant tree species, but Evergreens, Jack
Pine, and Spruce are plentiful as well. Commonly seen
flowers and small plants in the region have whimsical
names, like Marsh Reed Grass, Rusty Peat Moss, Foxtail
Barley, Sweet-scented Bedstraw and Low-bush Cranberry,
and are adapted well to growing in shade, underneath
The Parklands occupy the region
between the Boreal Forest and the Grasslands in Alberta.
The area is considered to be an
or area of transition, as the aspen groves are in a
constant state of competition with the grasslands for
supremacy of the region. It is also populated with plants like
the Saskatoon berry, Common Flat-brocade, Beaked Willow, June Grass, and Black Eyed
are made up flat low rolling plains with the main flora consisting of
Dry Mixed grass,
Foothills Fescue. You will also find Silver Sagebrush, Blue Grama Grass,
Golden Aster, Cushion Cactus, and Greasewood. These
plants typically grow low to the ground to shield
themselves from the prairie wind.
The Canadian Shield in Alberta covers the surface in the most northeasterly
part of the province. Precambrian rocks create a
landscape of lakes and marshy depressions. The flora, often rooted into
rock, includes Pale Reindeer Lichens, Dusty Green Sage, and
The flora of the Foothills include
the Lodgepole Pine, Aspen, and Evergreen trees, as well
as the Prickly rose, Wild Lily of the Valley, Bunchberry, Slender
Hair-cap Moss, and Labrador Tea.
In the Rocky Mountain Region, you can find
a diverse range of species: White Spruce, Englmann Spruce,
Stair-step Moss, the Common blueberry, Flattened Snow Lichen, Western Course Wort,
Heart-leaved Arnica, Bearberry, and Rough Hair Grass.
These flora are tough and hardy, capable of withstanding
the extreme conditions of high altitudes. They can grow
in very little soil and shield themselves from the
elements by growing close to the ground or rock face.