From junior kindergarten through eighth grade, students at MHCS experience a challenging academic curriculum that is grounded in biblical principles and delivered in an environment that is loving, encouraging, and supportive. Our program of study is designed to inculcate core values while maintaining academic integrity. Results from standardized tests and from high school placements confirm the academic success our students enjoy. In addition to the subject-specific content included in the state educational framework, MHCS students also participate in Spanish, technology, and fine arts. If you would like to review the textbooks we use or see an overview the specific curriculum for any grade level, please contact our Admission Director and schedule a tour.
Accelerated Reader is a reading incentive program for our 1st-5th grade students that encourages them to read more and better quality books using a reading point system with goals and prizes to motivate. This fun program has been proven to boost student academic performance. Students can log in and earn point in their classrooms.
This math enrichment program will challenge students to become active problem solvers with weekly practice that focuses on building mastery of essential skills while promoting critical thinking. Students in grades K through 4 are invited to participate in this program which is integrated with classroom instruction.
Educational specialists agree that children should begin learning a foreign language as early as possible. MHCS employs a full-time Spanish teacher who leads Spanish classes for all students in grades 1-6. Our elementary Spanish program strategically introduces core Spanish vocabulary words and phrases through songs and games. Junior high students are required to take one year of Spanish in eighth grade to prepare for high school level foreign language.
For students to become proficient in the use of technology as an educational tool they need to know much more than how to write reports using the computer. Our technology program includes internet and operating system basics, graphics, word processing, spreadsheets, databases, multimedia, desktop publishing, and web page design. Students learn to use technology in their classrooms and not just in a lab setting. MHCS has a classroom set of wireless notebook computers that students use to create projects and complete assignments that integrate technology with specific classroom objectives and standards. Our upper grade and junior high classrooms are equipped projectors and interactive Promethean Boards and Smart Boards that allow teachers to incorporate technology into their everyday instruction. Junior high students also have the option of a digital animation elective class that incorporates both art and technology skills.
Fine arts is a valued component of our educational program. MHCS has a Fine Arts Director who teaches music to grades JK-6. Students are involved in both vocal music and an introduction to instrumental music. Primary students work with a variety of percussion instruments, while our third and fourth graders work with recorders, and our fifth and sixth graders use hand chimes. The MHCS fine arts department proudly sponsors an after-school musical theater program that produces two musicals each year. Students in grades 1-8 are invited to participate in these musicals. Additionally, fifth and sixth grade students have extra-curricular opportunities including the Singing Saints, a contemporary worship team and performance group. Junior high students have the opportunity to participate in the junior high worship team in addition to electives that include drawing, art essentials, theater arts, and digital animation. Further, private, extra-curricular Instrumental lessons in piano, violin, and guitar are available on campus for an additional fee. MHCS piano students participate in a yearly piano festival hosted by the Association of Christian Schools International (ACSI).
MHCS participates in a number of academic competitions sponsored by the Association of Christian Schools International (ACSI). In any given year, students may compete in speech meets, spelling bees, creative writing festivals, math Olympics, and more.