Simply begin typing or use the editing tools above to add to this article.
Once you are finished and click submit, your modifications will be sent to our editors for review.
measurement in meteorology
One weakness common to virtually all satellite-borne sensors and to some ground-based radars that use UHF/VHF waves is an inability to measure thin layers of the atmosphere. One such layer is the tropopause, the boundary between the relatively dry stratosphere and the more meteorologically active layer below. This is often the region of the jet streams. Important information about these kinds...
...temperature gradient—i.e., a temperature decline with altitude—of roughly 6 °C (10.8 °F) per km through the troposphere. At the top of the troposphere, which is called the tropopause, temperatures have fallen to about −80 °C (−112 °F). The troposphere is the region where nearly all water vapour exists and essentially all weather occurs.
The top of the troposphere, called the tropopause, corresponds to the level in which the pattern of decreasing temperature with height ceases. It is replaced by a layer that is essentially isothermal (of equal temperature). In the tropics and subtropics, the tropopause is high, often reaching to about 18 km (11 miles), as a result of vigorous vertical mixing of the lower atmosphere by...
lowest region of the atmosphere, bounded by the Earth beneath and the stratosphere above, with its upper boundary being the tropopause, about 10–18 km (6–11 miles) above the Earth’s surface. The troposphere is characterized by decreasing temperature with height and is distinguished from the overlying stratosphere by a region of nearly constant temperature in the lower stratosphere....
upper-level wind movement
...vary with height. The characteristics of upper-level wind systems vary according to season and latitude and to some extent hemisphere and year. Wind speeds are strongest in the midlatitudes near the tropopause and in the mesosphere.
...to the left and right just downstream and upstream, respectively, and sinking motion is found to the right and left just downstream and upstream, respectively. Jets tend to be strongest near the tropopause where the horizontal temperature gradient reverses.
What made you want to look up "tropopause"? Please share what surprised you most...