Science and Technology Innovation Program
The Wilson Center's new Project on Emerging Nanotechnologies will study the potential health and environmental implications of nanotechnology products. Developments from this cutting-edge science will increasingly affect our everyday lives, from medicines to consumer products to new energy sources.
According to Andrew Maynard, chief science advisor for the Wilson Center's Project on Emerging Nanotechnologies, a project created in partnership with The Pew Charitable Trusts, the release of Approaches to Safe Nanotechnology: An Information Exchange with NIOSH and Strategic Plan for NIOSH Nanotechnology Research: Filling the Knowledge Gaps is a small but important step forward by the U.S. government to address the possible health implications of nanotechnology.
A new study shows Americans are excited about the prospects of nanotechnology, but concerned about its potential health and environmental effects.
Internationally-recognized environmental scientist Barbara Karn has joined the Project on Emerging Nanotechnologies. Dr. Karn will focus on innovative ways to apply the principles of "green" chemistry and "green" engineering to nanotechnology.
A new study released by the Wilson Center's Project on Emerging Nanotechnologies, a project created in partnership with The Pew Charitable Trusts, reveals that while Americans welcome new potential life-saving and -enhancing applications promised by nanotechnology, they voice concern over its potential long-term human health and environmental effects and the ability of government and the private sectors to manage such risks.
The newly launched Project on Emerging Nanotechnologies announced today that two U.S. government experts are joining the Project---Andrew Maynard, Ph.D., an internationally recognized authority on the health implications of nanotechnology and Julia A. Moore, senior advisor in the National Science Foundation's Office of International Science and Engineering.
In partnership with the Pew CharitableTrusts, the Wilson Center will work with industry, academia, NGOs, and others to explore the future of nanotechnologies and their implications for the environment and human health.
In this roundtable discussion, officials from the government, NGOs, and the private sector will join Meetup.com CEO Scott Heifferman and Senior Political Advisor Don Means to discuss possible applications of its popular Internet-based, community-building tool for public policy. This event is open to the public.
The Wilson Center's Foresight and Governance Project recently convened game developers and policymakers to explore the application of computer games to challenges facing our public sector. The first "Serious Games Day" featured computer games that address issues such as government recruitment, first responder training, and budgeting.