Lunar rocks yield no water
A new study of rock samples collected during the Apollo missions has concluded the Moon is almost bone dry.
The research published today in Science Express means the only water on the Moon was most likely deposited by comet or asteroid impact.
The finding may also have implications for theories regarding the origins of water on Earth.
To reach their conclusion a team of scientists led by Dr Zachary Sharp from the University of New Mexico looked at chlorine isotopes in lunar volcanic rocks.
Chlorine is hydrophilic - attracted to water - making it an extremely sensitive indicator of hydrogen levels.
If the Moon contained a similar amount of water as the Earth, than the ratio of chlorine isotopes in the rocks would also be similar to those found on here. Instead, the researchers found the range of chlorine isotopes contained in the lunar samples to be 25 times greater than what is found in rocks and minerals from Earth and from meteorites.
Sharp and colleagues conclude the interior of the Moon is anhydrous - contains no water.
Scientists still believe the discovery of water molecules at the bottom of craters in the Moon's polar regions indicate an abundant supply of water in these regions, which could be used by future lunar colonies for drinking, oxygen and rocket fuel production.
Dr Trevor Ireland from the Australian National University in Canberra says the findings confirm the Moon is as dry as previously thought.
"The insides of the Moon are very dry," says Ireland. "The new results mean the water that reached the Moon from comet and asteroid impact is most likely the only water there".
He says the result is also consistent with the planet impact theory used to explain the Moon's formation.
"[The Moon] lost all the original water which evaporated away during impact and so couldn't condense," says Ireland.
He says it also tells us more about the origin of water on our own planet.
"Water on Earth probably also came later from continual bombardment of comet and meteoritic bodies from elsewhere in the early solar system."