Always run the sessions on the assumptions that students are thoroughly prepared and make sure that they speak at least %60 of class time.
1. Do not attempt grammatical, linguistic, or word-use explanations in English; the session is for language USE not for explanation.
2. Do not speak English; avoid even short phrases like "OK," "any problems?", or "do you understand?" If students ask questions in English, do not reply in English, and do not slow down your own speech unnaturally.
3. Do not introduce any new vocabulary or grammatical structures. Use only the material in the text. If students ask for more, you should feel free to refuse in class.
4. Do not do most of the speaking; students should be speaking at least 60% of the class time.
5. Do not change any material in the text; changes tend to confuse students.
6. Do not rely on the textbook during sessions; it's better to keep it closed and to rely on visual cues and aids. Prepare all visual aids and teaching materials before the class and make sure to know exactly which patterns and words students are studying.
7. Do not call on students in a fixed order. Always vary the order randomly and encourage active participation by all.
8. Do maintain good eye contact with all students and make sure your voice is loud and clear.
9. Do keep drill moving rapidly and vary activities so as to keep students interested, but always in a controlled way.
10. Do correct errors in pronunciation and check student comprehension.
11. Do break down and build up utterances to help with pronunciation; start at the end and then work backwards to a complete utterance.
12. Do have students repeat after you, in chorus and individually, until they can say the utterances fluidly and accurately.
13. Do keep track of students' attendance (Keep good records of attendance on p-web), and offer them constructive feedback throughout the session (in the target language).
14. Do email students regularly to tell them about their strengths and weaknesses.
15. Do talk to the Director about students who miss sessions or who come unprepared, or who are having difficulties for other reasons.