A noncommercial collection of information about citizenship, dual citizenship and multiple citizenship
[Please refer to How to Read a Country Entry for help interpreting this material. It was produced prior to March 2001 as part of a US government report entitled Citizenship Laws of the World. The accuracy and depth of these country listings varies significantly, and some information may be incorrect. At best, this page presents only part of the story for a particular country. Additional information for this country may be available in Country Information]
CITIZENSHIP: Citizenship laws are based upon the Constitution of Singapore, dated August 9, 1965. All questions dealing with persons born before August 9, 1965, should be directed to the Embassy of Singapore. (UKC-Commonwealth Nation)
BY BIRTH: Birth within the territory of Singapore does not automatically confer citizenship.
BY DESCENT: Child born after August 9, 1965, in the territory of Singapore, at least one of whose parents was a citizen of Singapore. Child born abroad after August 9, 1965, whose father was a citizen of Singapore by birth or registration. Child must be registered in Singapore or abroad within one year of birth.
MARRIAGE: A foreign woman who marries a citizen of Singapore may be registered as a citizen under the following conditions: She has continuously resided in Singapore for two years, is of good character, and intends to reside permanently in Singapore.
BY NATURALIZATION: Singaporean citizenship may be acquired upon fulfillment of the following conditions: Person must be at least 21 years old, have resided in Singapore for the sum of 10 years - continuously at least the twelve months immediately before the application, be of good character, have a knowledge of the language, and intend to permanently reside in the country.
DUAL CITIZENSHIP: NOT RECOGNIZED. Exception: Child born abroad of Singaporean parents, who acquires the citizenship of the country of birth, may maintain dual citizenship until the age of 21 years. Then the person has 12 months to take the Oath of Allegiance and Loyalty and renounce the foreign citizenship, or their Singaporean citizenship will be revoked.
LOSS OF CITIZENSHIP:
VOLUNTARY: Voluntary renunciation of citizenship is permitted by law for all citizens over the age of 21. Contact the Singaporean Embassy for details and appropriate paperwork. Required submissions include proof of new citizenship, birth certificate, identity card, and passport.
INVOLUNTARY: The following are grounds for involuntary loss of Singaporean citizenship: Person over age 22 has voluntarily acquired new citizenship. Naturalized citizenship was obtained through fraud. Naturalized citizen has lived over 5 years in a foreign country.,
ANY QUESTIONS concerning citizenship, or requests for renunciation of citizenship, should be directed to the address below:
The Embassy of the Republic of Singapore Embassy/Consular Telephone: 202-537-3100 Consular Section Fax: 202-537-7086 3501 International Place, NW email@example.com Washington, DC 20008 www.singstat.gov.sg
Copyright (C) 2002-2007 All rights reserved.