ü Almost half of all children in this country fall short of meeting their calcium recommendations.
ü If you don’t get enough calcium, your bones weaken over time. You are at risk for osteoporosis – the crippling disease that affects 28 million women and men in this country.
ü A study indicated that children’s milk intake increased when they saw their moms drinking milk
How can your family get the calcium they need without drinking milk? Milk and milk products provide 75% of the calcium available in the food supply. Without milk on the menu, it’s unlikely that you’ll get enough calcium. About 3 glasses of milk every day, or a combo of milk, yogurt and cheese foods, are needed to round out the diet.
What You Can Do…
By being a role model, you can teach your children the importance of drinking milk. A study at the University of Vermont showed that children’s milk in-take increased when their mothers consumed milk with them. s
I Have Some Questions...
What if my children will only drink chocolate milk, is it still good for them?
Yes it is – it has the same 9 essential nutrients as regular white milk.
Is soda higher in sugar than chocolate milk?
Yes –soda has nearly twice the sugar as chocolate milk. Flavored milks do add about 60 more calories than white milk.
Will my children be able to stop drinking milk once they have finished growing?
NO! Even when they are finished growing in length, they are still growing. Milk is one of the best sources of calcium for them. You can actually store up calcium in your “bone bank” in the teen years, which will help your body fend off the bone-depleting effects of aging.
My daughter prefers diet sodas to milk. She says milk is too fattening – is this true?
By your daughter drinking diet drinks instead, her body is being robbed of calcium. Fat free milk, which has 0 grams of fat is much better for her and only has 80 calories. Plus, studies have shown that a diet high in calcium products can actually help her maintain a healthier weight.
(National Dairy Council)