Eight More Things You Might Not Have Known About Liver Disease
1) If someone says they have ‘liver disease’ or ‘hepatic disease’ it does not mean a specific disease called ‘liver disease’. Liver disease is a catch-all term for many different diseases that affect the liver.
2) Some common liver diseases are: cirrhosis, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, hepatitis, haemochromatosis, and cancer of the liver. There are other liver diseases too, such as primary biliary cirrhosis, Gilbert’s syndrome, and Budd-Chiari syndrome, and many more.
3) Hepatolenticular degeneration, also known as Wilson’s disease, is a liver disease in which copper collects and builds up in the body tissues. In severe cases, a liver transplant is needed.
4) Biliary atresia, alagille syndrome, chronic active hepatitis, Reye’s syndrome and Wilson’s disease are the most common pediatric liver diseases.
5) The liver is the only organ that can completely regenerate. One-quarter of a liver is able to regenerate and grow an entire full-sized liver. For those with irreversible liver failure due to liver disease, usually cirrhosis, a liver transplant is the only option.
6) Signs and symptoms of liver disease are varied and can include everything from itchy skin, pale stool, and dark circles under the eyes, to dark urine, a pot belly, excessive weight gain, chills, and spider veins. Sugar cravings and hypoglycemia can indicate blood sugar problems with liver disease.
7) Liver disease can cause the body to be unable to absorb fats which can manifest as reflux, gall stones, constipation, indigestion and fatty tumors.
8) Liver disease can not only affect a person physically with metabolism issues, blood sugar issues, and digestive problems, but it can affect the nervous system as well. Signs and symptoms of liver disease in relation to the nervous system can include headaches, moods swings, nausea, the inability to concentrate, irritability, anger, and depression. The body may also overheat.
Return to the Social Security Disability SSI Benefits Blog
Will the Judge ask me any questions at my Disability Hearing?
How can I Win my Social Security Disability Case Without Going to a Hearing?
Are there some Disability Attorneys who do not gather RFC forms?
Denied for disability
Do Not Send In Social Security Disability Paperwork Without Doing a Follow Up Call
What if Your Disability Lawyer doesn't Communicate With You
Labels: liver disease