"Healing the Environment Within"
We are dedicated to bringing you the most up to date, innovative information in the field holistic health care. We focus on both alternative and complementary medicine. Complementary medicine is used together with conventional medicine. Alternative medicine on the other hand, is used in place of conventional medicine. We believe in prevention; we know that education is an essential component in prevention.
We excel in staying current with of a wide variety of health-related information from international sources. We make the most recent research studies and other cutting edge documentation available to the public at large. Education is primary in making calculated decisions about health care. As you learn more about natural alternatives you have the opportunity to achieve and maintain optimal health. Making informed choices requires knowledge first, followed by practical application.
We assist our readers to make those good choices about what supplements to use, what foods to eat and what innovative practices to use in order to sustain a healthy lifestyle. Alternative, whole medical systems are built on complete systems of theory, as well as practice. Often, these systems, like Chinese Medicine, have evolved apart from and even earlier than the conventional medical or 'allopathic' approach used in the United States.
Acupuncture and Homeopathy are other examples of alternative, whole medical practices. Biologically based practices use substances found in nature, such as herbs, foods, and vitamins. This includes dietary supplements, herbal products, and the use of other natural, but as yet scientifically unproven therapies. Mind-body medicine uses a variety of techniques designed to enhance the mind's capacity to affect bodily function and symptoms.
Many techniques that were considered 'alternative' in the past have now become mainstream. A good example of this is cognitive-behavioral therapy. Other mind-body techniques like meditation, are still considered alternative.
Any questions? Email Pamela@EcologyHealthCenter.Net