SCOPE Fair was held at a residence on Fordyce Lane in Ladue Saturday afternoon to raise awareness of the many benefits of science and technology both, locally and nationally.
SCOPE, short for Science and Citizens Organized for Purpose and Exploration, is an organization that really connects the dots between the future of science and our community.
Regardless of temperatures reaching in the upper 90’s, the lawn was full of fun, hands-on scientific activities for children.
Kids and parents strolled from station-to-station trying out the different scientific teaching tools which included, robotics, strawberry DNA extraction, physics, and engineering.
There were also inflatable bounce houses that were scattered about and were just for fun.
Snow cones and cotton candy were served. The snow cones were a welcomed tasty treat that helped everyone to stay cool in the hot temperature.
The science behind cotton candy was explained on a fact sheet that was handed out to attendees. Who knew there are many chemical and atomic changes necessary to produce the fluffy, sugary stuff that kids love so much?
Kids learned that the inflatable Bungee Jump was more than a little competition and a great time. It was a great teaching tool about physics with three phases, the free fall with the acceleration of gravity of the jumper, the stretch phase until the rope reaches its maximum length and the rebound phase, consisting of a damped oscillatory motion.
Cynthia Kramer, Executive Director of SCOPE, is passionate about getting the message to the community about the importance of science now and in the future, which is why she organized the SCOPE Fair in Ladue. She has many other events planned for the remainder of the year. Her efforts are far-reaching.
“What sets our organization apart is that not only do we talk about science and technology, we offer an action to take. We make it fun. It is exploration with a purpose. We connect parents, adults and youth to workforce development, higher skill opportunities and financial aid,” said Kramer.
SCOPE began when Kramer was receiving treatment for a rare cancer. Traditional medical procedures and treatments failed. She was asked to consider a clinical trial that was innovative and cutting edge, one that used the latest science and technology to fight the cancer. She accepted the offer and to her amazement, it worked.
“My life was saved by participating in this clinical trial at Washington University. It only killed the cells in the tumors and not the healthy cells,” said Kramer.
After receiving the treatment that cured her cancer, Kramer was convinced that science and technology is vital to life and the future of our society. She began the organization, SCOPE.
“Our mission is to facilitate a collaborative effort in the community to interweave the benefits of science and technology into their region through hands-on events and speaking engagements, focusing on those communities that need it the most,” said Kramer.
If you were unable to attend the recent SCOPE Fair in Ladue, SCOPE will be at Missouri State Fair in August as well as many fairs from Nodaway to Kennet. For more information about SCOPE, click here.