AS fears of nuclear confrontation fade in the face of international arms agreements, military scientists have focused new attention on a pair of conventional battlefield adversaries, the tank and the antitank weapon.
Apprehension about superior Soviet tank forces in Europe has spurred a major scientific drive by United States Government laboratories to learn why different types of projectiles penetrate some forms of tank armor and not others. With the Defense Department having spent about $1 billion over the last three years in its Armor/Anti-Armor Research Program, some surprising discoveries have begun to emerge.
Steel, the traditional sinew of war, has begun to give way to reinforced plastics and such hard, brittle ceramics as titanium diboride, silicon carbide, boron carbide and aluminum oxide. Even empty space has become an important component of new types of armor.
In a dramatic development last month, the FMC Corporation of San Jose, Calif., unveiled a prototype armored vehicle made almost entirely of plastic. The plastic, a polymer composite, is stronger than the aluminum alloys used in armored troop carriers and other lightly armored vehicles, but is not strong enough to provide primary protection for tanks that must withstand heavy guns and missiles.
William E. Haskell, director of the United States Army Materials Technology Laboratory at Watertown, Mass., said the experimental infantry fighting vehicle was made by building up layers of Fiberglas impregnated with polyester resin to a thickness of an inch and two-thirds.
The result offers as much protection against heavy-caliber bullets up to 14.5 millimeters in diameter as does its all-metal counterpart, the Bradley infantry fighting vehicle, Mr. Haskell said. ''Moreover, the polymer composite vehicle weighs 25 percent less and is potentially cheaper to make.''
Many Army tacticians assert that the need for improved tank armor and antitank weapons has become urgent since the United States and the Soviet Union ratified the treaty on intermediate-range nuclear forces last year. The reduction of nuclear forces in Europe must be accompanied by efforts to match Soviet armored strength, they argue.
Gen. Donn A. Starry, retired, of the Army, who was chairman of the Defense Science Board Task Force when it began the current quest for better armor, recently commented:
''We are behind the Soviets in both armor and bullets. That simple declarative sentence is what makes the ratification of the I.N.F. a provocative action. It is the raison d'etre for the new national interest in armor and anti-armor technologies.''
Under the direction of the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, the new research into armor is coordinated by the Advanced Technology Assessment Center at Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico. Research tasks are shared among the Army's Laboratory Command, the Marine Corps, the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory and other Federal institutions, as well as 130 corporations specializing in military products.
Dr. Richard Mah, director of the technology assessment center's program at Los Alamos, said in an interview that nuclear weapons, which were invented at Los Alamos in World War II, are now a ''mature technology.''
''The time has come,'' he said, ''to develop the same kind of scientific base we needed for nuclear weapons, applied now to developing better armor and anti-armor weapons. You'd be surprised how little we really know at a fundamental scientific level about what happens when a projectile hits something.''