"It's a danger to be around": Scientists and experts affirm the negative effects of dihydrogen monoxide on humans and the environment

May 1, 2023
Washington, D.C. - Experts and scientists from the Department of Health and the Centers for Disease Control have issued a high-risk advisory for the entire nation. The head of the CDC, Dmitri Costas, issued the following statement: 

"Dihydrogen monoxide is a clear, odorless substance that has been found to dissolve hard substances over time, cause drowning in otherwise healthy individuals, and is found in abundance in all phases (gas, liquid, solid) around the world. People must be educated on the impact dihydrogen monoxide is having on them and their environment, and we must take steps to ensure no one is harmed by this dangerous substance."

Some from the scientific community have expressed doubts about the effects of dihydrogen monoxide, explaining that the substance is beneficial to humans and the environment and that further studies should be conducted to understand the full benefits of this chemical. "It appears the chemical dihydrogen monoxide is made up of elements that are already found in abundance in nature - hydrogen and oxygen - so having a chemical made from these elements, regardless of its stoichiometry, should be examined further," said a spokesperson for Ethical Chemical Experimentation in Albany, New York. "It is also possible that we may find many novel uses for dihydrogen monoxide that we have yet to discover that could benefit humans and society as a whole."

So far according to the CDC, there have been 117 reports of cases involving dihydrogen monoxide in the past week. These cases include a 45-year-old man who drowned from ingestion of a saline form of the chemical while swimming in the Atlantic Ocean; a 22-year-old California woman who was killed by frozen dihydrogen monoxide falling from the sky during a severe storm; and the appearance of erosion of mountains in the Appalachians where an abundance of the chemical can be found on the mountaintops.

Stay tuned for more information on this case as it develops.
