There once was a man who was struck by a train. He managed to survive but was in a coma and would not respond to anyone or anything. His wife, parents, and children stayed at his bedside for many months hoping he would suddenly wake up, but with no guarantees and no time limit to how long a coma can last, it was anyone's guess when (or if) he would wake up. As time went by, the man's wife, parents, and children began to come to the hospital less frequently, until after one year they stopped visiting altogether.

Then one day, five years later, the man woke up to the surprise of the hospital's nurses and doctors. It was a miracle that the man woke up, especially after such a long period of being in a coma, that they looked upon him as if he had risen from the dead. One of the nurses decided to call the man's family to inform them of the news. The man's wife, parents, and children rushed to the hospital upon hearing the news and smiled and cried tears of joy at the man's recovery.

When they finally settled their emotions, they asked the man one of the most pressing questions anyone who had never been in a coma would ask: What was it like being in a coma?

The man contemplated this for several seconds despite already knowing the answer to the question; he wanted to ensure he was able to fully explain what the experience was like being in a coma. "I had...dreams...very, very vivid dreams," he said, his voice cracking. As the tears started to stream down his face, he recalled the nature of his dreams.

"The last thing I remember is being in the train tunnel before being hit by the train. I saw a light at the end of the train tunnel, and it became really bright and struck me like a ton of bricks in the face. Then the light began to fade and recede back toward the end of the tunnel. I kept trying to run toward the light, but my legs couldn't move fast enough to reach it. Then, I woke up. But it felt like I had been running for about five full minutes. I felt sad that I couldn't reach the light," he cried.
