Landmarks of American History and Culture: School Teachers
The summary for the Landmarks of American History and Culture: School Teachers Federal Grant is detailed below.
It contains information such as the Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance (CFDA) number, who is eligible for the grant, how much grant money will be awarded, important deadlines, and a sampling of similar government grants.
Verify the accuracy of the data FederalGrants.com provides by visiting the webpage noted in the Link to Full Announcement section or by contacting the appropriate person listed in the Grant Announcement Contact section.
If these sections are incomplete, please visit the website of the government agency that is offering this grant.
Federal Grant Title:
LANDMARKS OF AMERICAN HISTORY AND CULTURE: SCHOOL TEACHERS
Promotion of the Humanities_Professional Development
Funding Opportunity Number:
Jan 04, 2011
Jan 13, 2011
Original Application Deadline:
Mar 01, 2011
Current Application Deadline:
Mar 01, 2011
Mar 31, 2011
Total Program Funding:
Information not provided
Maximum Federal Grant Award:
Minimum Federal Grant Award:
Expected Number of Awards:
Cost Sharing or Matching:
Applicants Eligible for this Grant
State governments - County governments - City or township governments - Special district governments - Public and State controlled institutions of higher education - Native American tribal governments (Federally recognized) - Nonprofits having a 501(c)(3) status with the IRS, other than institutions of higher education - Private institutions of higher education
Additional Information on Eligibility
Information not provided
The Landmarks of American History and Culture program supports series of one-week residence-based workshops for a national audience of K-12 educators. NEH Landmarks of American History and Culture Workshops use historic sites to address central themes and issues in American history, government, literature, art, music, and other related subjects in the humanities. The goals of the workshops are to increase knowledge and appreciation of subjects, ideas, and places significant to American history and culture through humanities reading and site study; build a community of inquiry and provide models of civility and of excellent scholarship and teaching; provide teachers with expertise in the use and interpretation of historical sites and of material and archival resources; and encourage historical and cultural sites to develop greater capacity and scale for professional development programs. NEH Landmarks Workshops are held at or near sites important to American history and culture (e.g., presidential residences or libraries; colonial-era settlements; major battlefields; historic districts; parks and preserves; sites of key economic, social, political, and constitutional developments; and places associated with major writers, artists, and musicians). Applicants should make a compelling case for the historical significance of the site(s), the material resources available for use, and the ways in which the site(s) will enhance the workshop. NEH Landmarks Workshops are academically rigorous and focus on key primary sources, documents, and scholarly works relevant to major themes of American history and culture. Leading scholars should serve as lecturers or seminar leaders. Workshops should also provide the opportunity to work with primary documents and develop classroom resources or a research project. Institutions or organizations that may host workshops include community colleges, universities, four-year colleges, learned societies, libraries or other repositories, centers for advanced study, cultural organizations, and professional associations. NEH expects host institutions to provide facilities conducive to scholarly research, discussion, and interaction. Host institutions should arrange suitable housing for participants, which participants pay for from the stipends provided to them as part of the Landmarks workshop grant.
Link to Full Grant Announcement
Grant Announcement Contact
Landmarks of American History and Culture Division of Education Programs National Endowment for the Humanities Room 302 1100 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW Washington, DC 20506 202-606-8463