THE DISCIPLINE OF STATISTICS IS ONE OF THE PRIME makers of the modern world. In both science and business it has proved an extraordinarily powerful tool, allowing us to organize huge sets of numbers, and to see patterns in them that would otherwise stay hidden. Statistics makes possible enterprises on a scale that would otherwise be unthinkable.
Unscrupulous people have long known, however, that using numbers to mislead is all too easy. In the middle of the 19th century, Benjamin Disraeli reportedly said that mendacity came in three forms: lies, damned lies, and statistics.
Accounting, the application of statistics that most concerns the world of business, has encountered damn lies many times since the first accountant put on an eyeshade in ancient times. Today, the rules of accounting are highly elaborated and legally mandated. Sarbanes-Oxley is only the latest attempt in a more than century-long quest to make sure that corporate books are not cooked.
Regulators might wish you believed it was the government that introduced Generally Accepted Accounting Principles and independent auditors to the marketplace -- to keep the players there honest. It was not. It was the players in the marketplace themselves.
Accounting is so ancient that some scholars believe that it was the need to keep accounts that led to writing and thus the birth of civilization itself. But up until the 19th century, most business concerns were small and family-owned. There were few reasons for crooked accounting, and fewer opportunities.
That changed with the growth of railroads. They were prodigious users of capital, and most were financed by selling stock and bonds to outside investors. For the first time in economic history, many owners of large businesses and the managers of those businesses were separated and came to have different interests in how the books were kept. The managers, naturally, wanted things to look as good as possible. The owners wanted to know the truth and to be able to compare results with other companies in order to know if the managers were doing a good job.
Few public companies issued annual reports. When in 1866 the New York Stock Exchange asked the Delaware, Lackawanna, and Western Railroad for its financials, the railroad curtly replied that it "makes no reports" and "publishes no statements." Translation: Drop dead.
Even when the railroads did issue reports, they were often less than forthcoming. "Alaska has a tropical climate," Horace Greeley snorted sarcastically in the New York Tribune regarding the Erie Railway's 1870 report, "and strawberries in their season. The Borgia was a much slandered martyr of a woman."
The answer to the problem was clear. The weekly Commercial and Financial Chronicle -- the Barron's of its day -- wrote about how to cure the problem the same year as Greeley. "The one condition of success in such intrigues is secrecy. Secure to the public at large the opportunity of knowing all that a director can know of the value and prospects of his own stock and the occupation of the 'speculative director' is gone. . . The full balance sheet . . . showing the sources and amounts of its revenues, the disposition made of every dollar, the earnings of its property, the expenses of working, of supplies, of new construction, and of repairs, the amount and form of its debt, and the disposition made of all its funds, ought to be made up and published every quarter."
In 1870 this was a radical idea. There was not much prospect of getting publicly traded companies to issue honest reports. Wall Street was in its wild and woolly days after the Civil War, and the New York state and city governments were utterly corrupt. The English Fraser's Magazine had reported in 1869 that "in New York there is a custom among litigants, as peculiar to that city, it is to be hoped, as it is supreme within it, of retaining a judge as well as a lawyer."
Matters were changing. In 1869, the New York Stock Exchange merged with its chief rival, the Open Board of Brokers, and became the overwhelmingly dominant institution on the Street. For the first time it became important for brokerage firms to belong to the exchange and for companies to have their securities listed. The NYSE quickly began to impose rules on both brokers and on the companies that sought listings.
As the country's industrial economy exploded in size in the last decades of the 19th century, the need for capital exploded as well. Increasingly, that capital could only come from the great Wall Street banks, of which J.P. Morgan & Co. was the apotheosis. These banks needed to be sure the books were honest before floating an issue of securities.
To ensure honesty, the stock exchange and the banks increasingly required that the books be certified by independent accountants, a profession that quickly grew at this time. As late as 1884, only 81 self-employed accountants were listed in the city directories of New York, Chicago, and Philadelphia combined. Five years later, there were 322 listings.
By then the American Association of Public Accountants, the ancestor of today's professional governing body, had been established. In 1896, New York State passed legislation, soon copied elsewhere, establishing accounting as a self-governing profession and using the phrase "certified public accountant" for the first time. By the outbreak of World War I, corporate managers regarded quarterly and annual reports and independent auditors as simply a normal part of doing business, though some still try to use their statistical reports in ways Disraeli would have recognized.
JOHN STEELE GORDON is an author of several book on business history.
E-mail comments to firstname.lastname@example.org