The diesel electric propulsion system drives a propeller by electric power. The conventional ships drive the propeller directly by the diesel propulsion engine.
In a diesel electric propulsion ship, electric power generated by diesel generators can
drive a propulsion motor and cover
all required electric power at the same time. The diesel electric propulsion system can be not only people and ship-friendly, but also earth-friendly.
The Diesel Electoric Propulsion System
Increase Navigational Safety and Operational Efficiency (Dual System)
Contrary to the conventional arrangement where the main diesel engine provides propulsion power and the auxilliary engines provide electricity, the diesel electric propulsion system provides electricity for both propulsion and energy needs of the ship. The need for only auxilliary engines means lower purchasing and operating cost.
Environmentally Friendly System
Lower lifecycle cost compared to conventional ships
Compliance with the IMO's NOx emission regulations. The diesel elecric propulsion system uses engines with small diameter cylinders and fixed speed. Resilient mounting sysem is also adopted. Besides lower vibration and noise can be accomplished with lower hull vibration caused by propeller driving.
Lower fuel and maintenance cost can be achieved with the electric propulsion system. Life cycle cost is also lower than conventional ships after 5 years operation leading to better economical use.
High Efficiency Achieved Through Improved Hull Design
As there is certain energy loss compared to conventional propulsion drive, improvements in hull design makes up for the loss in energy transfer efficiency. Traditional ship hull design bulges outward, however with the streamlined hull design, surface drag is reduced and the ideal hull shape is achieved. With this improvement, total efficiency is increased.
Cost Reduction Through Generator Decrease
With the electric propulsion system incorporates the "Power Management System" which automatically manages the optimal number of power generators according the the propulsion load requirements. By having the generators always operate in the most efficient fuel consumption zone, fuel consumption is decreased leading to lower running cost.
Ever Safer Operation - High Maneuverability
Fail Safe Design - All Directional Propellers
With the commitment to improve safety the electric propulsion system and the power generators are designed to be fail safe. With backup systems to prevent failures safety for long sea voyages is ensured. Further, the use of all directional propeller drives allows for high ship maneuverability.
Delivered in June 2006, Lewis and Clark is the first in a class of dry cargo-ammunition ships being built by Nassco for the U.S. Navy. Its diesel-electric plant is rated at 35 megawatts. (Courtesy Nassco)
KEDEPANNYA SELURUH KAPAL TNI AL / KOMERSIAL BISA MEMAKAI TIPE MESIN INI KARENA LEBIH IRIT MURAH & RAMAH LINGKUNGAN.