February Is Kids E.N.T. Month
February is Kids E.N.T. Month! National health statistics reveal that pediatric ear, nose, and throat disorders remain among the primary reasons children visit a physician, with ear infections ranking as the number one reason for an appointment. From earaches to choking hazards, kids can suffer from a variety of ailments that require prompt diagnosis and treatment. Children can also suffer from conditions normally only associated with adults, like chronic acid reflux and sleep apnea, which may require a visit to a specialist.
Kids E.N.T. Resources
Kids E.N.T. Health Library
Visit the websites of the following organizations for more information about E.N.T. health.
The Society for Ear, Nose and Throat Advances in Children (SENTAC)
The Society or Ear, Nose and Throat Advances in Children, Inc., is a non-profit interdisciplinary professional organization founded in 1973. Its members are otolaryngologists, pediatricians, surgeons, pediatric otolaryngologists, speech pathologists, audiologists, nurses, and basic scientists - all of whom are interested in enhancing the care of children with acquired or congenital disorders of the ear, nose, and throat.
American Society of Pediatric Otolaryngology (ASPO)
The American Society of Pediatric Otolaryngology exists to foster excellence in the care of children with otorhinolaryngologic disorders and thereby enhance the distinction of pediatric otorhinolaryngology as a profession.
American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP)
The American Academy of Pediatrics is an organization of 60,000 primary care pediatricians, pediatric medical subspecialists and pediatric surgical specialists dedicated to the health, safety and well being of infants, children, adolescents and young adults.
The Academy offers patient leaflets on common ear, nose, and throat illnesses that affect children and teens.
Visit our MarketPlace to purchase patient leaflets on popular topics.
Receive many benefits to help you in your professional pursuits: shape the future of the specialty, manage the business side of your practice more smoothly, and more.