You’ve probably heard the news about lutein and eye health. This powerful antioxidant has earned a stellar reputation for protecting our eyes and vision. Evidence continues to grow supporting lutein’s role in lowering the risk of age-related macular degeneration (AMD) and cataracts, and recent research finds that it may support our eyes in other ways—and even benefit our skin.
Keeping Your Eyes Healthy
Lutein is a naturally occurring pigment found in dark-green leafy vegetables, various fruits, and in egg yolks. Along with zeaxanthin, beta-carotene, and lycopene, lutein is one of the most common antioxidants that belong to a class known as carotenoids.
One of only two carotenoids found in the retina and lens of the eye, lutein is best known for its role in improving eye health. Higher dietary intakes of lutein are associated with a significantly decreased risk of AMD. The Age-Related Eye Disease Study 2 (AREDS2) conducted by the National Eye Institute is currently underway to assess the effects of 10 mg FloraGLO Lutein, zeaxanthin, and omega-3 on the progression of AMD. Studies also link higher intakes of lutein (combined with zeaxanthin and vitamin E) with a significantly decreased risk of developing cataracts.
While both lutein and zeaxanthin are linked to benefits for people with age-related eye conditions, these carotenoids are helpful at any age. In a recent study, researchers looked at the effects of glare on healthy subjects as experienced in everyday situations—such as being outdoors on sunny days, looking at a computer monitor for a lengthy period, and exposure to intense beams of oncoming headlights at night. After six months of supplementation with 10 mg of FloraGLO Lutein, participants’ ability to filter short- wave light had increased. (Exposure to short-wave blue light creates oxidative stress that can damage the retina.) Supplementation with lutein and zeaxanthin improved visual performance in glare situations for most subjects and significantly reduced its harmful effects.
Lutein may take on a new role as a skin-health supplement. Research shows that 10 mg of FloraGLO Lutein taken orally can help improve the skin’s natural antioxidant system and protect against sun damage. A recent study identifies more specific benefits, including improved elasticity and hydration in the skin.
Why Take A Supplement?
Most of us don’t consume enough lutein-rich foods to experience its health benefits. Even if you eat a balanced diet, it’s difficult to get even the minimum amount recommended, which emerging science indicates is 10 mg daily. Lutein is widely available as a supplement, and (like other carotenoid supplements) is best absorbed when taken with a meal that contains some fat. Cook lutein-rich foods in a little oil—dietary carotenoids are best absorbed with a little fat, too.