Suzuki Violin School, Volume 2 - Violin Part. (Violin Part). For violin. Method/Instruction; SmartMusic; String - Violin (Suzuki). Suzuki Method. Learn To Play and Technique. Instructional book. Fingerings, instructional text and introductory text. 19 pages. Published by Alfred Music Publishing (AP.0146).
ISBN 0874871468. With fingerings, instructional text and introductory text. Learn To Play and Technique. 9x12 inches.
Additional materials, available separately, for Suzuki Violin School, Volume 2 include: Piano Accompaniments (AP.0147), Compact Disc (AP.0486, AP.0597, AP.0347), MIDI & CD-ROM Discs (AP.30101), Cassette (AP.0593, AP.0337), Violin Duet Parts (AP.0093S).
About Suzuki Method
The Suzuki Method is based on the principle that all children possess ability and that this ability can be developed and enhanced through a nurturing environment. All children learn to speak their own language with relative ease and if the same natural learning process is applied in teaching other skills, these can be acquired as successfully. Suzuki referred to the process as the Mother Tongue Method and to the whole system of pedagogy as Talent Education. The important elements of the Suzuki approach to instrumental teaching include the following:an early start (aged 3-4 is normal in most countries); the importance of listening to music; learning to play before learning to read; -the involvement of the parent; a nurturing and positive learning environment; a high standard of teaching by trained teachers; the importance of producing a good sound in a balanced and natural way; core repertoire, used by Suzuki students across the world; social interaction with other children. Suzuki students from all over the world can communicate through the language of music.
Location: from Connecticut, USA
April 13, 2013
I am a Suzuki violin Student. I am ready to graduate to Book 3, and I thought this book gave me challenges with the note length and was very good for a child to play. The only compliant I have is that in the CD, the songs are played above...
2 of 4 people found this review helpful.
Location: from Hondo, TX USA
January 7, 2009
This is a good book and I love the Suzuki method. It is really good for ear training and memorization. My only complaint is that I wish the CD that comes with it had a section for playing the pieces slower without accompaniment.
28 of 57 people found this review helpful.
Location: from Houston, Texas
Location: from Maysville,Ga.
Location: from Phila, PA
August 7, 2006
Not just a book of solos...A Method
This book is part of a teaching method by Suzuki. The parent assists in learning with the chcld. The fingering numbers are included in the songs in order for the parent to assist the child. You should purchase the CD for listening as well. Part of the method is listening...
25 of 56 people found this review helpful.