Figure Drawing Head
Video Course Lesson One
Figure drawing gets a lot easier when you have simple proportion to follow and this course that's exactly what you're going to learn. In the lesson below you'll start exploring the basic proportions of the human head from the front and side. This will give you a good understanding of where the main features of the face should lay and will give you the foundation and understanding that you need to start drawing heads that look great from any position you can imagine.
Get the full course with printable PDF guides!
Enter your e-mail address below to get the full video course completely FREE. Also included with each lesson are easy-to-follow instructions and printable assignments to make sure you get the most out of the course.
Along with getting the printable guide for this lesson you also get automatic updates with new video lessons in this course. Take action now and sign up. Learning how to draw the human head with correct proportions was the first big step that I personally took in developing my figure drawing ability and becoming a more serious artist.
What's coming up next?
In the next lesson in this video drawing course you will start to explore drawing the head from different angles. Understanding the basic proportions presented in the video above is essential to move onto the next step in drawing figures. Once you are able to draw the head from different angles we will go on to learning how to shade the head to give it a much more realistic appearance. Finally, well look at the differences in drawing male and female characters as well as drawing people of different ages and how the characters age can affect proportions.
I really hope you enjoy learning from this course. The time you spend working with these materials will pay back huge rewards in the future, trust me on this. Even just watching this video a few times and going through the study sheets and doing the exercises could completely transform your drawing ability and confidence level. Figure drawing doesn't necessarily have to be hard as long as you have a good guide to follow.
Best wishes for your artistic success. The next lesson should be ready in a few days and if you signed up to get notifications and the free PDF study guide above will be sure to get your hands on the new videos as soon as they're ready.
Click here to return from Figure Drawing Head to How to Draw