Knife for amputations
In the 18th century for amputations they preferred to use knives with curved blades, as for surgeons it would be easier to cut the skin and muscles, and only then sawing the bone. In the 19th century, came into fashion straight blade knives, with their help, it was easier to form a flap of skin that covered the stump.
Some surgeons liked to flaunt their wealth,using ornate saws, but their etched surfaces were a breeding ground for microorganisms.
About this tool is not much known, presumably it was inserted into the wound in the folded position, the central rod was used to capture the boom. Blades sticking out sharp edges parted to the side with a handle, pushing the flesh around the arm, so that arrow would not tore the meat during its removal from the body.
Tool to extract the bullets
Such a long instrument could pull the bullet, deeply stuck in the patient’s body. Spiral tip was inserted into the wound and was nominated,bullet was then extracted.
Similar tools have been used for thousands of years, making it easier to access doctors vaginal (or other) area after the introduction, they expanded. This instrument was manufactured in Europe in 17th century, its distinctive feature is the ornament and a rotating drive.
This tool is used to expand the cervix during childbirth, tensile force was determined by the scale on the handle. These extenders have ceased to use, because they’re often led to rupture of the uterine cervix.
Bloodletting with leeches was so popular method, which in 1840 invented the artificial leech has been used in surgery of ear and eye. The rotating blades cut through the wound in the patient’s body, and the cylinder was used to create a vacuum and sucking blood.
Ekrazer was used to for hemorrhoids, and tumors of the uterus and ovaries. The chain was for the removing of tissue and tightened using the ratchet, stopping the circulation at this point.
Tool for the treatment of hernia
This unique tool was used to re-herniation.It was injected into the body near the affected area and leave for a week to form a scar tissue isolating rupture.
Compass, named for the inventor – a French doctor from the First World War. Brass instrument used to determine the exact position of bullets in the body, which was especially important in wounds of the head. This device is also used in conjunction with the data of X-ray studies.
These wooden helical gags inserted into the patient’s mouth, so that your cries do not distract your doctor.
Scarifiers were used for bloodletting. Spring-loaded blade device cut the skin, then the wound closed circular bowl of the glass. Heating of the cups can accelerate the process of bleeding.
Enema of tobacco smoke
The tobacco enema is used to feed smoke into the rectum of the patient, the goals of the event were different, mainly in this way tried to drain the drowned. Inserted into the anus rectal tube was connected to a fumigator in furs, with which the smoke is injected into the patient. At the time,it was believed that the hot smoke can catch your breath, but ther were doubts about the adequacy of this method .
Guillotine for tonsillectomy
This method of tonsillectomy using the principle of the guillotine, cutting off the infected tonsil. This tool used the scheme of “double guillotine,” when both the tonsils are removed at the same time. In the early 20th century to replace the guillotine came like forceps and scalpels, because they did not give this bleeding and allowed to work more accurately, leaving pieces inside the tonsils.
Trefin was a hand drill with a cylindrical crown, it was used for drilling skulls. The central spike is used to fix the instrument at the beginning or directly in the process of drilling .