Here is a simple structure for scaffolding a science video clip with students.
Predict: What will happen when you wring out a soaking wet washcloth in the microgravity of the International Space Station?
Observe the video below. (Click HERE if you cannot see the clip.) Where does the water from the washcloth go?
Explain why this happened. Make a claim and support it with evidence and reasoning.
Concord Consortium has a variety of excellent online interactives and simulations for K-12 science education. Concord Consortium also has a dashboard for using the Three Dimensions of the Next Generation Science Standards (Practices of Science and Engineering, Crosscutting Concepts, and Disciplinary Core Ideas) to select interactives. I highly recommend checking out the dashboard and the resources. Click HERE to get started with interacting with the Three Dimensions of the NGSS. Engaging with the dashboard is not only a helpful way of finding resources but also helps to illustrate how the dimensions of the NGSS might work together in instructional tools.
You will also find a cool printable “NGSS Fortune Teller” as a way to use a different form of technology to interact with these ideas.
The National Science Teachers Association has assembled a wealth of FREE resources to help us understand both the Framework for K-12 Science Education and the Next Generation Science Standards. The resources include articles and webinars on specific Practices of Science and Engineering, Crosscutting Concepts, and Disciplinary Core Ideas. You can see the list of resources HERE.
I took the NSTA resources and organized them on a one-page document (Word and PDF) with embedded hyperlinks that could be used by teachers, administrators, district office personel to build understanding of the Framework and the NGSS. The one-pager also promotes a learning progression of starting with the Framework and then moving to the Three Dimensions of the Framework before diving into the actual standards. I hope this is helpful- please share.
1 pager NGSS Awareness Word Doc
1 pager NGSS Awareness PDF
I just purchased an “e-book” of the NSTA Reader’s Guide to the Next Generation Science Standards by Harold Pratt- and have given it a quick skim (about the time it takes me to consume 16 ounces of iced coffee). Here are my thoughts on the resource so far:
- Provides thoughtful advice for learning about the Framework for K-12 Science Education and the NGSS
- Advocates for learning and thinking about NGSS and starting small before jumping to full implementation
- Cautions us not to “hand off” the NGSS to teachers and expect them to implement
- Provides a framework, planning tools and resources to guide our thinking about implementation
- I wish that this was in fact a true “e-book” (iBook?) and not just a pdf. For example, there is a great list of existing resources on the NGSS, however, the resources are not hyperlinked (hello!) and therefore requires the reader to hunt down the links. NSTA could have created a very dynamic and user friendly tool with embedded video and links.. but they didn’t.
- It doesn’t feel like there is a lot new here (I could be wrong).. perhaps this could have been a FREE resource like the NSTA Reader’s Guide to a Framework for K-12 Science Education
Audience: This resource would be useful for district curriculum directors, science coordinators, science professional development providers, and teacher leaders.. anyone who is planning to make a plan on how to implement the NGSS.
Please let me know your thoughts if you grab a copy.
Attention all readers in the Puget Sound region- The Institute for Math & Science Education at the University of Washington is holding a Summit on K-12 Science Education on May 22, 2013. Phillip Bell (Framework for K-12 Science Education) and Andrew Shouse (Ready, Set, Science) will be leading the institute.
There will be two sessions- one at 3pm and a second at 7pm. Click HERE to view the full online invitation. I am unable to attend that evening so I’m hoping that many of you will be able to share your learning from the event
The final draft of the Next Generation Science Standards is now available online. Click HERE to visit the website and download the documents. I’ll be back with more information, resources, thoughts, etc in the near future.
Imagine scientists attempting to describe their work to the public… using only the 1000 most common words in the English language. Well, that is exactly what is happening. A program inspired by Up Goer Five a strip by online comic xkcd (if you do not follow- you need to check it out) is promoting graduate students in science fields to attempt this challenge. Read a blog post HERE to learn more about the challenge and read the outcomes. Below is the winning entry by Yasmeen Hussain- note the scientific conference language versus the 1000 word challenge language:
Yasmeen at a scientific conference: I study the link between sperm chemotaxis and fertilization success. Eggs in animals such as sea urchins release chemicals that act as sperm attractants. Sperm use chemotaxis – that is, orientation towards the source of a chemical gradient – to find the eggs. However, it is unknown whether sperm chemotaxis directly contributes to reproductive success.
Yasmeen’s 1000 entry: I study tiny things that are man and woman parts of an animal. The woman part talks and the man part listens. The tiny things have a conversation so that they can find each other and make babies. Some man things are better at listening than others. I want to know if the man things that are better at listening are also better at making babies.
I think this work has implications for us in science education- How can we take vocabulary-rich and conceptually dense ideas and help students to explain them in everyday language?