The gallery will explain to visitors how it was duped into buying fakes in the past and how new technology is used in the battle to spot an imitation.
Close Examination - Fakes, Mistakes and Discoveries demonstrates the techniques used by scientists, art historians and conservators.
One painting on display is A Man with a Skull which was thought to be by Hans Holbein was "snapped up" by the National Gallery in the mid-19th century. Unfortunately, tree ring dating has since shown that the painting post-dates Holbein's death in 1543.
The gallery also bought what it thought were two Botticellis from the collection of Alexander Barker, the son of a fashionable bootmaker, at a Christie's auction in 1874.
It was later discovered that one of the paintings, An Allegory, which the gallery paid £1,627 for was not a Botticelli.
Despite modern scientific methods, including infrared imaging and X-ray images, fakery is still a big business.
Exhibition co-curator Marjorie Wieseman said it was now "extremely difficult" to sell a fake.
She said: "I like to think that we're at least one step ahead of any potential forgers. But art is more and more expensive so the rewards (for forgers) are greater and greater."
The exhibition also explains how works of art were altered over time to fit the proprieties of the age.
Woman at a Window, a 16th-century painting acquired by the gallery in the mid-19th century, portrays what appeared to be an innocent, demure Victorian beauty.
It was later discovered that the woman had originally been painted as a sultry seductress - her hair was originally blonde and her bodice was more revealing before she was altered to suit more restrained Victorian tastes.
Other paintings on display include Raphael's The Madonna of the Pinks (1506-7).
The work had long perplexed art historians, with arguments about whether it was genuinely a Raphael.
But infrared reflectograms revealed subtle differences between the underdrawing and the finished painting.
No forger would have made changes from an original drawing.
Experts have also been able to solve a long-standing conundrum over authorship of The Virgin and Child with Two Angels (1476-8).
The painting had been attributed to the workshop of Andrea del Verrocchio.
After removing layers of old retouching work and examining the underdrawing with infrared reflectography, it became clear that Verrocchio painted the Virgin and the angel on the left, while his assistant Lorenzo di Credi painted the angel on the right and the infant Christ.
The exhibition runs at the National Gallery from June 30 to September 12.