is Regenerative Agriculture?
Widening Circles of Influence
Thinking beyond the traditional scope
of organic and sustainable
Organic farming is not just about making a higher
profit. Most of us realize that in our bones. Sure,
we have to make a living. And, sure, we live and die
on the gritty details of compost and cover crops, tillers
and no-till. But we are stewards of more than just our
soil and our farm and we all draw meaning and sustenance
from what we accomplish beyond our own fence posts.
The Widening Circle of
You and Your Farm–By farming organically,
you are regenerating the soil and returning it to
it's natural, healthy state. By farming without
chemicals, you are also regenerating your health
and your family's health.
The Local Environment–The
wildlands, wetlands and the environment surrounding
your farm are regenerated by your organic practices.
Dangerous chemicals no longer wash out of your
fields and beneficial birds and wildlife return
to help you keep down insect pests.
The Community–the local community
and the world beyond are also regenerated by your
farm as you recycle natural waste products into
your fields, reducing local pollution points.
As people eat your organic food, they are being
regenerated and made healthier. Your farm is helping
to clean up the planet!
By farming organically, we are regenerating the soil,
returning the land to its natural state. We are also
regenerating the health of ourselves and our family
by reducing or eliminating chemical fertilizers, pesticides
Beyond our farm, by not using chemicals, we are regenerating
the wildlands and local environment. Wildlife and beneficial
birds return to help keep down insects and other pests.
Our local watershed has less pollution in the streams
and creeks which come off our land.
Finally, we are helping to regenerate our communities
by recycling organic waste that would otherwise be an
economic or environmental problem. By providing organic
food to consumers, we are making the planet a healthier
place--our products are helping to regenerate the world.
So organic farming is more than just agriculture–and
it's good to remind ourselves of this from time to time.
We're helping to create a healthier, better future for
everyone. It's Regenerative Agriculture. Regenerative
Agriculture has become a whole science over the last
20 years, involving more than just farming and selling
products. As we regenerate local woodlands and streams,
as we help regenerate our local communities, many benefits
come to us, monetary and otherwise. That gives most
organic farmers a satisfaction beyond mere profits.
By farming organically, we're helping society in many
different ways. We interact with the local community
on whole new levels, perhaps by local marketing, organic
matter recycling or entertainment farming. Or maybe
by hosting a Farmer Field Day to show new transitioning
farmers how we do it. Teaching others: That's when you
really start Regenerating!
Thinking in terms of Regenerative Agriculture reminds
us of the true importance of farmers in our society.
The ridiculous image of the farmer as hick and redneck
is forgotten. We remember that agriculture is the foundation
of all civilization, that when you improve agriculture,
you elevate the whole society. And we affirm that agriculture
is an absolutely essential part of any world-wide effort
to improve our environment and health.