Take control of your health. Subscribe to MediResourceís Healthy Aging for FREE!
Being overweight and inactive can boost your insulin levels, over time putting you at risk for diabetes. This dangerous combination can also boost your risk for Alzheimer's disease according to a study published in the journal Archives of Neurology.
Insulin is a blood-sugar-regulating hormone produced by the body. As you gain weight, your body becomes increasingly resistant to its effect, causing the production of even more insulin. Over time, this vicious cycle can result in type 2 diabetes, a known risk factor for Alzheimer's. But a small study from the University of Washington School of Medicine indicates that even insulin resistance - before it becomes diabetes - can also set the stage for the degenerative brain disease.
Researchers created blood conditions similar to insulin resistance in 16 healthy adults who ranged in age from 55 to 81. They did so by giving participants infusions of insulin and sugar, and then giving them a spinal tap in order to analyze the effects. The experiment was repeated on separate mornings, at least one week apart.
What researchers found was that just a moderate increase in insulin had a "striking" effect on the central nervous system, causing an increase in a number of markers for inflammation. Inflammation is believed to play a key role in Alzheimer's development.
Furthermore, they found that higher insulin ultimately led to decreased levels of transthyretin, which helps to clear beta-amyloid out of the brain. Beta-amyloid is a protein that forms the sticky plaque which clogs the brains of Alzheimer's patients. Insulin resistance also led to increased levels of beta-amyloid itself, as well as of a substance called F2-isoprostane, high amounts of which are seen in the brains of people with Alzheimer's disease.
The exact mechanisms for these changes are unclear, the researchers say.
"Our findings suggest that insulin-resistant conditions such as diabetes mellitus and hypertension may increase the risk for Alzheimer's disease, in part through insulin-induced inflammation," write Dr. Mark A. Fishel and colleagues. They go on to caution that surging rates for obesity, heart disease, and hypertension could pave the way for "a dramatic increase" in the number of Alzheimer's cases.
Did you find what you were looking for on our website? Please let us know.