(NaturalNews) The belief that maintaining a low-fat diet promotes health and prevents disease is perhaps the single biggest misconception responsible for today's epidemics of high cholesterol, obesity, heart disease and early death. In a recent report, Dr. Dwight Lundell, a former heart surgeon with 25 years of experience, admits that low-fat diets are actually responsible for destroying health, and explains why consuming fats in proper balance with one another is vital for protecting the body from disease-causing inflammation.
The low-fat diet can be traced to studies conducted as far back as the 1940s, in which scientists observed a correlation between what they saw as "high-fat" diets and high cholesterol levels. From there, over the course of several decades, the ideology that low-fat diets were good for the heart and beneficial in maintaining healthy weight became etched in stone as fact, with little room for honest inquiry or opposition (http://jhmas.oxfordjournals.org/content/63/2/139.full
Today, however, it is becoming painfully apparent that millions of Americans are needlessly suffering from health conditions brought about by adhering to low-fat diets they were told would help them stay slim and healthy. And as new studies emerge showing that foods like saturated fat, which have been vilified for years as unhealthy and disease-causing, are actually beneficial for health, there is a significant paradigm shift occurring in the way people think about health (http://www.naturalnews.com/035069_low_fat_diet_myths_weight_loss.html
But because the low-fat diet myth has been perpetuated for so long in mainstream culture, this shift is occurring rather slowly, as many in the medical profession are reluctant to admit they bought into bad science all these years. But Dr. Lundell is one of the rare, humble medical professionals that is now openly proclaiming to the world the truth about the dangers of low-fat diets.
Processed sugars and grains, high omega-6 oils like soybean and corn all responsible for epidemic disease
The sad reality is that many of the foods being promoted by health authorities as beneficial for health and weight are precisely the foods responsible for poor health and obesity. Oils like soybean, corn, and sunflower, which are commonly used in processed and fast foods, are loaded with omega-6 fatty acids and mostly devoid of omega-3 fatty acids, a very serious imbalance that is responsible for damaging arterial walls and causing the chronic inflammation responsible for high cholesterol levels.
"What are the biggest culprits of chronic inflammation?" asks Dr. Lundell in his report. "Quite simply, they are the overload of simple, highly processed carbohydrates (sugar, flour and all the products made from them) and the excess consumption of omega-6 vegetable oils like soybean, corn and sunflower that are found in many processed foods."
You see, it is not cholesterol that is the enemy here -- your body actually needs cholesterol to function properly. It is instead the arterial wall inflammation caused by low-fat, omega-6-rich diets
that is the problem, as this damaged tissue collects cholesterol and causes the blockages responsible for causing heart events like strokes.
"Simply stated, without inflammation being present in the body, there is no way that cholesterol would accumulate in the wall of the blood vessel and cause heart disease
and strokes," adds Dr. Lundell. "Without inflammation, cholesterol would move freely throughout the body as nature intended. It is inflammation that causes cholesterol to become trapped."
Be sure to read Dr. Lundell's full report on low-fat diets, cholesterol, and how you can improve your health by eating fats at:http://www.sott.net
Have comments on this article? Post them here:
people have commented on this article.