Direct exposure to sunlight can be very dangerous and damaging, but if taken in moderation, sun may also protect against many diseases. Sun, in fact, provides us with energy that all living things need in order to live and grow, and it also promotes our vitamin D production, enhances mood, and improves sleep.
But let’s take a look at some of the most important health benefits of sunshine.
Before we start talking about the beneficial effects of the sun, we must first emphasize the importance of proper sun exposure.
If you wish to enjoy all the health benefits of sunshine without any harmful after effects, you should absolutely avoid overexposing yourself to the sun between 10 a.m. and 4 p.m. This is the time of the day when the sun is at its highest point in the sky, and during this time the sun’s rays are the strongest and most dangerous.
However, midday sun is the best source of UVB rays, which in turn are the primary and the most powerful sources of vitamin D. Only 10 to 15 minutes of direct sun exposure (without sunscreen) can be enough to generate sufficient vitamin D amounts!
UVA rays (morning and afternoon) do not promote vitamin D production, but they have other great health benefits and are also less likely to cause sunburns.
As we have just mentioned, sunlight is our primary source of vitamin D, known also as the sunshine vitamin.
Sunshine, vitamin D and bones
Vitamin D is necessary to maintain normal blood levels of calcium and phosphorus.
Vitamin D helps our bodies absorb calcium, and is thereby responsible for building stronger bones. It promotes bone mineralization and growth, and its deficiency may, in fact, cause thin, soft, brittle, misshaped and weak bones, susceptible to breakage.
Sunshine, vitamin D and cancer
Researches have shown that getting enough sunshine, meaning adequate amounts of vitamin D, may reduce the risk of cancer by at least 60%.
Being a potent cell growth regulator, vitamin D may prevent the creation, the growth, and the development of cancer cells and tumors.
Other sunshine and vitamin D health benefits
Vitamin D is a fat-soluble vitamin, found in some foods and produced in the body after exposure to ultraviolet rays from the sun.
Vitamin D is essential for our health and for the proper functioning of various systems in our body. Vitamin D deficiency may lead to many diseases such as cancer, diabetes, heart disease, hypertension, miopathy, multiple sclerosis osteoporoses, psoriasis, rickets, and many other illnesses.
Vitamin D deficiency is a common cause of preeclampsia.
Another great health benefit of sunshine lies in its power to improve your immune system, by increasing the number of white blood cells and promoting the production of gamma globulin. This is essential for your body’s natural defense system, as it helps fight bacteria, molds and viruses, and ward off infections and diseases. It also helps increase the oxygen carrying capacity of red blood cells.
It is well known that sunshine gives your skin a healthy glow and a smooth and radiant appearance. But this is not all!
Sunshine and better mood
One of the greatest health benefits of sunshine lays in its ability to sooth our nerves and enhance our mood. It can have positive effects on our mind and lift up our spirits, while fighting depression and promoting calmness. All in all, sunshine can cheer us up!
Sunshine, in fact, cures a type of depression called seasonal affective disorder (SAD), caused by decreased sunlight in the winter months.
Sunshine is known to increase serotonin levels in the brain. Decreased winter sunlight may instead lead to depression, for it makes our body produce twice as less serotonin compared to summer sunlight. Sunlight therapy has therefore shown to be the only efficient treatment for people affected by SAD.
Sunshine and better sleep
Getting enough sunlight will help your serotonin levels remain high during the day, and increase the melatonin production in the night.
In fact, natural sunlight inhibits the release of melatonin, and its output is therefore greatly increased at night, which helps maintain a normal circadian rhythm, while promoting better sleep.
Now add some sunshine to your life and let us know if you have enjoyed reading this post. Just leave a comment below.
Jessica is a translator who has lived for many years in Asia and South America. She now lives and works in Europe, while preparing her new journeys. She enjoys traveling, meeting new people, exploring different cultures and foods, and being in love.
There’s a difference between someone being imperfect and being very disrespectful. Here’re some relationship red flags to watch out for when dating someone.
Getting ready for a date can be quite nerve-wracking, which is why we decided to reveal you secret tips that will help you achieve the perfect date makeup.
Social media is here to stay but are your habits jeopardizing your relationship? It can be quite difficult to spot the signs. Read on to find out more.
You don’t become a clingy girlfriend overnight and you definitely won’t become less clingy in an instant. Learn how to be less clingy by reading our 9 tips.
Every woman wants to look and feel her best, but it takes time and practice to learn what works. We’ll teach you how to prepare for a date from head to toe.
Every woman likes to feel beautiful and there’s no better way to do it than to invest in the appearance of your skin. We’ll teach you how to get soft skin.
Discover the reasons why men like older women and why they find them sexier than the younger ones. Here are the top 10. Use them to your advantage!
Breakups are simply heartbreaking, but we all go through it at least once in our lives. Learning how to survive heartbreak will make things a lot easier.