Science Fair Project Encyclopedia
Dunes (hotel and casino)
In its early years, the Dunes was known for the 35-foot tall sultan that stood above its main entrance. Although it opened to much fanfare, it struggled from the start; one of the reasons possibly being it was located at what was the southernmost part of the Strip at the time. They frequently had to borrow money, and even the Sands Hotel lent its executives to help out, as well as bringing in numerous famous celebrities and entertainers such as Frank Sinatra’s surprise appearance dressed as a sultan. In 1957, the Dunes became the first hotel/casino in Nevada that introduced a topless show called Minsky’s Follies in a desperate move to keep the resort afloat.
The Dunes went through many owners during its existence, and on November 17, 1992, it was sold for the last time to Steve Wynn and the Mirage Resorts Inc. On January 26, 1993, it closed its doors for good. Like some of the other legendary hotel/casinos of its era, it could no longer compete with the newer and more exciting megaresorts that were being built.
On October 27, 1993, the Dunes was imploded in a grand ceremony which involved major fireworks displays, and the use of several “cannon blasts” from the pirate ship of Treasure Island hotel and casino, another of Wynn’s properties at the time, in order to simulate the effect of the ship’s cannons being responsible for the destruction of the Dunes. Everything, including its legendary neon sign, was destroyed. The implosion also served as a very symbolic effect for the city. Many longtime residents knew the Dunes was controlled by the mob, having been first built with money from the mob and the Teamsters’ Pension Fund, and the implosion signaled the end of any kind of significant mob control and influence in Vegas.
The ground was cleared in order to make room for the elegant Bellagio, which stands today.
The contents of this article is licensed from www.wikipedia.org under the GNU Free Documentation License. Click here to see the transparent copy and copyright details