2015 Guidelines PALS Course
100% classroom training means students are with an AHA instructor for their entire learning experience.
Pediatric Advanced Life Support (PALS)
PALS is a classroom, video-based, Instructor-led course that uses a series of simulated pediatric emergencies to reinforce the important concepts of a systematic approach to pediatric assessment, basic life support, PALS treatment algorithms, effective resuscitation and team dynamics.
Updated with 2015 AHA Guidelines for CPR & ECC
AHA Blended Learning courses combine the flexibility of online training with in-person skills practice and testing.
HeartCode PALS is the AHA’s PALS blended learning delivery method. Blended learning is a combination of eLearning, in which a student completes part of the course in a self-directed manner, followed by a hands-on session.
The online portion of this comprehensive eLearning program uses eSimulation technology to allow students to assess and treat patients in virtual healthcare settings.
2010 Guidelines Pediatric Courses
PEARS teaches providers how to recognize respiratory distress, shock and cardiac arrest, and provide appropriate lifesaving interventions within the initial minutes of response until the child is transferred to an advanced life support provider. The goal of PEARS is to improve the quality of care provided to seriously ill or injured infants and children, resulting in improved outcomes.
Learn:® Rhythm Pediatric
This is a self-directed, online course that introduces healthcare providers to normal pediatric cardiac rhythms and prepares them to recognize basic pediatric cardiac arrhythmias in clinical practice. The course allows healthcare providers to gain proficiency in pediatric ECG rhythm recognition in an effort to provide better patient treatment and save more lives.
Use our Find a Course tool to locate an AHA Training Center in your area that offers classroom and skills sessions.
Shop AHA eBooks to purchase digital course materials required for your class.
Go to eBooks.heart.org.