Many years ago, I took an introductory philosophy course and was exposed to the teaching of René Descartes. While Descartes is probably best known for the statement Cogito ergo sum (I think, therefore I am) he was also the inventor of the Cartesian coordinate system (which served as the basis for many mathematical advances) and far too many other major contributions to address in this format. In short, he’s known as the Father of Modern Philosophy, due to the fact that his contributions and philosophical views were so widely accepted.
In his work titled Discourse on the Method, he stated the following regarding thinking correctly:
". . .differences of opinion are not due to difference in intelligence, but merely to the fact that we use different approaches and consider different things. For it is not enough to have a good mind: one must use it well."
Because in today’s workforce this truth is more evident than ever before, I thought I'd provide some examples. For young people trying to enter the workforce, people of any age trying to re-enter the workforce, or someone who wants to transition to a new career, there are some things you will want to know sooner rather than later if you plan to succeed. Who knows, maybe this little list will help someone get that next promotion or make the decision to return to school to complete his or her degree.
1. How you think will determine how quickly (or not) you will advance in your chosen field. Stated another way, how you think today will determine your tomorrow.
Do you solve problems effectively? Do you think beyond what is required to complete assigned tasks or just enough to get by?
2. Those who reflect often are often considered wise. (Or is it, those who are considered wise reflect often?)
If you want to learn more about the power of reflection tune in next week when reflection will be the main topic.
3. Learning is not defined by the collection of random pieces of information. Rather, learning is defined by how one connects pieces of information.
Do you understand both the details as well as the big picture when it comes to your workplace responsibilities? Do you know how your work affects the work of others? How does what you do fit into bigger processes?
If you're an LPN looking for good nursing schools, accelerated nursing courses, or a way to earn your ADN, The College Network can help you find an online nursing program to meet your needs.
Stop and take a minute to reflect on this.
So, what do you think?
Until next week.