Scanned text contains errors.
6. Ti QUINCTIUS ClNCINNATUS CAPITOLINUS,
consular tribune in b. c. 368. [cincinnatus.]
7 TV quinctius T. p. pennus capitolinus crispin us, was appointed dictator in b. c. 361, to conduct the war against the Gauls, as Livy thinks, who is supported by the triumphal fasti, which ascribe to him a triumph in this year over the Gauls. In the year following he was magister equitum to the dictator, Q. Servilms Ahala, who likewise fought against the Gauls. In b. c. 354 he was consul with M. Fabius Ambustus, and in that year the Tiburtines and Tarquinienses were subdued. In b. c. 351, he was appointed consul a se-second time, and received the conduct of the war against the Faliscans as his province, but no battle was fought, as the Romans confined themselves to ravaging the country. (Liv. vii. 9, 11, 18, 22.)
8. T. quinctius pennus capitolinus cris-pinus. In b. c. 214, when M. Claudius Marcellus went to Rome to sue for his third consulship, he left Capitolinus in Sicily in command of the Roman fleet and camp. In b. c. 209, he was elected praetor, and obtained Capua as his province. The year after, b. c. 208, he was elected consul together with M. Claudius Marcellus, and both consuls were commissioned to carry on the war against Hannibal in Italy. In a battle which was fought in the neighbourhood of Tarentum, Capitolinus was severely wounded and retreated. He was afterwards carried to Capua and thence to Rome, where he died at the close of the year, after having proclaimed T. Manlius Torquatus dictator. (Liv. xxiv. 39, xxvii. 6, 7,21, 27, 28, 33 ; Polyb. x. 32.)
CAPITOLINUS, P. SE'XTIUS, surnamed VATIC AN US, was consul in b. c. 452 with T. Menenius Agrippa. In this year the ambassadors who had been sent to Athens for the purpose of consulting its laws and institutions, returned to Rome, and in the year following P. Sextius was one of the decemvirs appointed to draw up a new code of laws. Festus (s. v. peculatus) mentions a lex multaticia which was carried by P. Sextius and his colleague during their consulship. (Liv. iii. 32, &c.; Dionys. x. 54.) fL. S.]
CAPITOLINUS, SP. TARPE'IUS MON- TA'NUS, consul in b. c. 454 with A. Aternius Varus. A lex de multae sacramento which was carried in his consulship, is mentioned by Festus (s. v. peculatus., comp. Cic. de Re Publ. ii. 35; Liv. iii. 31 ; Dionys. x. 48, 50). After the close of their office both consuls were accused by a tribune of the people for having sold the booty which they had made in the war against the Aequians, and giving the proceeds to the aerarium instead of dis tributing it among the soldiers. Both were con demned notwithstanding the violent opposition of the senate. In b. c. 449, when the Roman army advanced towards Rome to revenge the murder of Virginia, and had taken possession of the Aven- tine, Sp. Tarpeius was one of the two ambassadors whom the senate sent to the revolted army to re monstrate with them. In the year following, he and A. Aternius, though both were patricians, were elected tribunes of the plebs by the cooptation of the college to support the senate in its opposi tion to the rogation of the tribune L. Trebonius. (Liv. iii. 50, 55.) [L. S.]
CAPRATINA, a surname of Juno at Rome, of which the origin is related as follows :—When the Roman state was in a very weak condition, after the ravages of the Gauls, the neighbouring people under Postumius Livius advanced from Fidenae before the gates of Rome, and demanded Roman women in marriage, threatening to destroy Rome completely unless their demand was complied with. While the Roman senate was yet deliberating as to what was to be done, a slave of the name of Tutela or Philotis, offered to go with her fellow-slaves, in the disguise of free women, to the camp of the enemy. The stratagem succeeded, and when the Latins in their camp, intoxicated with wine, had fallen asleep, the slaves gave a signal to the Romans from a wild fig-tree (caprificus). The Romans now broke forth from the city, and defeated the enemy. The senate rewarded the generosity of the female slaves by restoring them to freedom, and giving to each a dowry from the public treasury. The day on which Rome had thus been delivered, the 7th of July, was called nonae Caprotinae, and an annual festival was celebrated to Juno Caprotina in all Latium, by free \vomen as well as by female slaves, with much mirth and merriment. The solemnity took place under the ancient caprificus, and the milky juice flowing from the tree was offered as a sacrifice to the goddess. (Macrob. Sat. i. 11; Varro, DeLing. Lat. vi. 18 ; Plut. Romul. 29, Camil 33.) [L.S.]
CAPREOLUS, succeeded Aurelius in the episcopal see of Carthage in the year 430, at the period when all Africa was overrun and ravaged by the Vandals. The state of the country rendering it impossible to send a regular deputation to the council of Ephesus, summoned in 431 for the purpose of discussing the doctrines of Nestorius, Ca-preolus despatched thither his deacon Besula, with an epistle, in which he deplores the circumstances which compelled his absence, and denounces the tenets of the patriarch of Constantinople. Capreolus is believed to have died before 439, the year in which Carthage was stormed by the Vandals.
We possess, 1. Epistola ad Synodum Ephesinam^ written, as Ave have seen above, in 431. It is extant both in Greek and Latin.
2. Epistola de una Christi veri Dei et Hominis Persona contra recens damnatum Haeresim Nestorii, a long and learned letter, addressed to two persons named Vitalis and Constantius, or Tonantius, who had written from Spain to consult Capreolus concerning the controversy which was then agitating the church. It is contained in the Varior. Opusc. of Sirmond, vol. i. Paris, 1675, 8vo.
Both of the above works, together with the epistle of Vitalis and Tonantius to Capreolus, will be found in the Bibliotheca Patrum of Galland, vol. ix. p. 490.
3. A fragment in reply to the letter addressed by Theodosius to Augustin with regard to the council of Ephesus, is preserved by Ferrandus in his " Epistola ad Pelagium et Anatolium," and quoted by Galland.
4. Tillemont believes Capreolus to be the author of the Sermo de Tempore Barbarico, on the invasion of Africa by the Vandals, usually included among the works of St. Augustin. Galland, Bibl. Patrum. vol. ix. Prolegg. p. 31 ; Schoenemann, Bibl. Pa trum Latinorum9 c. v. 32, who enumerates all the editions. [W. R.]
CAPTA or CAPITA, a surname of the Minerva