It has become a regular occurrence for BlackBerry users to tether their laptops to their phone to receive Internet connectivity through the cellular network. This ensures the user can use the Internet wherever they have a signal. Less common, however, is the need to connect your BlackBerry to the Internet through a computer. Though this scenario is less common, it does occur. Consider an area of low cellular signal that happens to be near a Wi-Fi hotspot. If your laptop is connected to the Wi-Fi network, you can create an ad hoc network that will allow your BlackBerry to connect and share the Internet connection.
What is an Ad Hoc Network?
An ad hoc network is made to temporarily provide connectivity to multiple computers or devices. A common use is to share documents at a meeting among members or to share a network connection with other computers or devices that would be otherwise unable to connect. Setting up an ad hoc network on your computer will allow anyone with Wi-Fi access and your password to connect to your system. You could then share drives, data, printers and your Internet connection until you disband the network. This type of network can be useful, but it can also be dangerous. Connecting to an unknown and unprotected ad hoc network could potentially grant an outsider access to your personal data.
Setup the Ad Hoc Network
Setting up the network is not a difficult process. First, ensure your computer is connected to the Internet. Click "Control Panel" from the Windows start menu. Click "Network and Internet" and then click "Network and Sharing Center." This screen provides information about all of your network connections and allows you to alter settings and create new connections. Click "Set up a new connection or network." Select "Set up a wireless ad hoc network" and click "Next." Enter a name for your network and select "WPA2-Personal for a security type. Type a password when asked for a "Security key" and click "Next." The network will now be created.
Setup Internet Connection Sharing
Internet connection sharing, or ICS, is a Windows feature that allows any computer connected to yours to utilize your Internet connection. This feature will allow your BlackBerry, once connected, to surf the Internet through your computer. To set it up click "Turn on Internet Connection Sharing" on the summary screen after setting up the ad hoc network. Windows will automatically share the active Internet connection with your new ad hoc network. Alternatively, you can click "Change Adapter Settings" from the Network and Sharing Center to view all of your network connection. Right-click the connection you intend to share and click "Properties." Click "Allow other network users to connect through this computers Internet connection" from the Sharing tab. You are now ready to connect your BlackBerry.
Connect your BlackBerry
In order to begin surfing using your computer's ad hoc network, you must set up the connection on your BlackBerry. Click "Manage Connections" from the BlackBerry homepage. Click "Manually Add Network." Type the name of the network when prompted and click "Add." "Select Pre-Shared Key" for security type and type the WPA-Personal password you entered when creating the network. Click "Connect" to initiate the connection. You are now connected to your computer's Internet connection through Wi-Fi.