IRON EYE URN I EARN I YEARN
by Tara Carreon
We hear a good deal about the Iron Age, or age of metals, as a great jump forward in man's history; actually the metals themselves played a comparatively small part in the rise of the first great civilizations. While men learned to use bronze, which demands little more heat than is necessary to produce good ceramics, and later iron, for tools and ornaments, the use of metal did not make a really massive change in civilization for well over 1,500 years. It was what Leslie White of the University of Michigan calls the "Fuel Revolution" that brought the metals into their own. Coal, oil, and gas, new sources of energy, combined with the invention of the steam and combustion engines, ushered in the new age. It was not metals as tools, but metals combined with heat in new furnaces and power machinery that took human society off its thousand-year plateau and made possible another enormous upswing in human numbers, with all the social repercussions.
Now I would like to talk about thermite, one of my favorite topics. This is a demonstration at the University of California with thermite. The reaction is iron oxide, rust, plus powdered aluminum, plus sulfur. Well, this didn’t have sulfur, but if you put sulfur in it, it cuts through steel faster. Thermite: Fe203+Al (+sulfur: fast cutter). And now you see the white hot steam. Now this reaches temperatures hot enough to evaporate steel. Does that sound familiar? Remember, evaporated steel was seen in the rubble pile. And this is the collapse of the North Tower. Here we see this aluminum oxide coming off, and the glowing hot metal. We’re trying to get more photos, but it looks like this is a steel structure. Now, from the North Tower, something glowing there. And then this trailing-off smoke coming off of that. It certainly looks like thermite. But there’s more.
There was molten metal found beneath both towers and Building 7. Now the temperature, according to Eager and others, of these fires were about 650 C. To melt steel requires 1500 C. Thermite gets you up well past that, to 2500 C. And as you look at the molten stuff being pulled out -- we have photographs and so on of this -- you see that you’ve got this yellow hot stuff. Now the color of the metal tells you the temperature. It’s physics, independent of the metal. So this has to be something that can hold together even when it’s salmon and yellow hot. What is that? Structural steel can handle that, lemon and salmon temperatures, no problem. Aluminum melts at 660C. If this had been aluminum, it would just be liquid. It can’t be solid at those temperatures. And it was also weeks after 9/11.
Molten metal slag: high iron content (aluminum does not make red rust)
And after this slag solidifies -- we finally got a picture of this -- you see that it’s covered with a red material which certainly looks like rust. Again, the end product of the thermite reaction is molten iron. And you see the entrained cement and rebar here, of course. I’ve had people say, “Well, it’s just aluminum from the planes.” Well, I’m sorry, first of all there was molten metal beneath Building 7 and there was no plane there. And plus the fact that we’re building the evidence here. We’re hoping to analyze some of this stuff, and really nail it. Does it have high iron content and aluminum oxide as well?
An explosive specialist says, “I have read your paper regarding the towers’ collapse, and agree that military thermite" -- which is the type with sulfur as an accelerant to make it cut through steel much faster -- "is the only explanation for the molten slag found weeks after the collapse. Thermite charges, used in conjunction with small linear charges.” Now I want to emphasize that. I believe that if thermite was used, there were also explosives like HDX or RDX used as well.
FEMA talks about the sulfidation. This is in the FEMA report. This is Professor Barnett again. He’s a good guy out in Massachusetts who said, “Look, we found this steel under Building 7 and it’s got sulfidation.” That means sulfur attacked the steel, which it does. “Where did this sulfur come from?” Good question. Used in conjunction with thermite, it’s called “thermate.” It’s a military form, and it’s used to cut through steel rapidly.
Hot spots in the rubble corroborate reports of the deep down molten metal. F-G, this is the South Tower, and then the North Tower is C-D, in this area. The red color. And this is Building 7. The red-orange implies these very high temperatures. This is five days after 9/11.
“There is an explosion at the base of the building.” This is Building 2. White smoke from the bottom, white smoke again consistent with thermite. Something happened. See, what you want to do is cut these core columns, these huge steel cores, down low. And this is what the demolition experts say. “If I were going to bring the towers down, I would put explosives in the basement to get the weight of the building to help collapse the structure.” Gosh, that sounds just like what happened, particularly to Building 7. But in the towers also there were reports of explosions.
Now we get to a little thing that’s kind of important. A puzzle piece. I brought along a puzzle, which my wife got for me. We’re putting out these puzzle pieces, you know, molten metal at the bottom of both towers and Building 7, and rusty when you look at the slag, the rapid collapse of Building 7 straight down, the fact that the fires were not hot enough. We’re trying to put these pieces together and figure it out.
The ongoing bureaucratic drama surrounding procurement for this project is a kind of fairy tale for the system of legalized corruption in this country, in which taxpayer money is basically stolen and shot into space by an open conspiracy of legislators, defense contractors and Pentagon officials, colloquially known as the "Iron Triangle." The F-22 project is particularly offensive since its cost -- $65 billion -- mirrors very closely the $50 billion in "emergency" cuts to social programs congress made last year, ostensibly to help pay for Katrina reconstruction.