SAN DIEGO - Three years after the largest wildfire in California history wiped out whole forests and disrupted native animals, there are signs the ecosystem is slowly recovering, scientists reported Tuesday.
Several long-term studies conducted after the deadly 273,000-acre Cedar fire of 2003 found certain trees and shrubs have resprouted while some animals have moved back into burned areas.
PROTECTORS: Goats make their way down the street in Scripps Ranch last summer to forage on the hillsides and create a firebreak in a neighborhood hit hard by the 2003 wildfires.
JOHN GIBBINS, SAN DIEGO UNION-TRIBUNE
Wrightwood blaze contained
•A wildfire that broke out near a ski resort and ranger station in Wrightwood, in the mountains of the Angeles National Forest east of Los Angeles, was quickly contained Tuesday.
The blaze, which was fanned by strong winds, threatened several structures before firefighters got it fully contained about 8 a.m., said U.S. Forest Service spokeswoman Dee Dechert. It burned across about six acres of dry brush and trees. The cause was under investigation.
•A wildfire that killed five firefighters last month near Palm Springs was started with a device consisting of a cigarette and six matches, a newspaper reported Tuesday.
Authorities suspect a similar device was used in June to set two other wildfires that were later linked by DNA to the man charged with setting the deadly blaze, according to court documents obtained by The Press-Enterprise of Riverside.
Raymond Lee Oyler, 36, is charged with murder and arson in the fatal fire, and with arson in 10 other blazes. He has pleaded not guilty.
"Recovery seems to be good," said Jon Keeley of the U.S. Geological Survey's Western Ecological Research Center in Three Rivers.
Concerns remain, however. Exotic, weed-like grasses have flourished in some charred forest land, choking off native plants and threatening to displace small mammals.
One of the hardest-hit areas was Cuyamaca Rancho State Park, a 25,000-acre natural oasis 40 miles east of San Diego. The park was temporarily closed to the public after the Cedar fire roared through, leveling almost all pine and conifer trees. Oak trees were burned from the ground up, but their bases mostly survived.
Researchers from San Diego State University who surveyed the park after the fire reported mixed progress. While chaparral shrubs and native wildflowers sprouted a year after the fire, a rainy season last year also led to an explosion of invasive plants, which could increase future fire hazards.
What's worse, scientists said, pine trees have failed to regrow. Some fear that without restoration projects, forests will be dominated by oak trees and shrubs for decades to come. "It's puzzling why there's so little regeneration" of pines, said San Diego State biologist Janet Franklin, who presented her study at a conference in San Diego.