ScienceDaily (Dec. 31, 2009) — Most of the carbon dioxide emitted by human activity does not remain in the atmosphere, but is instead absorbed by the oceans and terrestrial ecosystems. In fact, only about 45 percent of emitted carbon dioxide stays in the atmosphere.
Many climate models also assume that the airborne fraction will increase. Because understanding of the airborne fraction of carbon dioxide is important for predicting future climate change, it is essential to have accurate knowledge of whether that fraction is changing or will change as emissions increase.
To assess whether the airborne fraction is indeed increasing, Wolfgang Knorr of the Department of Earth Sciences at the University of Bristol reanalyzed available atmospheric carbon dioxide and emissions data since 1850 and considers the uncertainties in the data.
In contradiction to some recent studies, he finds that the airborne fraction of carbon dioxide has not increased either during the past 150 years or during the most recent five decades.
The research is published in Geophysical Research Letters.
Scientific data which exposes the environmental justice hoax continues to be published and lame main stream media is still ignoring this gigantic deception. All the global warming hysterics can stop the mantra of the “science is settled.” The science is NOT settled and claims that there are universal agreement by world scientists is a lie.
The more concerning aspect of this hoax is how developing countries have found championing the bad science offers them opportunities to reach in to the pockets of developed countries (mainly the United States.) Third world countries have found a new way to exert guilt on countries that have prospered.
“No money, no deal,” Selwin Hart, a Barbadian envoy who speaks on finance issues for 43 island and low-lying states, said in an interview. “Financing will be critical.” Delegates from developing nations walked out of talks today in a dispute over the day’s agenda, causing a delay of at least three hours.
Developing countries including China and India will need as much as 100 billion euros ($145 billion) a year in climate aid from 2010 to 2020, New York-based McKinsey & Co. said in a September report. That’s to help avoid “ , McKinsey said.
The U.S. andhave called for $10 billion a year for developing states from Jan. 1 through 2012. The EU promised to provide about a third of that, while Canada has no pledge and the U.S. says it will pay its “fair share.”
“Ten billion is not sufficient for adaptation,” said Chinese negotiator Su Wei, in an interview.
On aid after 2012, the U.S. is not likely to state how much it would be willing to contribute, according to an official familiar with the talks. The Obama administration is more focused on a financing plan of $10 billion from 2010 through 2012, the official said.
The U.S. plans to pay its “fair share” of that amount,said in a statement earlier this month.
A draft text from Copenhagen on adaptation to climate change says industrialized nations should provide funds equivalent to 1.5 percent of their .
Slowly the American public is understanding the implications of this pseudoscience, only 34% of Americans now believe that climate change is due to primarily human activity. As the science is being questioned, people will start looking at reparations to developing countries as what they are redistribution of wealth; in essence a penalty because a society has flourished.