Home school Physical Education is actually one of the easiest courses to organize for our family. I simply record activities as they happen and we have enough credit hours.
What is Physical Education? For our family, it is learning about the health of our physical bodies.
I want our boys to learn to love an active healthy lifestyle1. I want them to understand healthy eating habits, as well as what their bodies need to be healthy. Cleanliness, Getting enough sleep, stress reduction, whatever deals with living a healthy lifestyle1.
Once you decide the ultimate goals, the details of what activities to include seem to fall into place. Here are some ideas.
Nutrition could be a part of your homeschool Physical Education.
The obvious activity is any sport league your sons may participate in.
You might track trips to the park. Trips to the bike path. Hiking trips.
Playing Sports. This is pretty self explanatory. Little league, baseball, foot ball, wrestling, basketball.
Our family focuses more on individual sports; karate, gymnastics, shooting sports, snow boarding, hiking, good hard work! Keep track of practice and game or class time. Add it up. Put it on your transcript as Homeschool Physical Education.
Living an active lifestyle1 as a family. Go hiking, exploring, ice skating skiing, hunting (lots of hiking while hunting) The list could go on. Any physical activity that your kids participate in. Keep a list and the hours will add up.
Nutrition: We have almost daily discussion of healthy eating habits. "Eat your veggies!" and tell them why. What are carrots good for? Why we should not live on peanut butter and jelly.
We garden, can and produce much of our foods ourselves which provides a natural learning experience for our kids. If you can't garden for yourselves. Try to make it to a farmers market in your area. At least a time or two. Your children will learn where their food comes from. Discuss the foods you buy at the grocery store. Look at ingredients with your kids.
For older kids if they have a strong interest it could be developed into a high school elective credit class all on its own.
For boys especially as they enter the teen years they really start noticing when muscles are growing (or not growing!) It is a good idea to have them set individual goals for themselves. Daily physical activity makes for a much happier boy!
Being safe in the water is the number one reason to teach kids to swim. Kids should know how to swim well enough to stay afloat if they should ever fall into water.
Our homeschool Physical Education courses tend to be more individual sports and activities. One of my sons enjoyed Karate classes for some time... then he discovered Jiu Jitsu. It fit him perfectly. He purchased the video courses and worked through them at home on his own schedule.
Here is a game my oldest son brought home with him on his last visit.
For this game all you need is boys, a deck of cards, and a space on the floor for each boy to exercise without running into each other.
Have a fun game or activity that you've found for your boys physical education? Share it, we'd love to give it a try.