What We Do:
We can help you become an explanation specialist.
Common Craft Membership
Start your life as an explainer with Common Craft Membership. Prices start at just $49 per year. It provides:
Make your presentation or video remarkable with 800+ digital images in Common Craft Style, plus Know-How resources for using them.
We Wrote the Book on Explanation
Need a Video for Your Product?
Imagine for a minute that you’re a librarian, but not a normal one. You’re a librarian for every book in the world. People depend on you every day to find the exact book they need. How do you do it?
You need a system. You need to know what’s inside every book and how books relate to each other. Your system needs to take in a lot information and spit out the best answers for a patron’s questions. It’s not an easy job.
Search engines like Google and Bing are the librarians of the Internet. Their systems collect information about every page on the web so they can help people find exactly what they are looking for. And every search engine has a secret recipe, called an algorithm - for turning all that information into useful search results.
Now, if you own a website, search results matter. When your pages have higher rankings, they help more people find you. The key to higher rankings is making sure your website has the ingredients search engines need for their recipes. This is called search engine optimization or SEO.
As it turns out, most of the big ingredients are known. Let’s take a look...
First, words matter. Search engines account for every word on the web. This way, when someone searches for “shoe repair” the search engines can narrow the results to only the pages that are about those words.
Second, titles matter. Each page on the web has an official title, but you may not ever see it because it’s in the code. Search engines pay a lot of attention to page titles because they often summarize the page, like a book’s title.
Third, links between websites matter. When one web page links to another, it’s usually a recommendation, telling readers “this site has good information”. A web page with a lot of links coming to it can look good to search engines.
But some people try to fool the search engines by creating or buying bogus links all over the web that point to their own website. Usually search engines can detect when a site has a lot of them. And they account for it by giving links from trustworthy sites more weight in the recipe.
Fourth, the words that are used in links matter too. If your webpage says “Amazon has lots of books” and the word “books” is linked, search engines can establish that amazon.com is related to the word “books”. This way when someone searches for books, that site will rank well.
Lastly, search engines care about reputation. Sites with a consistent record of fresh engaging content and growing numbers of quality links may be considered rising stars and do well in search rankings.
These are just the basics and the recipes are refined and changed all the time. Good SEO is about making sure your website has great content that supported by the ingredients that search engines need for their recipes.
What it teaches
This video uses a recipe analogy to explain the importance of search engine rankings and what can help your site achieve higher rankings. It teaches:
- How search engines evaluate websites
- The importance of words and titles in rankings
- The importance of quality links and content
The Explainer Network
Our network of custom video producers can create short, animated videos that make your product or service easier to understand.