MUSKEGON, Mich. (AP) -- The Coast Guard would become one of the largest sources of the toxic metal lead entering the Great Lakes if it goes through with a plan to create 34 live-fire weapons-training zones in the lakes, according to federal data. Coast Guard personnel would fire up to 430,000 bullets each year in the training zones, which are to be scattered across all five Great Lakes, The Muskegon Chronicle reported Monday. Because the bullets that the military agency plans to use are largely made from lead and copper, the training exercises would deposit as much as 6,900 pounds of lead and 2,800 pounds of copper each year in the lakes, according to a health-risk assessment that the Coast Guard commissioned. "That's more lead than the entire state of Michigan and all of its industries and pollution sources emit to surface waters every year," said Hugh McDiarmid Jr., a spokesman for the Michigan Environmental Council. Michigan industries in 2004 discharged 4,069 pounds of lead compounds into surface waters, according to data from the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Coast Guard officials say the live-fire training is needed to protect the Great Lakes region from terrorism and other illegal activities. "We need to train in the environment in which we are going to fire the weapons," said Capt. Patrick W. Brennan. The health-risk assessment, prepared by CH2M Hill Cos. Ltd., an Englewood, Colo.-based engineering and construction firm, concluded that sending hundreds of thousands of lead and copper bullets into the Great Lakes would not pollute the lakes or poison aquatic life. Furthermore, the weapons training would "result in no elevated risks for the Great Lakes," according to the study. Critics claim the exercises would turn the lakes into a military zone, endanger boaters and others who use the lakes and potentially poison fish and other aquatic life with lead and other toxic metals found in bullets. Ingesting lead can cause brain damage, reproductive problems and cancer in humans, according to the U.S. Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry. Rick Rediske, a scientist at Grand Valley State University's Annis Water Resources Institute, said the bullets would pose little threat to the Great Lakes ecosystem because lead does not easily dissolve in fresh water. "There's never been any evidence, that I'm aware of, of lead accumulating in the food chain unless it was ingested by animals," said Rediske, a professor of water resources at the university. "I wouldn't anticipate the lead getting into the food chain." Public safety is another area of concern because many of the proposed firing ranges are in areas frequented by fishing boats, sailboats and public transit ferry boats. Coast Guard officials have said all the proposed zones are at least five miles off the U.S. shoreline and the maritime border with Canada. Each firing range would be used only a few times each year, for four to six hours per day. Federal officials have said they would alert boaters about upcoming weapons training exercises and stop shooting if a boat strayed into the firing range. The Coast Guard has conducted 24 live-fire weapons-training exercises on the Great Lakes this year, all without incident, federal officials said. The proposed firing ranges are the subject of a series of public meetings that were to begin Monday in Duluth, Minn. The second meeting is scheduled for Wednesday in Spring Lake, about 10 miles south of Muskegon.