Since the inception of Title IX in 1972, female sports participation has grown dramatically in the United States. With this increased participation, female sports injuries have also been on the rise.
While traumatic injuries involving the extremities, such as ACL tears, are frequently diagnosed immediately, nontraumatic sports injuries and conditions are frequently overlooked. One of these conditions which has received increased attention recently is called the female athlete triad.
It is a combination of three conditions: disordered eating, menstrual abnormalities, and osteoporosis (weak bones). Disordered eating can vary along a spectrum from fasting and food restriction to serious eating disorders such as bulimia nervosa and anorexia nervosa. The combination of disordered eating and excessive exercise may result in decreased estrogen, a hormone that is responsible for regulating the menstrual cycle. As a result, a female athlete’s menstrual cycle may become irregular, stop altogether, or never even begin. Poor nutrition, with low calcium and vitamin D intake, and low estrogen levels may lead to poor bone density and osteoporosis. This may in time predispose the athlete to bone fractures.
While all female athletes are at risk, those who compete in cross country running, gymnastics, and dance are particularly prone to this condition. Because many female athletes are not open about their eating habits, the exact incidence of the female athlete triad is unknown. However, studies have shown that in some female collegiate athlete populations, more than 50 percent suffer from an eating disorder.
In the short term, athletes who are consuming too few calories may feel tired, have poor attention span, and be irritable. All of these may negatively affect academic performance. Those with female athlete triad are also at risk of stress fractures or overuse injuries. In the long-term, athletes may have a harder time becoming pregnant and may be predisposed to future osteoporotic fractures.
Female athlete triad is a complex problem that often requires a multidisciplinary approach. If it is suspected that a girl has female athlete triad, she should be seen by a physician and perhaps consult with a dietitian or nutritionist who works with teenage athletes.
To prevent the development of female athlete triad, an athlete can keep a menstrual calendar, avoid skipping meals or snacks, and acknowledge and treat injuries promptly. Parents and coaches should encourage healthy eating and work to promote positive body image.
Andrew T. Pinnock, M.D., is a pediatric and adolescent orthopedic sports medicine specialist at Rady Children’s Hospital San Diego and an assistant professor of orthopedics at UCSD. He can be reached at firstname.lastname@example.org