Medical Thermography or Infrared Thermography is the non-contact and non-invasive technique of deriving diagnostic indications from detailed images of the human body with the use of high resolution infrared thermal imaging cameras.
Infrared Thermography is a passive method in which the device or equipment does not get in physical contact with the patients. The Infrared Thermography finds its application in the fields of oncology, chiropractic, rheumatology, neurology, dentistry, physiotherapy, vascular medicine/cardiology, etc. It can be successfully applied to diagnose a number of disorders in human body including the breast cancer, respiratory dysfunctions, urinary diseases, cardiovascular disorders, circulatory disorders, lymphatic dysfunctions, reproductive disorders, nervous dysfunctions, endocrine problems, locomotors disorders, skin problems, ENT dysfunction, and many more. However, the best application of Medical Thermography comes in the detection of the breast cancer in women.
Breast Thermography is very helpful and effective in the prevention of breast cancer in women. Breast cancer in women results due to spreading of cells in breast tissues as malignant tumors. A large number of women suffer and die due to breast cancer each year. There are many ways to prevent breast cancer in women. Self examinations, mamograms and Breast Thermography are some of the most effective ways.
Breast Thermography is becoming more and more popular with time to detect the breast cancer in the very beginning stage. A plus point with the use of thermal breast imaging is absence of any type of radiations involved in the technique. Moreover, the result is high quality images obtained that can accurately tell about the complications.
So how does Medical Thermography technique works? The technique works by sensing the heat generated in the tissue areas under inspection. It is based on strong correlation between the functional conditions of a body and its internal temperature. For a normal human body, the internal temperature remains constant independent of the external conditions. The heat produced in the body is radiated to the environment with the help of the skin. It is now known that our skin radiates highest intensity of electromagnetic energy in the infrared region of the electromagnetic spectrum. In case of cancer in a tissue area, extra heat is generated due to the metabolic modifications by the tumor and changes in blood circulation pattern. The infrared imaging detects every minute variation in the heat patterns and thus blood vessel activity. These variations may indicate a pre-cancerous state of the breast or a tumor that cannot be detected during a physical examination.
Medical thermography is a highly reliable technique. This passive diagnosis method does not negatively affect the patient’s health. This technique is safe even for the children and pregnant women. As a result, Medical Thermography is becoming more and more popular and has opened new prospects for its use in diagnostic screening.
by Devender Kundaliya