Light drinking increases the risk of cancer!
More than 3.5% of all cancers are attributable to drinking alcohol, and there is convincing evidence that this increases the risk for cancer of the colon, breast, larynx, liver, esophagus and mouth. Most of this evidence came from studies of high and moderate intake of alcohol. An analytical review by Italian researchers of 222 studies involving almost 92,000 light drinkers (up to 1 drink/day) has found even this level of drinking is associated with increased risk of mouth, esophagus and breast cancer.
PositiveTip: Avoid even small amounts of alcohol to minimize your risk of cancer.
Only 1.5 drinks of alcohol per day significantly increases the risk of cancer.
Alcohol use accounted for about 3.5 percent of all cancer deaths in the U.S. That means that almost 20,000 Americans die from cancer each year as a result of drinking. Researchers estimated that each alcohol-related cancer death cost 18 years of potential life. Among women, breast cancer was the top cause of cancer death; in men it was cancers of the upper airway and the esophagus.
PositiveTip: There is no safe threshold for alcohol and cancer risk!
Are we really over-diagnosed in America?
Meet Dr. Timothy Wilt. You probably haven't heard his name. He has not authored any books, blogs, or newspaper columns. He doesn't even have a TV show! He is a member of the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, a 16 member panel of independent experts. He is an evidence-based doctor, interested in quality healthcare for all.
PositiveTip: Learn more about Dr. Wilt and why he is interested in altering your view of cancer screening to reduce early-screening anxiety.
Cigarette smoking started in early life significantly increases mortality.
Even though the significant negative health effects of cigarette smoking are well known, smoking rates in young people continue to rise. Analysis of data from the Harvard University Alumni Study found that men who reported smoking at age 18 experienced a 30% increase in all-cause mortality (P<0.001). Deaths from smoking-related cancers increased by 91% in these same men (P<0.001). Quitting smoking lowered risks significantly over those who continued.
PositiveTip: Do all you can to encourage young people to never start smoking.
Worldwide, there are nearly 13 million cases of cancer each year. A study published in Lancet Oncology estimates that 2 million (16%) of these cancers are caused by infectious agents.
Viruses, bacteria, and parasites are known to cause human cancers. The most common organisms causing cancer are Helicobacter pylori, hepatitis B and C viruses, and the human papillomaviruses. These infections are largely preventable or treatable.
Researchers looked at 27 cancer cases in 184 countries in eight geographical regions. The percentage of infection-related cancer was highest in developing countries, 23%, compared to 7.4% in developed nations. The cancers caused by these infectious agents include cancers of the stomach, liver, and cervix.
A large portion of cancers are preventable by healthier lifestyle choices.
According to British researchers, almost 40% of cancers are due to avoidable life choices. Tobacco causes 23% of cancer cases in men and 15.6% in women. The next largest cause of cancer in men is a diet lacking in fresh fruit and vegetables, and for women, it is being overweight. The use of alcohol is also a significant cause of cancer.
PositiveTip: To a large extent, your lifestyle choices determine your risk of cancer.
Clinical antioxidant trials have shown increased risk of cancer with supplementation.
The wide use of supplements (50% of U.S. population), fueled by marketing-oriented claims of many benefits, may actually increase the risks of cancer according to a review of many studies. In the face of the abscence of convincing evidence that more is better in nutrient-adequate populations, especially for cancer, the authors called for more education from the scientific community and more regulatory vigilance.
PositiveTip: Healthy food choices are the best way to support health and reduce the risk of disease.
Cancer rates fall, but poor lifestyle toll mounts.
If you don't smoke, excess weight and lack of sufficient physical activity are the greatest risk factors for cancer, according to the 2012 Annual Report to the Nation stated. While cancer incidence and mortality have continued to decline since the early 1990s, cancers associated with these risk factors are a critical concern. Theyh are identified in the report as esopageal, colorectal, kidney, pancreatic, endometrial, and postmenopausal breast cancer.
PositiveTip: Get moving every day and eat only what you need to lower your risk for cancer!
High dietary cholesterol intake linked to higher cancer risk.
Dietary cholesterol intake is associated with a higher risk of cancers of the stomach, colon, rectum, pancreas, lung, kidney, bladder, and postmenopausal breast cancer. A recent Canadian study shows that high cholesterol intake is linked to a higher risk of several common cancers. Though the mechanisms involved are not fully understood, these findings suggest that diets low in cholesterol may help prevent cancer.
PositiveTip: Increasing plant foods in your diet, and decreasing animal foods (the only source of dietary cholesterol) may lower your risk of cancer.
Healthy Habits Reduce Risk Of Cardiovascular Disease Deaths in Chinese Women By 59%.
The Shanghai Women’s Health Study followed approximately 71,000 Chinese women aged 40-70 for 9 years. Among participants, common lifestyle risk factors of early death included physical inactivity, abdominal obesity, being overweight or obese, exposure to spousal tobacco smoke, and eating few fruits and vegetables. When participants reversed these risk factors, they exhibited a striking life-extending effect, especially in participants with a severe history of chronic disease. Overall, results showed that participants with healthy lifestyle habits reduced their risk of cardiovascular disease by 59%, all causes of mortality by 33%, and cancer by 19%.