American Heritage® Dictionary of the English Language, Fourth Edition
- adj. Tending to allay suspicion or hostility; winning favor or confidence: a disarming smile.
- v. present participle of disarm.
GNU Webster's 1913
- adj. capable of allaying suspicion or hostility and inspiring confidence.
- adj. capable of allaying hostility.
- n. act of reducing or depriving of weapons.
- n. act of reducing or depriving of arms
- adj. capable of allaying hostility
“They have to do what we call disarming the doors if they want to be open the doors without blowing the slides.”
“Dr Mandela demands what he calls the disarming of my men, as he puts it, as though the carrying of symbolic weapons opposes any real threat to peace.”
“How many times does it take N Korea and Iran to snub the U. S.'s efforts for peaceful deconstruction of their nuclear programs before Obama can accept that they simply have no interest in disarming?”
“The position of Ford, a senior fellow at the Hudson Institute and chief negotiator of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons for the Bush administration, can perhaps best be described as counseling extreme caution in disarming while other states still seek to develop nuclear weapons programs.”
““I strongly believe … that we must engage strategically in disarming terrorism by stopping their sources of supply of money, training, equipment and motivation,” he said.”
“The legitimate government of Lebanon has an interest in disarming and disbanding Hezbollah in conjunction with Israel.”
“You will realize that security is a psychological matter, and if the French feel a security that will enable them to begin disarming it will result in an all-round reduction of armaments.”
“Their policy in disarming the natives has been often followed in the East.”
“Aren’t these policies more effective in disarming those inclined to follow it?”
“Prefacing a statement with “I think” can make it less aggressive and more disarming, which is occasionally useful.”
These user-created lists contain the word ‘disarming’.
military conflict, non-proliferation..., decommission, gun control, accept a ceasefir..., according to the ..., action plan, ad-hoc conciliati..., administrative co..., alliances, arms control, arms trade and 268 more...
No true synonyms, no other word will do.
Words that literally leave me speechless when I hear them.
This is a collection of words I love, old ones that I love the sound of when I repeat them for years and new ones coined in news articles on up and coming trends and technologies - most of them I k...
Words to my liking. (The most lovelybeautifulintricatecondecendinggratuitous.)
Looking for tweets for disarming.