Lesson Supports for Everyone Jump 2012/2013
Everyone Jump is a cross curricular resource!
Because the Everyone Jump 2012/2013 manual has more cross curricular links than ever before, teaching the lessons is not just limited to your health class!
Depending on your province, using the 4 Everyone Jump lesson plans included in the manual will help you meet many more curriculum expectations. These can be found at the end of each lesson plan.
Additionally, for provinces mandated to implement Daily Physical Activity (DPA), utilizing the active Minds On section of each lesson will help you meet your province’s DPA requirements. Remember that physical activity is an important component of type 2 diabetes prevention.
Link to World Diabetes Day
Link your classroom’s Educational Challenge kick-off to World Diabetes Day by choosing the official kick-off challenge date, November 14th, 2012. Or build on the teacher lessons and choose a physical activity or awareness event to do with your classroom to celebrate World Diabetes Day and share your photos and videos at www.worlddiabetesday.org.
Lesson Support Documents
Provincial Curriculum Guide
Did you know that more than 9 million Canadians are living with diabetes or prediabetes?
Did you know that an estimated 285 million people worldwide are living with diabetes?
That number is expected to increase to 438 million by 2030.
Did you know that by 2020, it’s estimated that diabetes will cost the Canadian healthcare system $16.9 billion a year?
The above information is from the Canadian Diabetes Association, The prevalence and costs of diabetes. Available at: http://www.diabetes.ca/diabetes-and-you/what/prevalence.
World Diabetes Day
World Diabetes Day is an official United Nation’s World Health Day celebrated every year on November 14th. The date was chosen because it marks the birthday of Frederick Banting, who, along with Charles Best, is credited with the discovery of insulin in 1921. World Diabetes Day is represented by a blue circle logo. The blue circle is the global symbol of diabetes and signifies the unity of the global diabetes community in response to the diabetes pandemic. World Diabetes Day brings together millions of people in more than 160 countries to raise awareness of diabetes. The theme for World Diabetes Day is Diabetes Education and Prevention, both of which are addressed though use of the Everyone Jump lessons, music CD, and Educational Challenge.
For more information about the World Diabetes Day events that will be taking place across Canada, please visit www.worlddiabetesday.org. Get inspired and share photos and videos from your school’s or community’s World Diabetes Day celebration!