The group pioneered new methods to understand the mind of the consumer, basing its approach on the science of experimental design. Mind Genomics® creates databases for a person’s experience of the ‘every day,’ applied to such diverse worlds as automobile dealerships, hospitals with patients, schools teaching high school students, and mediators resolving national and international conflicts. Mind Genomics® identifies the different mind-sets of the population (like the genomes in genomics), discovers how to communicate with these different mind-sets, and in turn increases sales, creates satisfied customers, happier and more productive students, and ultimately lays the groundwork for peaceful settlements of disputes. On the same day that the Edison Award was given to Mind Genomics ®, the Democratic Republic of Niger announced that it was opening up NICE (Niger Institute for Competitive Excellence), using Mind Genomics® as the basis of new education programs to make Niger’s people, its human capital, more competitive in the world.
The Edison Award recognizes that new products and services are the economic engine to the American economy. The Edison Best New Product Awards have recognized and honored some of the most innovative products, services and business leaders in the world.
The Edison Awards are named after Thomas Alva Edison (1847-1931) whose extraordinary new product development methods garnered him 1,093 U.S. patents and made him a household name across the world. The Edison Best New Product Awards are known around the world for recognizing and honoring innovation and excellence in the development, marketing and launch of new products and services. These awards symbolize the persistence and excellence personified by Thomas Alva Edison, while also strengthening America’s drive to remain at the forefront of innovation, creativity, and ingenuity in the global economy.
Little did Thomas Edison know that, upon the completion of his Menlo Park, New Jersey laboratory in 1876, he would invent the process we know today as Research and Development. At Menlo Park – and later at West Orange – Edison used a systematic process of innovation to churn out new-to-the-world technologies, including the world’s first phonograph, the incandescent electric light, the system of electrical power, motion pictures, and the alkaline storage battery. These technologies transformed the lives of virtually every individual in the developed world from the 1870’s to the 21st century.