Restoration and Enrichment of Migratory Bird Habitat
Year of Project: 2012
Name of Project: Restoration and Enrichment of Migratory Bird Habitat
Number of Trees to be Planted: 0
Project Name: Restoration and Enrichment of Migratory Bird Habitat in Biocultural Landscapes of the Eastern Sierra Madre.
Location: Veracruz, Mexico
Number of Trees: 60,000
Project Description: Veracruz, Mexico and bird migration are virtually synonymous. An amazing 67 percent of the 341 migratory species registered by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service pass through or winter in the state of Veracruz. The Veracruz cloud forest is one of the most biodiverse and vulnerable ecosystems in Mexico. However, the state’s cloud forests have been fragmented by urbanization, subsistence agriculture and cattle ranching. The region offers a climate coffee growers favor for their crops, which has led to continued expansion of coffee plantations. Today, only 10% of its cloud forest remains, and restoration efforts in Veracruz forests are essential to the survival of many North American bird species.
Since 2010, American Forests has supported Pronatura Veracruz’s efforts to restore migratory bird habitat in Veracruz. This year’s project with Pronatura will plant 60,000 trees in the Mesophilic cloud forest ecosystem in the highlands of Central Veracruz. Besides working to restore degraded forests, Pronatura is working to enrich adjacent coffee agroecosystems by working with coffee producers and ejidos (areas of communal land used for agriculture) to strategically select coffee parcels that can be enhanced to act as biological corridors between fragmented cloud forests.
Environmental education is another key component of this project. Pronatura will set up informational booths and workshops on how to obtain financing for environmental services. They will also help develop an initiative to provide benefits to regional coffee producers who conserve their forests by certifying them as private reserves and linking them to international markets.