The symptoms of asthma vary in individuals, as do their triggers. According to the Asthma and Allergy Foundation of America, there is no perfect place that will free you of all asthma symptoms. However, there are climates that are better for asthmatics than others. Ideally, the best climate for an asthma patient would be near the ocean, have high levels of humidity, be free of cigarette smoke and have low levels of air pollution and pollen.
Individuals who live by the ocean have lower instances of asthma attacks. Inhaling the salt in the air by an ocean has healing effects that can help to prevent asthma symptoms from occurring. An individual who is wheezing may find relief simply by sitting on a beach.
To relieve asthma symptoms, some individuals go to a sauna or take a hot bath to inhale the steam in order to break up mucous trapped in the airways. Humidity levels have the same effect. Places with humid climates are ideal for asthmatics, because humidity helps to keep symptoms at bay. Southern Florida is an example of such a climate.
Avoid Cigarette Smoke
Smoking is not healthy for anyone, especially asthma patients. Cigarette smoke is a common trigger of asthma symptoms, but it can be difficult to avoid for individuals who live in a smoker-friendly environment. According to COPD International, some areas of California, such as Orange County, are a good area for asthmatics to reside, due to the strict public smoking bans in place.
Air pollution is one of the main risk factors of asthma. When ozone levels are high, it is vital for an asthmatic to stay indoors in order to prevent an asthma attack. Ideally an asthma patient should reside in a climate that is relatively free of air pollution.
Allergens such as pollen, mould, dust and pet dander are common triggers of asthma symptoms. The latter three can be controlled, while pollen levels vary by season and climate. If an asthma patient lives in an area that has high pollen levels during certain times of the year, then they must limit their outdoor activities. There are a few climates that have relatively low pollen levels year-round, including Southern Florida, Southern California, Hawaii, along with McAllen, Texas, and Syracuse, New York.