As the largest center for the diagnosis and treatment of asthma in Western North Carolina and Southwestern Virginia, allowing us to have more options and resources for diagnosis and treatment.
Wake Forest Baptist is one of eight centers in the country, and the only one in the South, that is part of the Asthma Clinical Research Network (ACRN), which evaluates new treatments for asthma.
We have the ability to perform methacholine and exercise challenges on site, as well as Spirometry. When scheduled ahead of time CT scans and X-rays can also be performed on site.
The asthma clinic has three certified RN asthma educators who spend extensive one-on-one time with each asthma patient, or for pediatric patients with the family, to ensure they understand disease management, triggers, avoidance measures, and disease monitoring.
Wake Forest Baptist faculty conducts numerous clinical trials dealing with the role of genetics and inheritance in asthma. Many of these trails are done in conjunction with Wake Forest’s Center for Human Genomics, which was established in June 2000. Its primary purpose is to investigate genetic mechanisms in the development and progression of complex human diseases, including cardiovascular disease, diabetes, prostate cancer and pulmonary diseases such as allergies and asthma
“We want to understand what is wrong in patients with severe asthma and apply what we learn to help them,” said Wendy Moore, M.D., a specialist in pulmonary medicine.
“The long-term goal is to develop new ways to evaluate a patient’s asthma to allow us to design individualized therapy for that patient based on the type of inflammation in their lungs or the genes they have,” said Moore.
“We are trying to answer important questions about asthma, to evaluate new and existing therapies and to get the results out quickly so patients can benefit,” said Stephen Peters, M.D., Ph.D., research director and professor of pulmonary and critical care medicine.
Articles about asthma by Wake Forest Baptist experts:
Hawkins GA, Peters SP – Pharmacogenetics of asthma.
Peters SP – Asthma treatment in the 21st century: What’s next?