years ago this April, Jill Robinson first walked onto a bear bile farm. On that day in April 1993, Jill could have walked away, but she chose to act and do what she could. Today, you also have a choice. If everyone reading this donated just US$20, it would pay for the care of over 150 bears at our China sanctuary for a full year. Please help us celebrate 20 years of progress. Donate US$20 today (or whatever you can afford).
Animals Asia is opposed to practices which cause harm and suffering to animals in captivity. In particular we are opposed to cruel and abusive practices such as training and using animals in circus style performances, the feeding of live prey to predators, the use of animals for photographs with the public and the sale of animal parts from zoos and safari parks for use as medicines.
We recognise that many zoos and safari parks are working with limited resources and are using these resources to improve the lives of the captive animals they house where possible. We support measures to improve the welfare of animals through the design of new naturalistic enclosures, environmental enrichment aimed at meeting the physical and psychological needs of specific species, improvements in veterinary facilities, training in veterinary skills and animal management, and education designed to inform and engage members of the public in the conservation of both species and habitats. In addition we support measures taken by zoos to inform visitors of the welfare needs of animals in captivity.
During visits to zoos and safari parks across China, attendance at Chinese zoo workshops and individual correspondence with zoo management staff, we have observed a number of projects which are providing improved welfare for captive animals. These projects provide real hope for the future of Chinese zoos and the necessary improvements in welfare that are required.
Please click to download the full report documenting specific examples of enclosure design and enrichment projects which are providing an improved environment for the animals which they house
We hope these examples provide an introduction to the positive changes taking place within China’s zoos and through this article we can encourage further enclosure improvements and enrichment projects to continue to benefit animals in captivity in China.