General Human Rights resources
by Minnesota Advocates for Human Rights
Amnesty International is a worldwide campaigning movement that works
to promote all the human rights enshrined in the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights and other international standards. The website contains
a library with country human rights reports, campaign reports and
an index on thematic publications.
Britannica.com is a free knowledge and learning center. Britannica.com
includes the complete, updated Encyclopedia Britannica, the oldest
and largest general reference in the English language. Selected
articles from more than 70 magazines--including Newsweek, Discover,
and The Economist--provide additional feature and current-events
Derechos Human Rights is an international organization working for
the respect and promotion of human rights all over the world. Their
work consists of educating the public about human rights and human
rights violations; on investigating human rights abuses, including
their causes, development and consequences etc. Derechos mainly
focuses on Latin America.
An international Human Rights Database:
Diana is a joint project of several schools, it brings together
different sites and each site contains a unique archive of human
rights information. The site has links to other human rights sites
on the Internet.
The Hague Appeal for Peace is a major coalition of civil society
organizations with 80 member international organizing committee
and a network of over 1000 organizations and individuals that seeks
to abolish war and build a culture of peace.
Human Rights Internet:
A key objective of the organization is to support the work of the
global non-governmental community in its struggle to obtain human
rights for all. To this end, HRI promotes human rights education,
stimulates research, encourages the sharing of information, and
builds international solidarity among those committed to the principles
enshrined in the International Bill of Human Rights.
Human Rights Watch:
Human Rights Watch is an organization dedicated to protecting the
human rights of people around the world, by investigating and exposing
human rights violations and holding abusers accountable. The website
contains reports and articles on human rights in different countries
around the world.
Minnesota Advocates for Human
The Mission of the Minnesota Advocates for Human Rights is to implement
international human rights standards, promote civil society and
reinforce the rule of law. The website provides information about
Minnesota Advocates' research, education and advocacy in the United
States and in selected global communities.
Peace Boat is a Japan based non-governmental organization that seeks
to establish a global network among people, grassroots movements
and NGOs working on issues such as peace, human rights, development
and the environment.
The People's Decade
of Human Rights Education:
The people's Decade of Human Rights Education is a non-profit, international
service organization that works directly and indirectly with its
network of affiliates - primarily women's and social justice organizations
- to develop and advance pedagogies for human rights education relevant
to people's daily lives in the context of their struggles for social
and economic justice and democracy. This is by far one of the most
comprehensive resource on human rights on the internet. It contains
a large number of links to other human rights pages on the Internet.
Antislavery International is an organization with the specific objective
of ending slavery throughout the world. The website contains current
reports on slavery around the world, news about their campaigns
and various resources with links to other human rights organization.
The links page is very useful.
For Labor Rights:
Campaign for Labor Rights is an organization that mobilizes grassroots
activism throughout the United States for campaigns to end sweatshop
abuses and child labor. The organization is involved in these and
other struggles for the rights of sweatshop workers. The website
contains information on sweatshops around the world but it is mostly
focused on Latin American Countries.
This is the official United Nations website.
Co-op America, a national nonprofit organization founded in 1982,
provides the economic strategies, organizing power and practical
tools for businesses and individuals to address today's social and
The Green Pages is the
online version of Co-op America's National Green Pages directory
of thousands of socially and environmentally responsible businesses,
products and services. You'll find special offers and discounts
on products you need every day. And there are information and tips
on "green shopping" and how to support companies which
do well by doing good.
Corporate Watch provides news, analysis, research tools and action
resources to respond to corporate activity around the globe. They
also talk with people who are directly affected by corporate abuses
as well as with others fighting for corporate accountability, human
rights, social and environmental justice. As part of the independent
media, Corporate Watch is free of corporate sponsorship.
Clean Clothes Campaign:
Started in the Netherlands, The Clean Clothes Campaign (or the "CCC"
as it is popularly called) aims to improve working conditions in
the garment and sportswear industry, it is now involved in ten European
Fair Trade Federation:
The Fair Trade Federation (FTF) is an association of fair trade
wholesalers, retailers, and producers whose members are committed
to providing fair wages and good employment opportunities to economically
disadvantaged artisans and farmers worldwide.
Labor Rights Fund:
The International Labor Rights Fund (ILRF), a nonprofit action and
advocacy organization, uses new and creative means to encourage
enforcement of international labor rights. The ILRF pursues legal
and administrative actions on behalf of working people, creates
programs and enforcement mechanisms to protect workers' rights,
and advocates for better protections for workers through publications,
testimony before national and international hearings, and speeches
to academic, religious, and human rights groups.
Global Exchange is a non-profit education, research and action center
forging closer ties between North Americans and grassroots groups
working for democracy around the world. Through programs such as
Reality Tours, a Fair Trade program, Public Education and Campaigns
to influence international policy issues, Global Exchange works
for social and economic justice through grassroots citizen empowerment.
Confederation of Free Trade Unions:
The ICFTU organizes and directs campaigns on issues such as: the
respect and defense of trade union and workers' rights, the eradication
of forced and child labor, the promotion of equal rights for working
women, the environment, education programmes for trade unionists
all over the world, encouraging the organization of young workers,
sends missions to investigate the trade union situation in many
The National Labor
The National Labor Committee (NLC) is a human rights advocacy group,
dedicated to promoting and defending the rights of workers. Through
establishing long standing working relationships with non-governmental,
human rights, labor and religious organizations, primarily in Latin
America, the NLC puts a human face on the global economy. The NLC
educates and actively involves the public in actions aimed at ending
labor abuses, improving living conditions for workers and their
families and promoting the concept of a living wage and true independent
Sweatshop Watch is a coalition of labor, community, civil rights,
immigrant rights, women's, religious & student organizations,
and individuals committed to eliminating sweatshop conditions in
the global garment industry. We believe that workers should be earning
a living wage in a safe and decent working environment, and that
those who benefit the most from the exploitation of sweatshop workers
must be held accountable.
ProJusticeMN.org is Minnesota's online resource for volunteer or
judicare attorneys, law students, law faculty or legal services
staff - anyone advising low-income or disadvantaged clients.
Last Updated 1/15/08 -