|ESRL training calendar | member libraries | contact us | home|
Technology Terminologies (A to Z)
To enter, modify or delete data.
A program that permits the review and editing of the contents of a file.
Electronic mail. Information exchanged by electronic means in a manner analogous to that provided by the postal service.
The way you specify where an E-Mail message should be delivered.
A computer system that provides MTA, mailbox storage and directory services and optionally UA services.
UA, MTA, mailbox storage, and directory service.
Combining or defining a data structure of attributes and a group of associated functions and behaviors as a single object.
A special function key on a keyboard used to transmit a line or screen of data from a display screen to a computer. Often used interchangeably with return key.
The setting in which computing takes place that is the aggregate of the hardware, software, policies and procedures relating to their use. The computing environment may be influenced by software, such as the operating system (for example, a UNIX environment) or the vendor (for example, an IBM environment).
To remove data from a data medium, leaving the medium available for recording new data.
A message that reports the detection of an error.
Uploading or downloading transfer check employed to identify errors in data transmission.
A local area network originally developed by Xerox for linking personal computers. Later adapted by DEC and Intel as well and subsequently adopted as an international standard called 802.3. It transmits data at 10 megabits per second. All computers on a network were originally connected to a coaxial cable up to one kilometer. Each computer monitors all transmissions, looking for packets containing its identifier as the destination. Only one signal may be present on the channel at a time and no single computer controls transmissions. Several upper layer protocols, such as DECnet and TCP/IP use Ethernet as an underlying transport mechanism. Ethernet is to be contrasted with other data link protocols such as token ring, DDCMP or SDLC. Uses CSMA/CD.
To interpret a computer instruction and carry out the operations specified in the instruction.
122-126 S. Division St. Salisbury, MD 21801