Inside Lincoln's pockets: The Confederate money, wire-rimmed spectacles and newspaper clippings that America's 16th president was carrying on the day he was assassinated
Abraham Lincoln's legacy has been mired in myths over the last century as countless historians have sought fresh angles into his prolific story, in which he rose from poverty to lead a warring nation to peace and to end centuries of American slavery.
Now, as the U.S. marks the 150th anniversary of the Civil War, the Library of Congress wants Americans to get to know the real man behind the myths through an exhibit of 200 artifacts from his time, including many items that have never before been seen by the public.
Among the artifacts are the contents of Lincoln's pockets on the day that he was assassinated, which include two pair of wire-rimmed spectacles, handkerchiefs monogrammed 'A. Lincoln.' in red thread, a pocket knife, a watch fob and a custom-made button.
Revealed: When Abraham Lincoln was killed in 1865, he was carrying two pairs of spectacles, a lens polisher, a pocketknife, a watch fob, a linen handkerchief, and a brown leather wallet containing a five-dollar Confederate note
Exhibit: The Library of Congress opened an exhibition this month featuring 200 artifacts from Lincoln's time, including many items that have never before been seen by the public
The only money in his leather-bound wallet was a Confederate $5 bill, which Lincoln made worthless with the successful prosecution of the war.
Lincoln was also carrying nine newspaper clippings on the day he died, most of which painted him in a favorable light.
One clipping marveled at 'how strong a hold the President has upon the popular heart throughout the loyal North.'
Dated before the presidential election of 1864, the article said: 'As the time approaches for a new Presidential election, and people cast their eyes about for a candidate, there is no one so generally looked to as Abraham Lincoln.
'Other men may have the requisite talents and virtues; but none impress the people as being so well entitled to the next term of four years as the man who has so faithfully guided the republic through the terrible storms of civil war,' the article continued.
Edits: The final version of Lincoln's first inaugural address shows that he cut up a typed draft, then pasted it together with his handwritten changes before delivering the speech
'There is a general feeling that after a term of war he is entitled to a term of peace; and that other men, military and civil, must defer their claims at least until the year 1868.'
Another clipping, from a Missouri newspaper, announced the date that slaves would be emancipated and a third article described disaffection among Southern soldiers.
The articles will not be displayed in the library's exhibit because they are too fragile to be moved from storage, but copies of the clippings will be available.
Americans are so fascinated by the contents of Lincoln's pockets from the day he was killed because of their intimacy to the man whose story they remember studying in history classes growing up.
End of slavery: On July 13, 1862, President Abraham Lincoln consulted Secretary of State William H. Seward and Gideon Welles, the secretary of the navy, on the particulars of the Emancipation Proclamation
Lincoln was shot at Ford's Theatre in
Washington, D.C. on April 14, 1865 by John Wilkes Booth shortly after he
was re-elected for a second term as president.
He died the following day, and the contents of his pockets were emptied and given to his son. The artifacts stayed in the family for 70 years until Lincoln's granddaughter, Mary Lincoln Isham, gave them to the Library of Congress as a gift.
But the library did not put the items up for display until 1976, when then-Librarian of Congress Daniel Boorstin thought their exposure would 'humanize a man who had become "mythologically engulfed,"' according to the Library of Congress.
Lincoln's emptied pockets quickly became the most popular exhibit at the museum, and they remain so today, according to library staff.
The 'Burnt District' in Richmond was a pitiable sight for the various photographers who scrambled to record the Confederate capital in the last days of the Civil War
Other artifacts featured in the library's exhibit include the final versions of Lincoln's first and second inaugural addresses, letters between military leaders during the war, and a map of Shenandoah Valley, which was used to move troops and material north throughout much of the war.
inaugural addresses show Lincoln's edits to initial drafts of the
speeches. The final version of the first address shows that Lincoln cut
up a typed draft, then pasted it together with his handwritten changes
before delivering the speech.
One of the last-minute changes included this added line: 'I therefore consider that, in view of By the time he delivered the speech, several Southern states had already seceded and formed the Confederate States of America.
Also on display will be a page of one of Confederate Gen. Robert E. Lee's military orders, which was found wrapped around cigars in a field just south of Frederick, Maryland in 1862. The order, found just before the bloodiest battle of the war -- the Battle of Antietam -- said Lee would divide his army.
The Confederate is born: South Carolina was the first state to officially secede from the United States after Lincoln was elected president in November 1860
Union Commander Gen. George McClellon told Lincoln that he would use that information to trap Lee's armies, but before he acted, Lee reunited his troops and marched on Antietam, leading to the bloodiest single day in the history of the American military.
The Library of Congress boasts that with these items and hundreds of others, it holds the largest collection of Civil War artifacts in the world. Its exhibit opened this month and will run through June 1, 2013.