Dominique Caparros-Lefebvre and colleagues' important study1
adds another isolated focus of neurodegeneration to those described on Guam and the Northern Mariana islands, in Hobara on the Kii peninsula of Japan, and Western New Guinea. On Guadeloupe, atypical parkinsonism is reported to have clinical similarities with progressive supranuclear palsy and the parkinsonism dementia complex of Guam (PDC). Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, which the investigators describe as occurring with atypical parkinsonism in some cases, is also highly prevalent in these Pacific foci. However, on Guam and in Western New Guinea amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and PDC are distinct and seldom coexist, but they are epidemiologically linked by their occurrence in different members of the same families.
We hope that examination of necropsy material will soon clarify the similarities and differences between atypical parkinsonism on Guadeloupe and parkinsonian disease elsewhere. Neurofibrillary tangles occur in the substantia nigra of progressive supranuclear palsy and PDC and this pathology may be distinguished on the basis of the isoforms of tau deposited. Aggregated tau in progressive supranuclear palsy is characterised by a major doublet of protein bands at 64 and 69 kDa, whereas in PDC tau is characterised by the same triplet of 55, 64, and 69 kDa that occurs in Alzheimer's disease.2
There are also differences in the distribution of lesions in the two entities. In particular, PDC is the most aggressive tangle-forming disease yet described, with the hippocampus and entorhinal cortex being particularly devastated.
Since Zimmerman's 1945 report of an “obscure malady” on Guam,3
neurologists have hoped that studies in Guam would give understanding of neurodegenerative diseases throughout the world. Because PDC and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis have steadily declined among Guamanian Chamorros born after 1940, in the past 16 years we have searched for a risk factor that altered during World War II and the subsequent westernisation of Guam.4
Nutritional analysis of subsistence foods, chemical studies of cycad foods, and anthropological inquiries of Chamorro life styles have not identified this factor. Because PDC and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis on Guam are usually familial and only those of Chamorro descent are affected, genetic studies have been undertaken but have not been helpful.2
Because of our negative studies on Guam, we are attracted by the hypothesis that atypical parkinsonism in the French West Indies may relate to benzyltetra-hydroisoquinoline alkaloids that are consumed in herbal tea and fruits of the Annonaceae family. We know that these same fruits are eaten in many tropical countries and Pacific islands, where atypical parkinsonism is not prevalent. However, annona fruits and teas are also consumed on Guam, and it will be important to investigate their possible role in PDC, especially if the pathology of atypical parkinsonism in Guadeloupe is similar to PDC. Alternatively, perhaps consumption of these fruits and teas is a marker for another environmental factor that, together with genetic predisposition, has led to the occurrence of this newly described focus of neurodegeneration.
We thank Debbie Quinata, Jose A Cruz, and Lynn Raulerson of the University of Guam for their advice.