Math Fundamentals Intensive
This course is designed for students who need to review basic computational skills involving whole numbers and fractions. Students will be prepared for their college level work by introducing abstract concepts and critical thinking skills. The course covers basic concepts of algebra including simplifying expressions, solving linear equations, and graphing linear equations. The Casio FX-55 calculator will be introduced after proficiency is shown in these fundamental arithmetic operations.
Introduction to Algebra
This course prepares students for their college level work by introducing abstract concepts and critical thinking skills. It covers solving and graphing linear equations, interpreting formulas, and application problems.
This course requires students to use critical thinking skills and mathematical approaches to decision making processes. Topics include: algebra, finance, probability, and statistics. Students will solve problems using this symbolic language of algebra. The finance topics include problems designed to both educate students and develop approaches to financial decision making. Probability will be applied to issues in finance, social sciences, political forecasting, and health professions, to name a few. Statistics is relevant to all disciplines and this course will examine various applications.
This course is designed for the students who need to strengthen the algebra skills necessary to develop an appreciation of conceptual thought and to provide the background for more advanced mathematical courses. Topics include operations with polynomials, factoring polynomials, solving quadratic equations, radical expressions and equations, functions, and operations with functions.
This course is designed as a survey of statistics for students majoring in Criminal Justice, Health Services Administration, or Hospitality Management and the Culinary Arts with emphasis on statistical reasoning, sampling methodology, probability, descriptive statistics, correlation techniques, and inference. It includes analysis and interpretation of statistical data generated in the fields of sociology, criminal justice, allied health and hospitality. Common errors in sampling, data interpretation, and research design will be addressed. Topics will include statistical thinking, descriptive statistics, the normal distribution, frequency distributions, correlation, confidence interval estimates, hypothesis testing, data interpretation and analysis, and an introduction to research design.
Prerequisite: MA-127 or MA-130 or Placement
College Algebra with Applications
This course is designed for the student who plans to pursue baccalaureate study. The goal of this course is to strengthen analytical thought and problem-solving skills. Topics include rational equations, functions, and exponential functions.
Prerequisite: MA-130 or Placement
This course is designed for the student who plans to continue his/her education and needs the Prerequisite skills for higher level math courses. Topics include: a review of polynomial functions; trigonometric functions and their graphs; trigonometric formulas and identities; as well as sequences and series.
Prerequisite: MA-140 or Placement
Statistics for Business Decisions I
This course is designed as a survey of statistical techniques and their applications to business. Topics include: frequency distributions, sampling techniques, confidence intervals and hypothesis testing and laws of probability theory. Examples will be extensively used to demonstrate and apply these techniques to cases relevant to business and may include applications such as analysis and interpretation of profitability, marketing, and production line quality.
Prerequisite: MA-140 or Placement
This course will focus on topics related to business fields, specifically economics. Topics include: the derivative, graphing functions, the definite integral and realistic applications that illustrate the use of calculus in other disciplines.
Prerequisite: MA-142 or Placement
Statistics for Business Decisions II
This course is a continuation of MA-145. Topics include hypothesis testing, correlation and regression, and analysis of variance. Emphasis is placed on applications to economics, marketing and the social sciences. Computer software is available to augment the course.
Prerequisite: MA-145 or Placement
This course is designed for Business and Computer Science majors. It is an extension of MA-242. Topics include techniques of integration, trigonometric functions and differential equations with applications to business, economics, ecology, medicine and general interest.
Prerequisite: MA-242 or Placement