Carbohydrates, the most important fuel for exercising muscles, make up 85% of the rice kernel. Most of the carbohydrate is starchy and found in the white endosperm, which forms the main part of the rice.
According to scientific research by the World Health Organisation and the Food & Agriculture Organisation, complex carbohydrates are essential to good health and a high carbohydrate intake can reduce the risk of obesity.
Rice is a low-fat complex carbohydrate that is quickly digested and rapidly made available to the muscles and other body systems and is therefore a perfect source of energy. As a complex carbohydrate, rice powers the body. Our muscles store complex carbohydrates to be released as energy when needed.
Rice can play an important part in helping to achieve a healthy diet as it contains practically no fat and no cholesterol. Most of the fat is found in the germ and therefore Brown rice contains slightly more fat than white rice.
Rice is normally classified as a carbohydrate. Whilst this is true, rice protein – when compared to that of other grains – is considered one of the highest quality proteins. It has all eight of the essential amino acids, the necessary building blocks for strong muscles.
Rice is one of the few cereals that is free from gluten and rarely causes unpleasant reactions or digestive difficulties. It is therefore ideal for people with gluten intolerance and this is why it is suitable for babies, the elderly, sick and those who find eating difficult. Although rice is often called glutinous, this refers to its stickiness and not its gluten content.
Rice is a source of insoluble fibre, which helps to prevent diseases of the large intestine and is necessary for protection against bowel and colon cancer and for lowering cholesterol, which is a risk factor for coronary heart disease.
Low to medium GI
Whereas standard long grain rice raises your blood sugar levels very fast (followed by just as abrupt a fall), the unique structure of the Pure Basmati rice grain means it is more slowly digested and causes only relatively gentle rises and falls in your blood sugar. It is therefore described as having a low to medium glycaemic index, or GI.
Scientists now believe that these slower releasing carbohydrates are better at suppressing appetite because they avoid fluctuating blood sugar levels which can stimulate appetite. Studies also show that lower GI carbohydrates produce lower average insulin levels over the day, which allows greater use of fat as the source of fuel. Diabetics can also control their blood glucose much better by consuming low to medium GI carbohydrates like Pure Basmati and consuming them may even reduce the chance of developing diabetes, too.
Eating lower GI foods has another secret plus point. By ironing out highs and lows in blood sugar it also keeps hunger under control, helping to control our weight.
The Food Standards Agency recommends that we should eat no more than 6g of salt a day as part of a balanced diet. Tilda Pure Basmati contains no salt. The salt content in Tilda Steamed Basmati ranges from 0.3g to 1.1g per serving. This range is equivalent to between 5% and 18.3% of an adult’s daily allowance.
All Tilda products are free from artificial colours, flavouring and preservatives.
All Tilda products are suitable for vegetarians.
Download the pdf to read more…