- Brachypodium distachyon: making hay with a wild grass
Trends in Plant Science, Volume 13, Issue 4, 1 April 2008, Pages 172-177
Magdalena Opanowicz, Philippe Vain, John Draper, David Parker and John H. Doonan
AbstractBrachypodium distachyon is a wild grass with a short life cycle. Although it is related to small grain cereals such as wheat, its genome is only a fraction of the size. A draft genome sequence is currently available, and molecular and genetic tools have been developed for transformation, mutagenesis and gene mapping. Accessions collected from across its ancestral range show a surprising degree of phenotypic variation in many traits, including those implicated in domestication of the cereals. Thus, given its rapid cycling time and ease of cultivation, Brachypodium will be a useful model for investigating problems in grass biology.
Abstract | Full Text | PDF (575 kb)
- Palaeogenomics of plants: synteny-based modelling of extinct ancestors
Trends in Plant Science, Volume 15, Issue 9, 1 September 2010, Pages 479-487
Michael Abrouk, Florent Murat, Caroline Pont, Joachim Messing, Scott Jackson, Thomas Faraut, Eric Tannier, Christophe Plomion, Richard Cooke, Catherine Feuillet and Jérôme Salse
AbstractIn the past ten years, international initiatives have led to the development of large sets of genomic resources that allow comparative genomic studies between plant genomes at a high level of resolution. Comparison of map-based genomic sequences revealed shared intra-genomic duplications, providing new insights into the evolution of flowering plant genomes from common ancestors. Plant genomes can be presented as concentric circles, providing a new reference for plant chromosome evolutionary relationships and an efficient tool for gene annotation and cross-genome markers development. Recent palaeogenomic data demonstrate that whole-genome duplications have provided a motor for the evolutionary success of flowering plants over the last 50–70 million years.
Abstract | Full Text | PDF (1108 kb)
- Epigenetic neofunctionalisation and regulatory gene evolution in grasses
Trends in Plant Science, Volume 17, Issue 7, 1 July 2012, Pages 389-394
Hugh Dickinson, Liliana Costa and Jose Gutierrez-Marcos
AbstractDuring plant evolution, genome duplication and subsequent selection acting on new gene pairs has frequently resulted in partition of gene functions, or acquisition of new functions. This ‘sub- and neofunctionalisation’ (subF and neoF) is held to have driven the expansion of key gene classes. One such gene class in maize (Zea mays) includes a pair of Polycomb group (PcG) protein genes that, unlike their single Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) counterpart, are both parentally imprinted with only the maternal alleles being expressed in the seed endosperm. Surprisingly, this imprinting is regulated by different mechanisms in the two genes, resulting in different phasing of parent-specific expression. In this opinion article we propose that recruitment of different imprinting systems constitutes ‘epigenetic neoF’, and has enhanced maternal control over seed development, with a potential impact on the evolution of the large and persistent endosperms of cereal grains.
Abstract | Full Text | PDF (445 kb)
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved.
Trends in Plant Science, Volume 18, Issue 1, 1-4, 31 October 2012
Techniques & Applications
Gateway vectors for transformation of cereals
Until now, the availability of vectors for transgenic research in cereal crops has been rather limited. We present a novel collection of Agrobacterium tumefaciens binary T-DNA vectors compatible with Gateway recombinational cloning that facilitate the modular assembly of genes of interest together with new regulatory sequences, such as strong constitutive or endosperm-specific Brachypodium distachyon promoters. This resource aims at streamlining the creation of vectors and transgenes designed to explore gene functions in vital monocotyledonous crops.