Technorati Tags: NCADV,Child,Custody,Domestic,Violence,News,Information,October,Issue,Remember,Name,Project,History,DVAM,Anatomy,Movement,National,Summit,Events,Around,Nation,Empower,Life,Volunteer,Memorial,Month,moment,conjunction,Magazine,result,poster,Coalition,Against,children,activities,incidents,posters,womenNote: Cross posted from [wp angelfury] A Human Rights Issue-Custodial Justice.
NCADV News and Information October 2009
In This Issue
This October, Domestic Violence Awareness Month 2009, we ask you to take a moment to remember the many people who have lost their lives because of domestic violence.Please click here to see a listing of names submitted to the Remember My Name© project since 1994 and remember them in your thoughts as their names appear on the screen.
NCADV, in conjunction with Ms. Magazine, started the Remember My Name© project in 1994 to create a national registry of names of those who have been killed as a result of domestic violence. Since then, we have continued to collect information on incidents of people who have been murdered as a result of domestic violence. Each year for Domestic Violence Awareness Month, we produce a memorial poster listing the names of those submitted to the project within the year. To date, over 7,753 people* have been memorialized through Remember My Name©.
Names continue to be added daily.
To purchase our newest poster or posters from previous years, please click here.
If you would like to submit a name to the Remember My Name© memorial project, please click here.
The History of Domestic Violence Awareness Month
Domestic Violence Awareness Month evolved from the first Day of Unity observed in October, 1981 by the National Coalition Against Domestic Violence. The intent was to connect battered women's advocates across the nation who were working to end violence against women and their children. The Day of Unity soon became a special week when a range of activities were conducted at the local, state, and national levels. <