Gang Stalking is a covert investigation that is opened on an individual, or a list that a Targeted Individual is placed on.http://gangstalkingworld.com/Media/2009 ... behaviour/
Mrs Clift’s name in the “Violent Person Register”. She was rated as medium risk, her name to remain on the register for 18 months.
Individuals can be placed on such lists designating them as potentially Violent Person's or persons who have displayed inappropriate behaviours, and it flags them as individuals to be watched. An innocent person can be added to a Violent Person's Registry without knowing it, and given a Violent Person Designation, which will flag and send their names out to every area they visit. Jane Clift was targeted this way and spent four year clearing her name.
Individuals without their knowledge are being placed on lists. In many countries these lists fall under Occupational Safety and Health. http://www.wcb.pe.ca/photos/original/wcb_wpviolence.pdf
The Canadian Center of Occupational Health and Safety
Workers have the ’ right to know ‘ all risks and safe work procedures associated with the job. This may involve identifying individuals with a history of unpredictable or violent behavior.
The identity of the person and the nature of the risk must be given to staff likely to come into contact with that person. While workers have the right to know the risks, it is important to remember that this information cannot be indiscriminately distributed.
Other countries have such lists or similar lists. It seems that employers, educational facilities, and community centers are in some cases placing innocent individuals on such lists as a means of retaliation, silencing, or controlling members of society.http://www.harassment101.com/Article5.html
They both are victims of an increasingly popular employer weapon against whistleblowers: the psychiatric reprisal.
The individual is then placed under overt and covert forms of surveillance. Everywhere the Targeted Individual goes, their name is flagged. In a big city this could mean that thousands upon thousands of people are getting a flag with the targets information. The person is followed around 24/7. Foot patrols and vehicle patrols are used to follow the Individual around, as part of the monitoring process. During these patrols a one handed sign language is used to assist the citizen informants with communicating to each other. They will use this to silently communicate to any business the target enters, or other areas.
Gang Stalking can be viewed by the Targeted Individual as a systemic form of control, which seeks to control every aspect of a Targeted Individuals life. Gang Stalking has many similarities to workplace mobbing, but takes place outside in the community. It called Gang Stalking, because the target is followed around and placed under intrusive and directed surveillance by groups of organised "Covert Human Intelligence Sources" also known as Citizen Informants 24/7. Using anti-terror laws to spy on ordinary people.
Many Targeted Individuals are harassed and placed under surveillance in this way for months or even years before they realise that they are being targeted by an organised protocol of harassment.
What happens during this surveillance is very similar to what happened to many innocent individuals in the former East Germany or Activists and Dissidents in Russia. Many innocent people in the former East Germany would be targeted for these harassment programs, and then their friends, family, and the community at large would be used to monitor, prosecute, and harass them. The same persecutions and harassments are now happening in democratic countries.
Once a person is flagged the community becomes hypervigilant, and within this structure there is a targeted and illegal protocol of harassment that happens. Electronic means are used to monitor, harass and torture the target. When the target tries to describe what is happening to them, it sounds as if they have had a mental breakdown. The reality is electronic means are being used to make it appear as if the target has had a breakdown.
In Russia similar means were used by the state to declare activist, dissidents or anyone they thought to be an enemy of the state as mentally unfit and many were institutionalised using this form of systemic control.
The closest thing to Gang Stalking that democratic countries have seen before this is McCarthyism, Cointelpro, and RED SQUAD programs. Red Squad programs were used for monitoring, and harassment of various groups. They have been in place for over a hundred years, and they also employed Covert Human Intelligence Sources.
Civilian Spies, also known as "Covert Human Intelligence Sources" are recruited from every level and sector of society. Remember anyone the Targeted Individual comes into contact with gets a warning about the target.
Just like with Cointelpro investigations, everyone in the targets life is made a part of this ongoing never ending, systemic psychological harassment and manipulation of the target. These actions are specifically designed to control the target and to keep them in line. These actions are also designed to destroy the target over years, make them look crazy and leave them with no form of support. The individuals around the target carry out actions and tasks as they are instructed, without realising that the structure is psychologically designed to break the target down.
For the targets of this harassment, Gang Stalking is experienced as a covert psychological, emotional and physical attack, that is capable of immobilizing and destroying a target over time. For the state it’s a way to keep the targets in line, control them, or destroy them.
Worldwide programs of control and conformity have been used with equal success and lethality. What we are seeing now is a global co-ordinated and organised effort of control and conformity. Many countries around the world are currently using a model of policing called: Community Oriented Policing. It's described as a systemic approach to policing. It focuses on instilling a sense of community within a geographically located neighborhood. Communities come together and discuss what values they would like to have in their community, community development, and it's also a time to discuss any problems that might be happening in a specific area. If a problem is identified an investigation might be opened. These local programs in many countries have been forming partnerships with other government run programs at, provincial, state and federal levels. http://news.cnet.com/8301-13578_3-20000550-38.html
With agents going undercover, state and local police coordinate their online activities with the Secret Service, FBI and other federal agencies in a strategy known as “deconfliction
A process called Deconfliction allows them to share information. Reports of Gang Stalking are not only coming in from democratic countries, but they are coming in from many other countries as well.http://www.eff.org/files/filenode/socia ... orking.pdf
The modern day systemic form of control could only be funded at governmental levels, just like it has in other societies where these similar types of harassment programs have been implemented. It's all part of a system of control and conformity that has been in place for many years. A system of control with many local groups and appendages taking part. Many targets report that their information is passed and shared between country boarders, and that the surveillance continues even when they travel.
What are the goals of Gang Stalking?
The official goal is listed as a means of flagging or investigating dangerous, or potentially dangerous individuals. The real goal however seems to be to isolate the target from all forms of support, so that the target can be set up in the future for arrest, institutionalisation, or forced suicide. Other goals of this harassment is to destroy the targets reputation and credibility. Make the target look crazy or unstable.
Other goals involve sensitizing the target to everyday stimuli’s as a form of control, which is used to control targets when they get out of line. Once the target is sensitized, the Citizen Informants have an easier time identifying the Targeted Individual in public. The targets sensitivity is most likely added to their file as a warning marker and sign to watch for future reactions to.
These programs are designed to make the targets of this harassment vulnerable, they want to make them destitute. The secondary goals seems to be to make the target homeless, jobless, give them a breakdown, and the primary goals seems to be to drive the target to forced suicide, just like what they did with some of the targets of Cointelpro. It's a useful way of eliminating perceived enemies of the state.
What are other Names for Gang Stalking?
There are many names for this form of systemic control and harassment. Under the Gang Stalking label you will also find such terms as Violent Person's Registry, Organised Stalking, Cause Stalking, Multi-Stalking, Community Mobbing, but it's all part of the same harassment protocol. What many people do not realise is that Gang Stalking is just one appendage of this systemic form of control. There are other forms of control used to repress, and keep individuals in line. Other forms or appendages include, but are not limited to: Mobbing, Cointelpro, The Buzzsaw, Covert War, Electronic Harassment, etc. These are the just some of the names being given to a very old game, that is once again being played by governments on their unsuspecting citizens.
How are targets chosen?
Officially targets can be flagged and investigated for suspected, or reported behaviours. Unofficially the Targets can be chosen because of many other reasons. They can be chosen for political views. They can be chosen for whistle-blowing. They can be chosen because they belong to a dissident movement. They can be chosen because they asserted there rights at work. They can be chosen because they made the wrong enemy. Were considered to be too outspoken, unwittingly investigated something that the state did not want investigated, signed a petition, wrote a letter. They were deemed as suspicious by a civilian spy/snitch and their names were handed over.
It’s becoming apparent that targets might be chosen for this systemic form of control, if they are not already in some way a part of this controlled system. Eg. Many Targeted Individuals seem to be unaware that large chunks of our society are now being used as Citizen Informants.
Who gets targeted?
Targeting can happen to anyone in society. In the past primary targets of programs such as Cointelpro have been minorities. Targeting however can happen to anyone. Individuals are often targeted for being outspoken, whistle blowers, dissidents, people who go up against wealthy corporations, woman’s groups, (single) women, minorities, extremists, conspiracy theorists, anti-war proponents, individuals identified or targeted as problems at these community meetings, and other innocent individuals. The majority of the targets are often not aware that they are being targeted in this way. When a target moves, changes jobs, the harassment still continues, because they are still flagged. Every time the target moves, the same information, lies, and slander will be spread out into the new community and the systemic monitoring and harassment will continue. http://gangstalkingworld.com/Forum/YaBB ... 05738832/0
Who takes part?
People from all walks of life are being recruited to be the eyes and ears of the state. People from all races, ages, genders. Every sector of society that you can think of is a part of this. Civilian Spies/Snitches include, but are not limited to: General labourers, the wealthy, bikers, drug dealers, drug users, street people, punks, hip hop culture, KKK, black activists, church groups, youth groups, Fire Fighters, police officers, lawyers, health care workers, store keepers, maids, janitors, cable installers, phone repair persons, mail carriers, locksmiths, electricians, etc. There really is no minimum or maximum age range. An article came out recently in the UK, saying they were recruiting children as young as eight years old to be Covert Human Intelligence Sources.
Public individual that the Targeted Individual comes in contact with are given this warning. Some of these citizens might be recruited via programs such as Citizen Corp, Weed and Seed, Citizens On Phone Patrol, (COPP), City Watch, T.I.P.S. Many started with good intentions to help patrol and monitor their cities and neighbourhoods. Others are recruited via their families, others at school, others at work. Since every sector, class, race in society takes part, recruitment is multi-faceted.
Many do not understand or care that the end consequence of this flagging, this harassment protocol is to destroy a person.
Why people participate in Gang Stalking?
There are many reasons that someone takes part in this activity.
1. Some do it for the sense of power that it gives them.
2. Others do this as a way to make friends and keep friends. It’s something social and fun for them to do. Many in society use the one handed sign language to communicate and it's very effective in breaking down race, gender, age, social barriers.
3. Others are forced or black mailed by the State or the police into taking part.
4. They are told that they are part of homeland or national security. They are told that they are being used to help keep and eye on dangerous or emotionally disturbed individuals. They see themselves as heroic spies for the state.
Civilian spies can come from a variety of different programs such as the Citizen Corp, Citizen On Phone Patrol COPP, Weed and Seed, T.I.P.S., City Watch or some other centralized government program used for patrolling and monitoring cities.
5. Others are just local thugs or Informants who are already being used for other activities, and their energies are just diverted over into these community spy programs. Eg. Some may be given the choice of Spying for the State or the police vs going to jail.
6. Others are told outright lies and slander about the target to get them to go along with ruining the targets life.
7. Many are however just average citizens who have been recruited by the state the same way citizens were recruited in the former East Germany and other countries. It's the way the society is.
What are some techniques used against targets?
A few of the most common techniques are listed below.
a) Classical conditioning.
Getting a Targeted Individual sensitized to an everyday stimuli. The targeted individual over a period of months, or even years is negatively sensitised to an everyday stimuli, which is then used to harass them. It’s used out in public to let them know they are constantly being harassed and monitored. Some examples of everyday stimulus that might be used include: sounds, colors, patterns, actions. Eg. Red, white, yellow, strips, pens clicking, key jangling, loud coughing, loud whistling, loud smacking of clapping of hands together, cell phones, laptops, etc.
b) 24/7 Surveillance This will involve flagging and following the target everywhere they go. Learning about the target. Where they shop, work, play, who their friends and family are. Getting close to the target, moving into the community or apartment where they live, across the street. Monitoring the targets phone, house, and computer activity. Surveillance Policy.
c) Isolation of said target.
This is done via reports. The reports are meant to warn the community, but they act as little more than slander campaigns. They present a one sided assessment of the targets behavior and activity. The target is never allowed to tell their side of the story or to clear their name. This one sided assessment can include false reports, lies, and legitimate incidents where the target was set up. Eg. People in the targets community are told that the target is crazy, dangerous, a thief, into drugs, a prostitute, pedophile, in trouble for something, needs to be watched. This very flagging in and of itself is capable of creating paranoia, and false interpretation of everyday incidents.
Files will even be produced on the target, shown to neighbours, family, store keepers.
d) Noise and mimicking campaigns.
Disrupting the targets life, sleep with loud power tools, construction, stereos, doors slamming, etc. Talking in public about private things in the targets life. Mimicking actions of the target. Basically letting the target know that they are in the targets life. Daily interferences, nothing that would be too overt to the untrained eye, but psychologically degrading and damaging to the target over time.
e) Everyday life breaks and street theatre.
Flat tires, sleep deprivation, drugging food, putting dirt on targets property. Mass strangers doing things in public to annoy targets. These strangers might get text messaged to be at a specific time and place, and perform a specific action.
It might seem harmless to these Citizen Informants, but it could be causing great psychological trauma for the target. Eg. Blocking targets path, getting ahead of them in line, cutting or boxing them in on the road, saying or doing things to elicit a response from targets. Etc. It's like the death of a thousand paper cuts. One or two minor incidents will not cause any harm to the target, but over time the target is slowly worn down.
Where does the support or funding for this come from?
Though the systemic harassment that Targeted Individuals refer to as Gang Stalking is immoral and unethical in nature, programs such as this in democratic countries, and none democratic countries have always been funded by the Government. They are the only ones with enough money, coordination, and power to keep such a system in place. These Co-ordinated efforts then join hands with others for this systemic form of control and harassment.
"Ruling the community with an iron fist. “Savvy law enforcement types realized that under the community policing rubric, cops, community groups, local companies, private foundations, citizen informants and federal agencies could form alliances without causing public outcry.” Covert Action Quarterly, summer 1997.”
Ruling the communityhttp://www.albionmonitor.com/9711b/policing.html
“You mean to tell me that it is legal for corporations from the private sector to team up with local law enforcement officials in efforts to spy on innocent members of our society? You also mean to tell me that the synthesis of law enforcement authority and the drive of for-profit companies operate under little to no guidelines or restrictions and it is unclear to whom they are responsible to?”
What can you do to help?
1. If you know someone who is being targeted in this way please don’t go along with it. Don’t assume that the person is guilty or a bad person. Many innocent people are currently being targeted, and people are being told lies. This form of harassment is systemic and it's about state control and conformity. The express goal of this harassment is to destroy the individual over time.
2. If you are aware of someone being harassed in this way, subtly direct them to websites that deal with Gang Stalking, or sites for Targeted Individuals. Knowledge is power.
3. You can subtly offer your support to someone who is being unfairly treated, in very small little ways.
4. You can bring up the subject of Gang Stalking or Targeted Individuals.
6. You can subtly suggest that your local newspapers or community papers print articles about Targeted Individuals or even an write an objective piece about Gang Stalking.
How do participants communicate?
Communication happens in a number of ways. When on the street or in cars patrolling, they use baseball or Stasi like signals. Citizen Informants also seem to get verbal ques via cellphone and earphones.
These include things like tapping the side of the nose, corner of the eye, brushing back the hair 3 times, the infamous double blink, etc.http://gangstalkingworld.com/Media/2010 ... t-signals/
Here is a list of signals that the former East German Secret Police the Stasi used. http://www.nthposition.com/stasiland.php
SIGNALS FOR OBSERVATION
1. Watch out! Subject is coming - touch nose with hand or handkerchief
2. Subject is moving on, going further, or overtaking - stroke hair with hand, or raise hat briefly
3. Subject standing still - lay one hand against back, or on stomach
4. Observing Agent wishes to terminate observation because cover threatened - bend and retie shoelaces
5. Subject returning - both hands against back, or on stomach
6. Observing Agent wishes to speak with Team Leader or other Observing Agents - take out briefcase or equivalent and examine contents.
1. GmB Bailey, "Bridging The Gap."
2. Gloria Naylor. “1996"
3. Kristina Borjesson "Into the Buzzsaw"
4. Jim Redden “Snitch Culture”
5. Noa Davenport "Mobbing: Emotional Abuse in the American WorkPlace"
6. Ward Churchill, Jim Vander Wall “Cointelpro Papers”
7. Anna Funder “Stasiland”
8. Protectors of Privilege: Red Squads and Police Repression in Urban America
9. Victor Santoro “GASLIGHTING How To Drive Your Enemies Crazy “
10. Anthony Brina “Suburban Spies”
11. Stephen Knight “The Brotherhood”
12. Alex Constantine “The Covert War Against Rock”
13. Frank Donner “The Age of surveillance”
14. Niki F. Raapana "2020"
15. Dr. Andrew M. Lobaczewski. Political Ponerology: The science on the Nature of Evil.
16. Community Oriented Policing. A Systemic approach.
1. The lives of others. http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0405094/
(A movie about covert investigations in the former East Germany)
2. The Matrix. (Sci-fi Movie.) Neo a target wakes up and realises not only is he being watched without knowing why, but that the world is a lie, that has been created to pull the truth over people’s eyes.