Oh The Fourth Of July
Known as the Fourth of July or Independence Day, July 4th has been a Federal Holiday in the United States since 1941. However, the tradition of celebrating Independence Day goes all the way back to the 18th century and the American Revolution (1775-1783)
In June of 1776, representatives of the thirteen (13) colonies then fighting in the Revolutionary struggle weighed a resolution that would declare independence from Great Britain. On July 2,1776 the Continental Congress voted in favor of Independence and two (2) days later, on July 4, 1776 it's delegates adopted the Declaration of Independence- an historic document dtrafted by Thomas Jefferson.
And, from then until now, we celebrate. We celebrate Independence Day with all manner of festivities ranging from the incredible show of fireworks that Macy's provides the City of New York with to formal flag waving parades and patriotic concerts in towns and villages everywhere, to more casual family affairs and backyard BBQ's.
FYI- History has it that John Adams believed that July 2nd was the correct date on which to celebrate the birth of American Independence and would (reportedly) turn down invitations to appear at 4th of July events in protest. And, on a very sad and even stranger note, both Adams and Thomas Jefferson died on July 4, 1826- the 50th anniversary of the adoption of the Declaration of Independence!
Here is what Rockland County has to offer:
July 2: Haverstraw- Independence Celebration. Bowline Point Park off Samsondale Road. Music at 7pm. Fireworks at approximately 9:30pm.
July 2: West Haverstraw- Independence Celebration. Helen Hayes Hospital, 51 Rte. 9W. Rain dateis July 3.
July 3: Spring Valley- Fireworks will be on display at 9pm. Memorial Park, Memorial Park Drive. Rain date July 4.
July 4: Pearl River- Independence Day Celebration takes place July 4. Childrens activities and rides during the day. Music by the Rockland County Concert Band at 7pm. Fireworks at about 9:30pm. Rain date July 5. Central Avenue Field.
July 4: Nyack- Family Day Celebration and the 22nd Annual Fireworks! Activities start at 8pm. Fireworks at 9pm.Memorial Park, 53 Piermont Avenue, Nyack.
So... Get your voice into good singing order and start practicing The Star Spangled Banner. And every day from now until then, lemomade and strawberry shortcake will be on my menu! Don't forgat that The Pie Lady on Rte 9W in Nyack makes the best apple pie ever!
Posted on: Sunday the 1st of July 2012.
Total views: 4036
Written by: Ellen Hilburg