It is noteworthy to mention that culture is the prime agent for a socially inclined democratic society. Culture in any shape or form is the voice of the people. It is their views that manifest in artwork whether it be poetry, theater or paintings. Since the dawn of early civilizations, free spirited ideas were integral forces behind the prosperity and development of a particular civilization. Plato adhered to his belief of philosopher kings being the ideal bellwether, when it came to governing a republic. Despite contradictions in his discourse he could not emphasize enough the power music and art held in refreshing minds and moving societies towards a more ethical and empathetic front. The Renaissance saw a rise in philosophy,art, architecture which challenged the political and religious dogmas that were omni present during that time. Rousseau's incendiary thoughts on social reformation and Delacroix's fluent brush strokes were among the many culturally inclined individuals that brought about the French revolution. Bangladesh had seen the likes of the Shonnashi Bidroho movement in the late 18th century along with Malay Roy Chowdhury's Hungryalist movement in 1961 which brought about progressive reform not only in Bengali literature but society as well. Countless slave narratives were pivotal in abolishing slavery and making people aware of its discontents.The Harlem Renaissance in America brought into the limelight a new breed of African American artists that created the mystic Blues. The generation of the Beats along with the hippie era pushed artistic creativity into a different dimension which saw society thrust itself in countless anti-war campaigns (Woodstock). The contribution of artistic and cultural pursuits have left an indelible mark on society and its contributory influence cannot be ignored. Now its time for Bangladesh to revitalize their identity once again through such meaningful endeavours and unite different factions of culture for the much anticipated change.
Our goal is not a pipe dream. In fact the pipe dream is our goal. There is a saying "Discipline that stifles creativity and initiative should be abolished." If we work along these lines we are bound to find hidden gems and a myriad of talents spread all around Bangladesh through e-commerce. Also we would give the youth a chance to strut their skills. Artistic skills that they thought were not a cent worth. We are giving everyone an opportunity to let out their views regardless of their creed, caste or religion. At the end art is not only for art's sake but for the sake of an enlightened democratic society.