Kiwi shellfish smother Australian seabeds
A deceptively attractive looking spiral shellfish is smothering Australian seabeds, says CSIRO.
The New Zealand screw shell (Maoricolpus roseus), was introduced to Tasmania from New Zealand about 70 years ago and has now made its way to Sydney Harbour. On the way it has established vast beds in northern Bass Strait and off the coasts of eastern Tasmania, Victoria and New South Wales.
"It's a millenium marathon with uncertain environmental consequences," says CSIRO's Dr Nic Bax, who estimates the introduced species now covers an area of seafloor about the size of Tasmania.
Scientists are concerned that the filter-feeding mollusc may threaten other mollusc species, including scallops and the native screw shells. They say shellfish-eating fish species, and the food chain that depends on them, would also be affected.
"There are very few predators that can break through the hard shell of the screw shell and eat it," says Dr Bax, an ecologist at CSIRO Marine Research.
Commonly found on beaches and shorelines, with an attractive spiral shell similar to native screw shells, the New Zealand screw shell is one of an estimated 200 marine species intentionally or accidentally introduced to Australian waters since the start of trade and shipping.
Dr Bax said it is likely to be a threat to other seafloor species because it breeds so prolifically, smothering the sea floor, down to eighty metres depth along the Continental Shelf.
Dr Winston Ponder of the Australian Museum says Australia has the richest fauna of screw shells or turritellids in the world. He believes the mollusc is likely to displace similar related species of screw shells, several of which occupy the same depth range and sediment profile as the Maoricolpus.
CSIRO is collaborating with other researchers and fishers to build a profile of Maoricolpus roseus and its progress in Australian waters.
"We are only just starting to understand the habits of this species," says Dr Bax. "It is highly competitive with other species, and builds substantial beds to the detriment of other animals on the sea floor."
"We don't know yet how far north it may travel, nor do we know how much it will alter the existing natural habitat and shut down the habitat of other species."
The shell has not been reported, to date, on Tasmania's west coast or west of Bass Strait.
"We're not sure how it may have arrived here but shipping trade at that time revolved around apples and timber, and ships came loaded with dry ballast that consisted of stones gathered from New Zealand's shore," says Dr Bax.
Another likely source is the live oyster trade from NZ, which was very common at the time, Dr Bax says.