"Random" means that given a large number of events, the combination will reveal no pattern. It does not mean that each event had no cause, but that the cause was evenly distributing the events. And of course God determines that it be that way. By definition "God" is whatever causes that randomness to be random.
How does determinism and/or randomness work in the case of radioactive decay?
Radioactive decay has a pattern over a large number of events, but appears random for single atoms. What causes an individual atom to decay?
of decay is not what is random over time. What is random is which
of the particulates will break away from which atom, which direction, and in which order
The reason that they break away is because of unseen and unobservable turbulence that is constantly adding to and taking away from the energy bonding them all together. That turbulence approaches from all angles and disseminates at all angles depending on other turbulence occurring at the moment. In "normal space" (and really in any space) there is constant energy turbulence on what some people call the "subspace" level or merely beneath the level of detectable EM waves. A radioactive atom is just barely within the limits of the required bonding and thus it doesn't take much turbulence to cause dissemination. Non-radioactive atoms are further within the required limits and thus are more resistant to decay.
Statistically, a peak in turbulence can be expected to occur within a specific amount of time. That duration is what specifies the radioactivity level of the substance. It is much like predicting that on average, on any given day, an ocean wave will reach a certain level on the beach. Each individual wave need not be known, but rather by merely observing how often the waves reach the mark each day, a calendar can be made indicating typically how many waves will reach the mark on that day, assuming it isn't an unusual day. The turbulence of space has less variance than ocean waves, so more predictable results can be achieved by close monitoring. The same type of substance, being the same size, will yield the same results even though individually one cannot see or measure how much turbulence is going to strike at any one moment.
Determinism comes into the picture in that something is causing the turbulence
, "random chaos", to be at that level. Each tiny spec of turbulence is being caused to do what it does at that moment and thus as long as that cause is in effect, the turbulence will always be at that level, always still be unpredictable on an individual level, yet always be predictable over a large sample of waves or time.
Clarify, Verify, Instill, and Reinforce the Perception of Hopes and Threats unto Anentropic Harmony ElseFrom THIS age of sleep, Homo-sapien shall never awake.The Wise gather together to help one another in EVERY aspect of living.You are always more insecure than you think, just not by what you think.The only absolute certainty is formed by the absolute lack of alternatives.
It is not merely "do what works
", but "to accomplish what purpose in what time frame at what cost
As long as the authority is secretive, the population will be subjugated.
Gain is obtained by giving a lot and keeping a little.
Those who too ardently seek to be seen as correct, see only correctness in themselves.The Social Paradox
- to be well grounded and soundly harmonious, one must rise above the dirt and noise.The One God
≡ The reason/cause for the Universe being what it is = "The situation cannot be what it is and also remain as it is