It’s important for kids to get protein at every meal, especially breakfast. Studies have shown that eating breakfast helps kids focus and concentrate better at school. Milk contains nine essential nutrients in each glass and is a simple, delicious and wholesome way to give your kids a natural source of high-quality protein. You can pair your breakfast with a glass of milk for 8 grams of high-quality protein per 8 ounce glass or mix it into your favorite smoothie, overnight oats or breakfast recipe. Kids already love milk, so including it as part of a protein rich breakfast can be easy. Don't believe me? Check out some of these delicious recipe our Influencers created with milk to make us #FuertesConLeche.
Giving the boys a breakfast with protein, I think, is the best way to start their day. I can see they have the energy they need and will run off to school contented and ready to learn. Of course, breakfast doesn’t have to be complicated. It can be as simple as a glass of milk with toast (each 8oz glass of milk has 9 essential nutrients including protein), or oatmeal made with milk, or a fruit licuado.
It's a big responsibility as a parent to make sure that our little ones get the nutrients that their growing bodies need. Because, let's face it. If it were up to them, they would live off of a diet of cheddar fish and fruit snacks. It's important for kids to get protein at every meal, especially breakfast. Did you know that milk has 9 essential nutrients in each glass? Milk is a natural source of high-quality protein and it doesn't even need to be served in a glass. It's so easy to add it to your meals, especially since you always have milk on hand.
My kids really really really like milk. Since they wake up in the morning the first thing they ask for is a cup of warm milk. I love that they do because I know that It’s important for kids to get protein at every meal, especially breakfast. Plus, studies show eating breakfast helps kids focus and concentrate at school. With 9 essential nutrients in each glass, milk is a simple, delicious and wholesome way to give my kids a natural source of high-quality protein – plus other nutrients they need.
Fuertes con Leche es una campaña que nos recuerda lo importante que es incentivar el consumo de proteína en cada comida, especialmente en el desayuno de nuestros niños. Son numerosos los estudios que demuestran que un buen desayuno les ayuda a mantener la atención y concentración en las actividades escolares.