700 Journals and 15,000,000 Readers Each Journal is getting 25,000+ ReadersThis Readership is 10 times more when compared to other Subscription Journals (Source: Google Analytics)
Review Article Open Access
Coatings are widely used to provide drug protection, to increase aesthetic value of product (color, taste and texture), to reduces acidity of vitamins, to provide lubrication and modified drug release. Usually, coating agents are dissolved or dispersed in solvents (organic or water) prior to coating and glidants are commonly added to prevent particle agglomeration during coating. Hot-melt coating technique defined as the application of fine layer of coating material in molten state over the substrate. As hot-melt coating devoid of solvent use, therefore solvent disposal, recovery and treatment is not required; as a result powders with very high specific surface areas can be coated rapidly. And also, this process is economic, environment friendly and rapid as compared conventional coating techniques. There are various hot-melt coating techniques, including melt coating (pour/spray coating), direct blending and solid dispersion. Commonly used equipments like fluidized bed coater and pan coater can be easily modified to suit for hot-melt coating. Process involves coating the substrates like beads, capsules, granules, particles, pellets, spherules and tablets of various drugs. Lipid coating is the smart option to polymer coatings as they need melting before application directly on the substrate. Different lipids can be used in coating and selection of the right lipid for the application requires knowledge of their physico-chemical properties and its associated effect on drug release. Usual equipments like coating pan and fluid bed coater and conventional can be modified for coating process.
To read the full article Peer-reviewed Article PDF
Author(s): Sudke S. G., Sakarakar D. M.
Fluid bed coater, Hot-melt coating, Lipid coating, Modified release, Taste masking, Pharmaceutical Technology,Biopharmaceutics,Pharmaceutical Sciences