American Adults Hear Better
Than They Did 40 Years Ago
October 2010 - BHI Illuminates Link Between ADHD and
October 2010 - Recent Advances in Hearing Health Care and
July 2010 - Are Wind Turbines Detrimental to your
April 2010 - BHI Encourages Medical Professionals
to Include Hearing Health in Exams
Feb 2010 - Living with Single-Sided Deafness
Sept 2009 - The Biological Mechanisms of Hyperacusis
Sept 2009 - Selective Sound Sensitivity Syndrome
May 2009 - Type, Degree, and Configuration of Hearing
April 2009 - Have an Ear Infection? Maybe You Should
See a Chiropractor!
March 2009 - Ear Candling Ineffective and Dangerous
March 2009 - Hearing Loss Not Well Documented in
Electronic Medical Records
February 2009 -
Heart Disease and Hearing Loss Share Risk Factors
October 2008 - Topics at international conference
of ENT researchers
September 2008 -
New Hearing Scale Detects Hearing Loss in Elderly
January 2008 - Many Kids Get Unnecessary
January 2008 -
Hearing Things: When Sounds Come Unbidden
December 2007 -
Auditory Hallucinations or Musical Ear Syndrome
September 2007 -
Lasting Neurological Processes Impacted by Mild Hearing
August 2007 -
Otoacoustic Emissions: Reducing and Preventing
Noise-Induced Hearing Loss
July 2007 -
Meningitis Immunization Recommended for All Adolescents
2007 - Auditory Nerve Implant Next Big
Hearing Loss Breakthrough?
2007 - How Your Brain Hears
October 2006 - Going deaf and blind happens
simultaneously in old age
May 2006 - Guidelines for Care, Diagnosis of Swimmer's
May 2006 - Help for Sore, Irritated, Infected
April 2006 - "Blackberry
2006 - Why is the cochlea shaped the way it is?
2006 - If your child suffers frequent ear
infections, you might want to consider the home monitoring device
mentioned in this press release.
2006 - New research by the folks at Wake
Forest indicates that an infant's brain must learn to combine different
kinds of sensory information (e.g. sight and hearing).
February 2006 - Ear Candling:
A Foolproof Method or Proof of Foolish Methods?
February 2006 - Researchers have
discovered that the presence of a particular hormone is related how well
people retain their hearing as they age.
February 2006 - Deafness Research UK has recently
awarded a prize to a Cambridge University student for her work to
develop an objective method to measure frequency regions with little or
no hearing response. Here's the press release.
January 2006 - Do you think a computer-based diagnosis
tool would help doctors identify and treat hearing disorders? If
so, you'll be interested in the work being done in Australia.
October 2005 - Not hearing well is a certainly a
difficult issue to deal with. It turns out that seniors
may have additional communications problems beyond those caused directly
by hearing loss.
January 2005 - There's a new organization called Hearing Health Network
(HHN) that's interested in your hearing health. It's a collaboration between family doctors and hearing health
professionals. Read all about it here!
2002 - Here are some great tips on ear care and injury
What is the impact of hearing loss in older
adults? Would screening for the condition and treating it make a
difference in how people function as they age? These very basic questions
are at the heart of research that is yielding some provocative findings
about the relationship between hearing loss and healthy aging. The results
suggest that hearing loss has an important role to play in how people fare
as they grow older. There may even be pathways through which hearing loss
contributes to cognitive decline. "By the time people are 70, two-thirds
of adults have a clinically significant hearing loss," said Frank R. Lin,
MD, PhD, whose research group at Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine in Baltimore is examining these broader questions (see FastLinks).
"For almost everyone, it develops over time, yet we don't necessarily
think about it as possibly contributing to other, more important outcomes
in later life." In some cases, hearing loss may be a component of a more
complex syndrome of frailty or progressive overall disability, suggested
James T. Pacala, MD, a professor and the associate head of family medicine
and community health at the University of Minnesota Medical School in
Minneapolis. The more researchers look into this, "the more they uncover
associations of hearing loss with many other conditions that produce
functional decline," he said.
I remember well the day the music first began to
play. It was September 1999. We had just been cleared at the Canada-United
States border and were driving back to Southern California after spending
the summer in Alaska. The wind was blowing from the north and gently
rocking the travel trailer we were towing. All at once I heard singing,
loud singing-ladies with high voices, like a church choir. It was just
like someone had turned on a switch. I checked the radio; it was off. I
looked at my close friend and travel companion, who did not appear to hear
the music, but I did not ask her. The singing continued through the day. I
thought maybe the angels were calling me home. Was I just hallucinating,
or worse, was I going crazy? That night, the next day, and on from there,
the singing continued. There was never a break and never a pause. After a
week or so, the music was replaced by another song, opera like, with a
deep male voice singing. This continued for days before changing to
something else. I have never been a music person and have no music
training, but I like most music.
While there has been a recent uptick in the
quantity and quality of professional articles on the interaction of
cognition, listening, audition, and amplification, many more questions
than answers remain. Because this area of study is particularly important
as hearing healthcare professionals incorporate this knowledge into aural
rehabilitation, counseling, and hearing aid fitting protocols to better
address the needs of patients, new approaches to understanding are needed.
I've asked two experts in this area, Brent Edwards, PhD, Vice President of
Research and Director of the Starkey Hearing Research Center, and Kathy
Pichora-Fuller, PhD, Professor of Psychology at the University of Toronto,
Canada, to take a look at the current status of research and consider
where all of these data might be leading us.
The New York Times and NBC's TODAY Show recently
ran features on "misophonia," a condition in which people are unable to
tolerate certain sounds. The Tinnitus Practitioners Association (TPA)
applauds media efforts to bring attention to this little-understood
disorder but feels the recent reports stopped short of offering full
information about possible treatments. Marsha Johnson, AuD, a Portland,
OR-based doctor of audiology specializing in sound sensitivity disorders,
was featured in both segments. Dr. Johnson is a TPA board member and also
sits on the board of the American Tinnitus Association. The TODAY Show
piece opened with Dr. Johnson but then turned to a network medical
contributor who did not offer much hope for the condition.
I recently had the honor of speaking to many of
you at the recent AARP National Event & Expo, Orlando @50+. The topic I
discussed is one that may be all-too familiar; age-related hearing loss,
or presbycusis. We know the statistics - 18 percent of American adults
45-64 years old, 30 percent of adults 65-74 years old, and 47 percent of
adults 75 years old or older have a hearing impairment. But what many of
us don't know is what we can do to treat this hearing loss and there are
options. Hearing aids, cochlear implants, and assistive listening devices
can all help us hear better. So can making sure that you are face-to-face
with the person with whom you are having a conversation! I was pleased to
share in my presentation some interesting research developments that are
in the pipeline, specifically hair cell regeneration. While not yet a
reality, with adequate research funding we hope that in the next decade
we'll be able to offer a therapy that can actually regenerate hair cells.
If you missed my presentation-- or want to catch it again click here.
An Australian study involving adults 50 years and
older suggests that those with moderate kidney disease should have their
hearing tested. The report on the research, published in the American
Journal of Kidney Diseases, found that 54% of the adults with moderate
kidney disease had some degree of hearing loss, while 30% had severe
hearing loss. According to the National Institute on Deafness and Other
Communication Disorders (NIDCD), only 18% of adults aged 45 to 64 in the
general population suffer from hearing loss. Previous studies have linked
both conditions in some rare syndromes, but this study suggests hearing
loss can be linked to any older adult with kidney disease. The results do
not suggest a cause-and-effect relationship between the two conditions,
and it was noted that some of the medications used to treat kidney disease
can affect hearing.
It was the early 1940s and I was in elementary
school when I developed the measles. I ran a very high temperature, but
the doctors could not get my temperature to come down. I was supposed to
swallow aspirin, but I could not do it. I remember being sick over and
over trying to swallow that aspirin. All I could do was survive. My
temperature stayed up for seven or eight days. When I finally began
feeling better, I noticed I could not hear as well out of my left ear.