Dear Dr. Johnson: Is there any explanation as to why some people have more trouble digesting milk than others? As I understand it, people from the southern part of the world or even southern Europe have more trouble than people from North America and northern Europe. Why would this be?
First, it is necessary to understand that ``milk intolerance`` is generally caused by a deficiency in lactase--an enzyme found in the small intestine of almost all mammals at birth. This enzyme assists in breaking down and digesting the sugar in milk--lactose. If it is not digested this way, the lactose will pass into the large intestine to cause gasiness and crampiness.
In non-human mammals, this enzyme is quickly diminished in amounts after the age of weaning. When milk is no longer a part of the diet, this enzyme is not necessary, and evolution has seen fit to get rid of an enzyme that is no longer needed.
However, humans obviously do continue to drink milk beyond weaning. And in areas of the world where that is a common practice and has been for many, many years, there appear to be higher levels of lactase enzyme persisting into adulthood than in other areas of the world where the use of milk is not common beyond the age of weaning. Therefore, some scientific theorists have explained the differences in milk tolerance among members of the human race by looking at their history of milk use--and the consequent higher or lower levels of the enzyme to help digest the sugar, lactose, in milk.
Dear Readers: Many of you are aware of the growing controversy about whether or not mercury-amalgam fillings are dangerous, as is claimed by many dentists. The March issue of Consumer Reports contains an article examining this question. In the view of CU`s editors, `` . . . dentists who purport to treat health problems by ripping out fillings are putting their own economic interests ahead of their patients` welfare.
``Amalgams have been used for more than 150 years. Except for a few people with a genuine allergy to mercury, CU knows of no one who has been harmed by them. There is little danger of the United States becoming a nation of Mad Hatters`` (a reference to the possible ill effects of mercury-amalgam on individuals).
For those interested in the subject, this article is must reading.
Do you suffer from sinus, tension or migraine headache? Find out what you should do to avoid or minimize headaches in Dr. Johnson`s booklet. For a copy, send $2.25 to ``Headache,`` Box 4406, Orlando, Fla. 32802-4406. Make checks payable to Newspaperbooks.