Art and Craft
Young children primarily learn through movement and imitation. They wish to explore the world and the seeds for skill and artistic sensibility are laid during these years. Rather than encouraging a high level of competence it is more important to "taste" a variety of different activities. The focus should be on the enjoyment of the "doing" and not on the finished product. The activities should make sense and the child should participate in it out of interest and curiosity - rather than expectation.
Our art and craft activities are not focused on teaching abstract concepts but rather in building skill and artistic sensibility and most importantly to foster a love for making things with our hands.
An activity will take place weekly and in the repetition of certain themes the child looks forward to "Painting day" or "modelling day".
A few examples of activities:
Wet on Wet painting: The paper is wetted and children are given water colours (usually only the primary colours). The colour flows on the paper and children can explore the way the colours meet and mingle - rather than fix on a set end result. This helps foster an artistic sensibility - which arises out of process and experimentation.
Drawing with wax crayons: We use block crayons that have a flat and a sharp surface and are made out of beeswax. They are "warm" to use and give the possibility to explore large expanses of colour and not only line drawing (as pencils or cokies). Primary and Secondary colours are used.
Modelling with beeswax: Beeswax is an excellent medium for modelling. It softens in the warmth of the hand and is warmer than normal modelling clays. It is non toxic and children can explore shape and form.
Craft activity - sowing: Children are introduced to sowing with needle and thread - at first just at play and slowly making small projects like pin cushions and bookmarks. Large darning needles are used and wool felt in various colours.
Festival Crafts: Each of the festivals (See our Yearly programme page) has particular crafts that accompany them e.g. making lanterns, making crowns, kites, shooting stars, mobiles, egg painting etc.