5 K's (Sikhism)
Simple and very basic introduction to the 5 k's (Kesh, Kanga, Kara, Katchera, Kirpan) which all baptised Sikhs wear.
The Zen Mind
This video is an introduction to the Zen Mind.
Praefectus Classis (HMS Pinafore, Gilbert && Sullivan)
versabar iuvenis ego procuratoris in domo; verrebam muros et solum, osti poliebam capulum, poliebam plane capulum - et nunc praefectus classis sum.
Important Body Parts
An introduction to important body parts and their function for young school age children. It teaches about the parts that are inside our body, including the brain, heart, lungs, kidneys, and liver. Run time 04:51.
George Washington, “The father of our nation,” is the subject of this sort video that sets the stage for his serving as general of the army in colonial times. Done as an animation. Too short to provide much value except as an introduction to the topic.
Dining Etiquette - European vs. American Dining Style
There is a distinct difference between European and American dining style and etiquette? Image Consultant Kimberly Law explains how to master both in this video which shows her seated at a table giving examples of everything she talks about.
ASPETTI DELLA FORMAZIONE ARTISTICA E DELLE FONTI DELLA PITTURA DI JACKSON POLLOCK
ASPETTI DELLA FORMAZIONE ARTISTICA E DELLE FONTI DELLA PITTURA DI JACKSON POLLOCK,Istituzione universitaria di secondo e terzo livello (ciclo II e III) per la formazione degli insegnanti e/o dei formatori,Memorizzare,Illustrare,Alta formazione universitaria (secondo e terzo livello),Ente ministeriale a supporto dell'innovazione e della valutazione del sistema educativo/formativo,Storia dell'arte,Presenza,Interazione con il tutor/docente,Guidato,Risorsa per studenti,Apprendimento uditivo / visivo
Explains the importance of muscles in the body. Also, explains how muscle names are given. Good introduction to the muscular system. Every movement you make depends on the movement of your muscles. And the muscular system works with every other system in your body. Color with narration. 1:35 min.
Have you ever wondered why overheating on a hot day and getting a fever when you're sick feel so different? Both involve an increase in your body's temperature. However, in one case your brain and body do everything they can to cool you off, while in the other they push the temperature inside your body to extreme levels. This video describes these two responses in detail and takes some of the mystery out of fever. The video also gives a simple introduction to homeostatis. Closed captioning inclu
Respiratory System - Phoenix Learning Group
The mechanism of breathing and the anatomy of the organs that carry out this activity are brought to life through animation and x-ray motion pictures. Short clip (1:48) intended to to entice viewer to buy DVD (15:00), but good basic introduction to respiratory system.
Characters in Shakespeare's Romeo and Juliet
A short video that quickly goes over the characters without offering any depth. This would be good for an introduction to the classic story.
På fredagen berättade Klartext att vulkanen på ön Java har fått ett nytt utbrott. Dessutom berättade vi om det nya helgonet Mary MacKillop som avslöjade en sexskandal i Australien.
Anglo-Saxons: How They Lived
Anglo-Saxons came to Britain from other countries on the European
continent. How did they live in their new land? To uncover what life in
the Dark Ages might have been like, watch this video clip.
Understanding the Brain: Development
A baby's environment plays just as large a role in
its development as its genes. Very short video. Basically, a brief introduction.
Introduction to Triangles With Mathemachicken Teacher
In this lesson in the classroom a teacher dressed as a MathemaCHICKEN "gobbles" through each type of triangle. Students sing a song about triangles and define isosceles, scalene, right, equilateral,obtuse, and acute triangles. An entertaining and educational introduction to triangles. To finish the lesson a link is given at the end of the video to visit. (7:23)
Symbols of Europe
A thematic video featuring the main symbols of the European Union. The main symbols shown are the anthem, flag and motto .
50 Years of History in the European Union
this video teaches about the past 50 years in the European Union. It reveals an unprecedented success story: The video has narration.
Past 50 Years of the European Union
A pictoral timeline of 50 year of history in the European Union. The 50 years of history of European Union is show in 5 minutes in this clip.
Spanish Lesson - formal vs. informal
A very basic introduction to the difference between tú and usted. Figure out how to use different levels of formality along with some good examples in Spanish. (The quality could be a little better.)
Circle, Square, and Triangle
A claymation introduction of the circle, square and triangle shapes. Narrated by a student. . (:19)