According to state statistics, over 1,300 Atlantic County residents are
currently living with AIDS. Yet many people do not fully understand the
effects and extent of this disease. Learn more about AIDS/HIV by reading
the following information compiled from the Centers for Disease Control
Know the Facts about AIDS/HIV
AIDS stands for acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. AIDS is caused by
infection with a virus called human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). This
virus is passed from one person to another through blood-to-blood and
sexual contact. In addition, infected pregnant women can pass HIV to their
babies during pregnancy or delivery, as well as through breast feeding.
Infection with HIV can weaken the immune system to the point that it has
difficulty fighting off certain infections. The immune system of a person
with AIDS is weakened to the point that medical intervention may be necessary
to prevent or treat serious illness.
Today there are medical treatments that can slow down the rate at which
HIV weakens the immune system. There are other treatments that can prevent
or cure some of the illnesses associated with AIDS. As with other diseases,
early detection offers more options for treatment and preventative care.
AIDS/HIV and Sexually Transmitted Disease Screenings
The Atlantic County Division of Public Health offers free, confidential
screenings for AIDS/HIV. Counseling and treatment for gonorrhea,
syphilis and chlamydia is also available at no cost. No appointment
is necessary. The clinic is scheduled every Monday, except holidays,
from 2:30 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. at 201 Shore Road (Stillwater Building) in
Northfield. For more information call 645-5933.
For more information on AIDS/HIV, contact the expert nurses in our Community
Health/Clinical Services Unit (609-645-5933) or visit the resource pages
AIDS CCOMMUNITY CARE ALTERNATIVE PROGRAM (ACCAP) -
Eligible individuals diagnosed with AIDS may receive Medicaid covered
services including private duty nursing services in the community rather
than in a nursing home. Call 1-888-426-9243
HIV and AIDS: Are You At Risk? A great resource on
basic AIDS/HIV information from the Centers for Disease Control. Information
is also available in Spanish.
Living with HIV/AIDS - An informational booklet from
the CDC, also available in Spanish.
National AIDS Hotline: 1-800-342-AIDS – This
hotline operates toll free, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. The Hotline
offers anonymous, confidential HIV/AIDS information from trained specialists.
TTY service is available for the deaf (1-800-243-7889). The Spanish
service (1-800-344-7432) offers STD information in addition to information
about HIV/AIDS. Additional information about AIDS and other sexually transmitted diseases can be found at the American Social Health Association (ASHA) website.
New Jersey Department of Health and Senior Services –
AIDS Statistics by County
New Jersey Division of AIDS Prevention and Control
South Jersey AIDS Alliance – Provides advocacy,
education, prevention services, support groups, case management, outreach,
food bank, pharmaceutical assistance and a resource center.
Information compiled from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.