|Fast facts -||Amaravati is one of the popular tourist attractions in Andhra Pradesh. It is home to the Amaravati Stupa is a famous specimen of the Buddhist art and ancient Indian architecture|
|Did you know -||Amaravati is around 65 kms from the city of Vijayawada and is visited by hundreds of tourists and pilgrims from all parts of the country. It dates back to around 2000.|
|Must do -||Witness the grand and beautiful carving and sculptures. Also visit the sculpture of Lord Buddha, Lord Amaresvara Temple and 2000-year-old Buddhist settlement|
Amaravati is one of the popular tourist attractions in Andhra Pradesh. It is home to the Amaravati Stupa- a famous specimen of the Buddhist art and ancient Indian architecture. Amaravati is around 65 kms from the city of Vijayawada and is visited by hundreds of tourists and pilgrims from all parts of the country.
Amaravati in Andhra Pradesh is located on the banks of the River Krishna and is a great relic of the grand architecture of the Buddhist school of architecture. Amravati was the ancient capital of the Satavahana dynasty. It came under the influence of the Buddhist faith through the Kushanas of Mathura. The town also has a 2000-year-old Buddhist settlement and a temple of Lord Amaresvara.
Amaravati, Andhra Pradesh dates back to around 2000 and was an important settlement during the reign of Emperor Ashoka.
The Amaravati Stupa is the most popular attraction of Amaravati. It is a major relic of the Mauryan architecture in South India. Lord Buddha is represented in various forms through beautiful sculptures in the Amaravati Stupa. There are grand carvings and sculptures which portray the life of Buddha and his various incarnations from the Jataka tales. Most of the archaeological specimens of the Stupa originate from the Vajrayana teachings of Kalachakra.
Amaravati can be conveniently reached. It is well connected with the city of Vijayawada and other important cities in the state. The nearest airport is at Vijayawada while the nearest railway station is located at Guntur. The town is also well linked with other parts of the country by the road network.