Winston Churchill, British prime minister during World War II, is believed to have once said that, "history is written by the victors."
But the untold stories of the defeated, right or wrong, are not silenced forever.
Such is the tale told by Capitan resident Dr. Bernhard Reimann in his books, "Peter: A Boy From Berlin" and, "Hans: A German Soldier's Tale."
Reimann's latest story is not a reality Americans are used to hearing or accepting, but his books put a face on the men and boys drafted into Hitler's armies - soldiers, sons, brothers and fathers just like the men they faced across the trenches and in the skies. Men and boys fighting for home and country, though many doubted the banners they were protecting.
Both books are allegorical tales of the people he could have been. Experiences throughout the books recount stories Reimann lived through or heard of, while some are purely fanciful, he said.
Passages in the book draw directly from Reimann's experiences, including learning to speak again after a bomb threw shrapnel into his face, nearly severing his tongue, a trial shared by Hans after a Russian grenade detonates nearby while the character attempts to tend to a wounded soldier. Another explosive injury to Reimann's knee left him facing the possibility of being crippled for life, he said.
Pervading the text is a dream of hope and freedom found in the sky, and in the daily grace of being alive that comes from Reimann's own experiences as a glider pilot, a profession shared by his character, Hans.
"I was in the Hitler Youth, and I had a great advantage in there because I learned to fly gliders," he said. "You're 14 years old, sitting in a little seat with a stick in your hand and the wings are behind you - there's nothing before you. You have to have that thing straight and fly for 20, 30 seconds, but you're on top of the world."
Membership in the Hitler Youth was required for all children ages 10 to 18, and all other youth groups were abolished during that time. Before being drafted to the Hitler Youth, Reimann said he sang in the Wiedermann boys' choir, which toured across Europe for a time.
"But that stupid war started in 1939, and there was no flying anymore," he said.
Two years later he was drafted into the German army, "right out of school, I became a soldier," he said. "I was a little guy in a uniform. If they say, 'turn right,' I turn right. If they say, 'turn left,' I turn left. If they say, 'here's a rifle, here's a machine gun - shoot that guy,' you shoot it. That's where Hans begins."
Many characters in "Hans" express their displeasure, if not outright hatred of, "that stupid war," forced on the people of Germany that tore families apart and cut short the lives of many, despite the punishments they faced at the hands of the Schutzstaffel, the Nazi SS.
But the book is not a horror story or a tragedy, despite gut-wrenching descriptions of trials endured by the characters, presented with the clinical honesty of the doctor that Reimann became.
After surviving the war, Reimann continued his studies, eventually rising to be among the top researchers in the budding field of electron microscopy, he said.
Reimann worked first for the Scripps Institute of Oceanography in 1961, and later for the U.S. Army at the William Beaumont Army Medical Center in El Paso, Texas, where he was introduced to his future home in New Mexico.
"For 20 years I worked as a civilian for the American army," he said. "The fellow who inspired me at (the army medical center), for which they later put a medal on me, was a general who came and said, 'what would you do if you were able to design a laboratory that would be the standard for many American installations?'"
His design, "provided this center with electron microscopy capabilities and support for research and clinical work unmatched by any other (Department of Defense) medical facilities," according to the award issued by Brigadier General Richard D. Cameron, which also praised Reimann for his 20 years of service and numerous research articles.
The Commander's Award for Civilian Services, set in a position of pride above Reimann's desk, is one of his most treasured memories because it reminded him that all soldiers, in any army, are humans, he said.
"'Hans' was a book I had written for my comrades in arms here," he said. "I don't know if they catch it that way, I hope they do because there's not much difference between a soldier in the line in France, Russia, Germany or here."
Article by Erik LeDuc