Both sweet and sour cherries derived from the wild cherry, which originated around 70 B.C. in the mountains between the Black and Caspian seas. Ruby and round, with that tantalizing tang, cherries quickly became a prized food among ancient Romans, Greeks and Chinese royalty. Cherries are a symbol of immortality in China; the Chinese hang cherry branches over their doors on New Year's Day to keep evil spirits away. Cherry seeds were used medicinally in 15th century Europe to relieve ills such as chest pains, upset stomach and to prevent kidney stones. Always a seasonal standout, today's cherries offer a host of good health, nutrition and flavor.
Sweet cherries (Prunus avium) and sour cherries (Prunus cerasus) are members of the rose family. Like their relatives plums, apricots and nectarines, they are stone fruit, meaning they have a stone-like seed pit surrounded by fleshy fruit. Sweet varieties such as Bing, Royal Ann and Rainier come to market between May and August, while tart varieties, which are almost always processed into canned, frozen or dried cherries, such as Morello and Montmercy, are available fresh from June to August. These tiny orbs are packed with antioxidants, particularly heart healthy anthocyanins. One cup offers 16 percent DV (Daily Value) of vitamin C, 9 percent DV potassium, and 12 percent DV fiber.
arthritis and gout. In addition, cherry properties also help prevent muscle pain and enhance recovery of strenuous running. According to a study published in the 2010 Journal of the International Society of Sports Nutrition, ingesting tart cherry juice for seven days before and during strenuous running can reduce muscle damage and minimize pain during and after strenuous exercise. Sleep duration and quality may also improve with the consumption of tart cherry juice; it increases melatonin, a hormone secreted by the brain, which has a mild sleep-inducing effect governed by the body's biological clock, according to a study in the October 30, 2011 European Journal of Nutrition.
Color and firmness are the best indicators of a cherry's flavor, so select firm and plump cherries with the deepest, brightest hues. Cherries are very perishable and quickly lose flavor and firmness in warm air, so buy them chilled and refrigerate them unwashed in a plastic bag up to two days. You also can freeze them up to a year without pits. No one will argue cherries are best fresh, whether adorning a dessert, accenting a salad or eaten right out of your hand. But don't let that stop you from creating sauces, jams and savory fillings, or baking fresh, frozen or dried cherries into tasty quick breads and scones.
Sweet cherries, raw (1 cup)
Dietary Fiber: 3 grams (12 percent DV)
Vitamin C: 9.7 milligrams (16 percent DV)
Potassium: 306 milligrams (9 percent DV)
(Environmental Nutrition is the award-winning independent newsletter written by nutrition experts dedicated to providing readers up-to-date, accurate information about health and nutrition in clear, concise English. For more information, visit http://www.environmentalnutrition.com.)