On Monday, Jenna talked with Mr. Eisnaugle again. She showed him
pretty good, Jenna," said Mr. Eisnaugle. "There are
a couple of things I would add though."
what Mr. Eisnaugle?"
he said, "they are only minor additions. You need to have
eight flower pots, two sets of four."
is that Mr. Eisnaugle? I am only testing four types of soil?"
need eight in case there is a problem, Jenna. Sometimes things
don't go just like you want. If you have eight, you can start
four one week, and four the week after so that if something went
wrong with any of the first four, your project wouldn't be ruined."
that's cool!" Jenna said. "I never thought of that."
need to also make sure each one has the same amount of water each
day. You're testing the different kinds of soil right?"
what I thought. So all the other things that might cause the grass
to grow differently need to be the same."
thing, put all of the flower pots in the same window so they all
get the same amount of sunlight. If you can, make sure all of
the flower pots are the same size. You can use one size with one
set, and another with the other if you can't find eight identical
see," said Jenna.
When she got home that night, Jenna sat down with her mom.
my plan, mom. Mr. Eisnaugle and I talked about it today."
showed her mom her notebook with the revised experiment; eight
flower pots, each one with a different kind of soil.
each set of four needs to be the same size
start the second set one week after the first
same grass seed
all of the pots need to go in my south bedroom
they get the same amount of water each day
see which grows the best
looks good, Jenna!" her mom said. "Let's go see if we
can find what we need."
Jenna and her mom went off into the garage. They found six flower
pots, pretty much the same shape and size.
think we can buy two flower pots that will be like these,"
her mom said.
We don't have any grass seed either."
will just have to put that on our list." They went back into
we go get the pots and the grass seed now mom?"
Jenna, but we will sometime tomorrow."