Marine iguanas are algae eating, color changing, free diving reptiles with a habit of sneezing (all the time). Check out these 11 curious facts about Galapagos Marine Iguanas.
1. Why do Marine Iguanas Sneeze?
They sneeze because while they eat they swallow saltwater. Once they are back up on land they need to get rid of all that salt. They do that with the help of their salt-excreting glands. As they sneeze, out comes the saltwater.
2. Why are some Marine Iguanas so big?
Some marine iguanas are so big because of where they live. If the marine iguanas live on an Island with a rich supply of underwater algae they will grow much bigger than the ones on Islands with a less plentiful food supply. No matter which Island they live on, they all try to be the biggest. The females like the biggest males, and the biggest females lay the best eggs.
3. Why do they lay in the sun all day?
They lay in the sun all day because they are cold-blooded. They need the warmth from the sun to digest their food and keep their body temperature up.
4. Do they only eat underwater?
Marine iguanas normally eat underwater from algae beds, but sometimes they have been seen eating plants on land as well. Their main food is algae because their bodies make the best use of it; they don’t digest other kinds of plants very well.
5. How deep can they dive?
The largest of the marine iguanas can dive up to 30 m or 98 ft.
6. How long can they hold their breath?
They can hold their breath for up to 45 minutes.
7. How many eggs do Marine Iguanas lay?
The small females on some Islands only lay one egg. The large females on other Islands lay up to six eggs.
8. Why do Marine Iguanas love Mockingbirds?
Marine iguanas love Mockingbirds because they hate Galapagos hawks. When Galapagos hawks are on the hunt, Mockingbirds let out a distinctive cry. Some iguanas have learned that this means danger which causes them to run for cover.
9. Who are their worst enemies?
Predators of the marine iguanas include Galapagos hawks, dogs and cats. Great blue herons are also high on the enemy list because they eat small hatchlings. Sad to say humans are on this list as well because of pollution and introduced predators, like dogs and cats.
10. Why are some brightly colored?
Male marine iguanas display bright colors during mating season. Marine iguanas are normally black or dark grey which helps them absorb the heat from the sun.
11. What other kinds of seafaring lizards are there?
These are the world’s only seafaring lizards.