Find information on common issues.
Ask questions and find answers from other users.
Suggest a new site feature or improvement.
Check on status of your tickets.
Simulators can produce all sorts of numbers, but the numbers themselves aren't terribly meaningful until they are put into context by visualization techniques. For example, the coordinates of the various atoms in a molecule don't readily convey the shape of the molecule, but once those coordinates are loaded into VMD, the the resulting picture conveys not only the shape of the molecule, but other important properties as well.
Learn more about visualization techniques from the resources on this site, listed below.
Tutorial on Using Micelle-MD
Ranking is calculated from a formula comprised of user reviews and usage data. Learn more ›
05 Apr 2006 | Online Presentations | Contributor(s): Patrick Chiu, Kunal Shah, Susan Sinnott
This is a tutorial using Micelle-MD. This includes the main capabilities, computation procedure, with format of files generated, and the simulation setup, which includes the material models …
Mechanical Properties of Surfactant Aggregates at Water-Solid Interfaces
This is a talk on the mechanical properties of surfactant aggregates at water-solid interfaces using Micelle-MD. This includes silica indentations of micelles with comparison to experimental …
Thermal Microsystems for On-Chip Thermal Engineering
04 Apr 2006 | Online Presentations | Contributor(s): Suresh V. Garimella
Electro-thermal co-design at the micro- and nano-scales is critical for achieving desired performance and reliability in microelectronic circuits. Emerging thermal microsystems technologies for …
Electron and Ion Microscopies as Characterization Tools for Nanoscience and Nanotechnology
27 Feb 2006 | Online Presentations | Contributor(s): Eric Stach
This tutorial presents a broad overview of the basic physical principles of techniques used in scanning electron microscopy (SEM), as well as their application to understanding …
Engineering Nanomedical Systems
06 Mar 2006 | Online Presentations | Contributor(s): James Leary
This tutorial discusses general problems and approaches to the design of engineered nanomedical systems. One example given is the engineering design of programmable multilayered nanoparticles (PMNP) …
The nanoHUB Science Gateway
07 Mar 2006 | Online Presentations | Contributor(s): Sebastien Goasguen
The TeraGrid Science Gateways program was initiated to expand the influence of TeraGrid resources through back-end integration into community developed portals and desktop applications. Nancy …
Launch of a Nanoscale Informal Science Education Network
21 Feb 2006 | Online Presentations | Contributor(s): larry bell
The Museum of Science, Boston, in partnership with the Science Museum of Minnesota and the Exploratorium in San Francisco, has been selected by the National Science Foundation (NSF) to form and …
How Can Your Educational Modules Contain Interactive Online Simulation?
28 Feb 2005 | Online Presentations | Contributor(s): Gerhard Klimeck
The Network for Computational Nanotechnology (NCN) is a multi-university, NSF-funded initiative with a mission to lead in research, education, and outreach to students and professionals, while at …
Embedding science and technology education into students' lifestyles and technology choices
06 Dec 2005 | Online Presentations | Contributor(s): Krishna Madhavan
Learning experiences of the future will be multi-sensory, engage technologies and significant computational power continuously and invisibly, and will be completely engaging. The emergence of …
VolQD: Graphics Hardware Accelerated Interactive Visual Analytics of Multi-million Atom Nanoelectronics Simulations
13 Dec 2005 | Online Presentations | Contributor(s): Wei Qiao
In this work we present a hardware-accelerated direct volume rendering system for visualizing multivariate wave functions in semiconducting quantum dot (QD) simulations. The simulation data …
First Principles-based Atomistic and Mesoscale Modeling of Materials
01 Dec 2005 | Online Presentations | Contributor(s): Alejandro Strachan
This tutorial will describe some of the most powerful and widely used techniques for materials modeling including i) first principles quantum mechanics (QM), ii) large-scale molecular dynamics (MD) …
Quantum Dot Lab
12 Nov 2005 | Tools | Contributor(s): Gerhard Klimeck, Lars Bjaalie, Sebastian Steiger, David Ebert, Tillmann Christoph Kubis, Matteo Mannino, Michael McLennan, Hong-Hyun Park, Michael Povolotskyi
Compute the eigenstates of a particle in a box of various shapes including domes and pyramids.
Add Rappture to Your Software Development
01 Nov 2005 | Learning Modules | Contributor(s): Michael McLennan
Rappture is the Rapid APPlication infrastrucTURE, a toolkit that you can use to accelerate the development of scientific simulation tools. Scientists developing a code are often led astray by all of …
Bandstructure in Nanoelectronics
01 Nov 2005 | Online Presentations | Contributor(s): Gerhard Klimeck
This presentation will highlight, for nanoelectronic device examples, how the effective mass approximation breaks down and why the quantum mechanical nature of the atomically resolved material needs …
Nanoparticle Synthesis and Assembly for Biological Sensing
25 Oct 2005 | Online Presentations | Contributor(s): Gil Lee
Nanoparticles have unique physical and chemical properties that make them very useful for biological and chemical sensing. For example, colloidal gold has been used as an optical transducer for …
21 Jul 2005 | Online Presentations | Contributor(s): Gerhard Klimeck
Quantum Dots are man-made artificial atoms that confine electrons to a small space. As such, they have atomic-like behavior and enable the study of quantum mechanical effects on a length scale that …
Parallel Computing for Realistic Nanoelectronic Simulations
12 Sep 2005 | Online Presentations | Contributor(s): Gerhard Klimeck
Typical modeling and simulation efforts directed towards the understanding of electron transport at the nanometer scale utilize single workstations as computational engines. Growing understanding of …
Numerical Aspects of NEGF: The Recursive Green Function Algorithm
14 Jun 2004 | Online Presentations | Contributor(s): Gerhard Klimeck
Scientific Software Development
29 Jun 2005 | Online Presentations | Contributor(s): Clemens Heitzinger
The development of efficient scientific simulation codes poses a wide range of problems. How can we reduce the time spent in developing and debugging codes while still arriving at efficient …
NCN Cyberinfrastructure Overview
21 Jun 2005 | Online Presentations | Contributor(s): Gerhard Klimeck
Presentation of the NCN cyberinfrastructure to the June 2005 NSF review team. The nanoHUB development over 12 months will be presented in a broad overview.
nanoHUB.org, a resource for nanoscience and nanotechnology, is supported by the National Science Foundation and other funding agencies.