Tuesday 21 May
Irish lady's tresses (Spiranthes romanzoffiana)
What’s the World’s Favourite Species?Find out here.
Irish lady's tresses fact file
- Find out more
- Print factsheet
Irish lady's tresses description
This beautiful orchid has white flowers that climb up the stem in three closely woven spirals. The leaves are clustered around the base of the stem and resemble those of grass. The group of orchids known as ‘lady’s tresses’ are believed to have been so-named from the resemblance of the spiral florets to locks of braided hair.
- Stem length: up to 30cm
Irish lady's tresses biology
This orchid produces its beautiful flowers in July and August. Despite the fact that the plant flowers regularly, no cross-pollination has ever been confirmed in this country and no seed has yet been recorded. It is still not clear how Irish lady’s tresses reproduces in the UK and Ireland, although recent genetic research has suggested that the northern populations of Scotland have reproduced sexually in the recent past. The plant also seems to reproduce vegetatively, although again it is not clear how.Top
Irish lady's tresses range
The European range of this orchid covers western Scotland, Northern Ireland and the Irish Republic. There is also one site in south Devon. However, the chief home of the Irish ladies’ tresses is North America. It is possible that the British and Irish plants originate from refugia in the Hebrides and Ireland as the glaciers retreated about 8000 years ago, after the last Ice Age.Top
Irish lady's tresses habitat
Irish lady’s tresses is a plant of wet marshy ground, wet meadows near water bodies and bogs. It prefers nutrient poor soil, especially that which is flooded at intervals, and often occurs on grazed meadows in open sedge-rich lawns.Top
Irish lady's tresses status
Classified as Near Threatened in Northern Ireland, and protected under Schedule 8 of the Wildlife (NI) Order.Top
Irish lady's tresses threats
Irish lady’s tresses is an important plant as the UK and Ireland populations are the only remaining examples of the species surviving in Europe. Although the UK Biodiversity Action Plan lists the use of fertilisers and herbicides as possible threats, the main threat seems to be too little or a lack of grazing in Scotland, which allows taller competitive vegetation to invade the sites.Top
Irish lady's tresses conservation
Irish lady’s tresses is listed in the UK Biodiversity Action Plan and is included in Plantlife’s Back from the Brink conservation programme. A survey in 1995 - 1996 by the Royal Botanic Gardens, Edinburgh for Scottish Natural Heritage, turned up more specimens of this species than were previously thought to exist. Although the UK and Ireland sites represent the entire European population of this species, at present just under half of its sites in Scotland have statutory protection. It is therefore of paramount importance that the sites are protected and their management, and that of the surrounding land, is altered to suit the species.
Part of the plan to preserve this species is to encourage more landowners, on whose property the flower grows, to adopt more traditional grazing regimes that would benefit this plant, hopefully supported by one of the agri-environment schemes designed to help many of our threatened plants. It is also likely that studies will also be carried out to discover why the UK’s plants do not seem to be able to cross-pollinate and produce seed. This will involve studies of populations in Ireland and Northern Ireland, as well as the populations of this lovely orchid in North America.Top
Find out more
For more on Plantlife, the wild plant conservation charity see:
Information supplied by English Nature.
- Agri-environment schemes
- These schemes allow the government to compensate farmers for using methods that benefit the environment. The two main initiatives in the UK are the Countryside Stewardship Scheme and Environmentally Sensitive Areas. Since October 2000 these have formed part of the England Rural Development Programme (EDRP), administered by DEFRA, the Department of Environment Food and Rural Affairs. For more on these initiatives, see http://www.defra.gov.uk/erdp/erdphome.htm.
MyARKive offers the scrapbook feature to signed-up members, allowing you to organize your favourite ARKive images and videos and share them with friends.
Terms and Conditions of Use of Materials
Copyright in this website and materials contained on this website (Material) belongs to Wildscreen or its licensors.
Visitors to this website (End Users) are entitled to:
- view the contents of, and Material on, the website;
- download and retain copies of the Material on their personal systems in digital form in low resolution for their own personal use;
- teachers, lecturers and students may incorporate the Material in their educational material (including, but not limited to, their lesson plans, presentations, worksheets and projects) in hard copy and digital format for use within a registered educational establishment, provided that the integrity of the Material is maintained and that copyright ownership and authorship is appropriately acknowledged by the End User.
End Users shall not copy or otherwise extract, alter or manipulate Material other than as permitted in these Terms and Conditions of Use of Materials.
Additional use of flagged material
Green flagged material
Certain Material on this website (Licence 4 Material) displays a green flag next to the Material and is available for not-for-profit conservation or educational use. This material may be used by End Users, who are individuals or organisations that are in our opinion not-for-profit, for their not-for-profit conservation or not-for-profit educational purposes. Low resolution, watermarked images may be copied from this website by such End Users for such purposes. If you require high resolution or non-watermarked versions of the Material, please contact Wildscreen with details of your proposed use.
Creative commons material
Certain Material on this website has been licensed to Wildscreen under a Creative Commons Licence. These images are clearly marked with the Creative Commons buttons and may be used by End Users only in the way allowed by the specific Creative Commons Licence under which they have been submitted. Please see http://creativecommons.org for details.
Any other use
Please contact the copyright owners directly (copyright and contact details are shown for each media item) to negotiate terms and conditions for any use of Material other than those expressly permitted above. Please note that many of the contributors to ARKive are commercial operators and may request a fee for such use.
Save as permitted above, no person or organisation is permitted to incorporate any copyright material from this website into any other work or publication in any format (this includes but is not limited to: websites, Apps, CDs, DVDs, intranets, extranets, signage, digital communications or on printed materials for external or other distribution). Use of the Material for promotional, administrative or for-profit purposes is not permitted.