American Heritage® Dictionary of the English Language, Fourth Edition
- n. The point nearest the sun in the orbit of a planet or other celestial body.
Century Dictionary and Cyclopedia
- n. That point of the orbit of a planet or comet in which it is at its least distance from the sun: opposed to aphelion. It is that extremity of the major axis of the orbit which is nearest to that focus in which the sun is placed; when a planet is in this point it is said to be in its perihelion.
- n. astronomy The point in the elliptical orbit of a planet or comet etc. where it is nearest to the Sun.
GNU Webster's 1913
- n. (Astron.) That point of the orbit of a planet or comet which is nearest to the sun; -- opposed to
- n. periapsis in solar orbit; the point in the orbit of a planet or comet where it is nearest to the sun
- Alteration of New Latin perihēlium : peri- + Greek hēlios, sun. (American Heritage® Dictionary of the English Language, Fourth Edition)
“Thus it can be seen that while the sun is travelling through space, it is at the same time giving rise to the electro-magnetic Aether waves, which, by their repelling power, repel the Earth from the sun in the direction that the sun is travelling, and hence the half-circle is elongated into that part of the elliptic orbit known as the perihelion, which is that part of the orbit where the distance of any planet from the sun is the least.”
“The point at which a planet is closest to the sun is called the perihelion point, and if Newton’s theory is correct, a planet should return to precisely the same perihelion as it orbits the sun each year.”
“An effect of this change is that the time of year that Earth is closest to the Sun, called perihelion, varies through the cycle.”
“It has been calculated that, had our earth been carried along in its course by the comet of 1861, at its perihelion, that is, its nearest approach to the sun, it would have undergone a heat”
“This point of the orbit is known as the perihelion, and at that point the velocity of the earth is at its greatest, because the earth is then nearest the sun.”
“The tangent of a comet's orbit, also, can only be tangential to the circular motion of the ether at and near perihelion, which is a very small portion of its period of revolution.”
“Among the celebrities who visited Denver while Field was in what he would have called his perihelion was Miss Kate Field, with whose name he took all the liberties of a brother, although there was no blood relationship between them thicker than the leaves of a genealogical compendium.”
“Hence each planet is nearer to the sun at one part of its orbit than another; that point is called the perihelion, and the farthest point aphelion.”
“Each time one of these big blobs of ice and dust ventures into the relatively toasty confines of the inner solar system (called a perihelion passage), the sun's rays cook off part of its frozen surface, releasing particles of dust.”
“Therefore, Earth is now beginning to make its closest approach to the sun (called perihelion).”
These user-created lists contain the word ‘perihelion’.
Words used quite often in steampunk
Words used in Astronomy
round or about; nearest
Thanks to all you Wordies out there flinging new words at my head. This one's for you.
Looking for tweets for perihelion.