JRuby Tutorials Posted on: June 13, 2009 at 12:00 AM
JRuby team developed JRuby, which is a pure implementation of Ruby language into Java programming language.
Hello World Program in JRuby JRuby team developed JRuby, which is a pure implementation of Ruby language
into Java programming language. JRuby supports various features of both Java and
Ruby such as Object Oriented Programming and duck-typing as Ruby.
factorial in JRuby In the previous section of "Running first JRuby
program" example you must be aware with the way to run JRuby program.
Now in this example you will know to "Calculate Factorial in JRuby".
Printing Table in JRuby In the previous sections of JRuby tutorials you
have studied how to run program in JRuby and to calculate factorial in
JRuby. Now in this part of JRuby tutorial we will tell you how to take input
in JRuby from the console and print output table on the console output.
File Reader example in JRuby In this section of JRuby tutorial we will study to Read
File in JRuby. We can read and write file on the console or in a file with
the JRuby. Here in our example we are reading a text file and printing its
content on the console.
Printing Command Line arguments in JRuby In this section of JRuby tutorial we will discuss about
printing command line arguments in JRuby program. We can also take arguments
from the command line into our JRuby program.
TreeSet example in JRuby In the previous sections of JRuby tutorials we have
learned about how to use Java classes in JRuby program now here is one more example that
uses Java class TreeSet.
"Hello World" program in Swing and JRuby In the previous section of JRuby Tutorials you have studied how to use Java classes in JRuby examples to show results on your
console. Now we are going to describe you how to use Swing in JRuby
For Loop example in JRuby In previous section you have studied a lot about JRuby
example. In this example we will show you how to use For-loop in JRuby.
Using "Case" control in JRuby In the previous section of JRuby tutorial you have
learned to use for-loop in JRuby. Now we will discuss that how to use "Case"
control in our program to provide working of program on selected case
Creating Class in JRuby In this part of JRuby tutorial you will come to know
that how one can define a class in JRuby and can define methods in class as well
as can call them.
Inheritance example in JRuby In the previous sections of JRuby tutorials you became familiar with the way
that how Classes are to be declared in JRuby and how these can be used to call
methods of a class. Now you will learn that how to implement Inheritance
Method Overriding in JRuby In this part of JRuby tutorial you will know to
implement overriding of methods between the classes. In earlier examples of
JRuby you have studied a lot about to create class, inheriting class and calling
methods of classes.
ArrayList example in JRuby In this section of JRuby tutorial you will learn how to
create and add elements in ArrayList using the JRuby. ArrayList is
used to store elements in the list which can be accessed sequentially.
Defining Class Constants in JRuby In this example you will learn about using Class
Constants in JRuby program. Constants can be defined within the scope of
classes, but they are not as instance variables, constants can be accessed
from outside the class.