FREE MOBILE CLOUD
COMPUTING CONCEPTS - TRAINING_MODULES_WITH_TONS_OF_VIDEOS
Post by Nancy Calliey with Texas Broadband Accelerators, Inc, Dallas
What is a Hypervisor
is a virtualization technique used to run multiple operating systems on the device. While non-hypervisor virtualization techniques are used
to run multiple operating systems on domestic computers and handheld devices, hypervisors are used exclusively on devices
whose sole task is to run multiple guest operating systems for commercial or industrial purposes.
can find their application in gaming technologies, commercial servers, and malware systems. Hypervisors are effective at reducing
system requirements by running simultaneous virtual systems on the same hardware and sharing the resources of that hardware.
How Hypervisors Work
Hypervisors mimick operating systems by running virtual operating systems as a
single program instead of as individual system interfaces. This allows multiple operating systems to coexist on the same device
without using additional system resources. Rather than storing different files on each operating system, all operating systems
within a hypervisor are able to access the same files that are located on the primary operating system and are used for running
specific programs that are only compatible with certain operating systems.
Hypervisors are used for a wide variety of applications. For example, hypervisors can be used in commercial applications
in order to allow guest users to access an online collection of operating systems for testing purposes or for communication.
Likewise, hypervisors can be used to allow educational, industrial, and government servers to allow many different
users to connect to the server from customized user accounts. Additionally, hypervisors can be used for malware purposes in
order for a spyware or rootkit software to detect actions taken by the primary operating system, such as actions carried out
by antivirus software, and effectively hide from them.
have several advantages of other virtualization techniques. For example, hypervisors are able to run on commercial and industrial
servers and can be used to run extremely large numbers of operating systems at the same time without using excess hardware
resources. Hypervisors are also used in virtual networks in order to share physical system resources such as memory, storage
media, and computational capacity.
Although hypervisors are advantageous
for many situations, they also have several disadvantages. For example, reliable hypervisor software can be expensive and
difficult to find, although free versions of hypervisor software are available. Hypervisors also lack the capability of running
virtual systems on domestic computers, although other virtualization techniques are widely used for this purpose.