It is found to be Nestled in the bottom of Western Ghats. Bandipur National Park is popular for the population of tigers presents it. This sanctuary offers endangered animals with the best available natural habitat to survive. During the year 1973, it was found to be declared as a Tiger Reserve under the Program to Project Tiger, and during the year 1975, it sanctuary was upgraded with the rank of National Park.
The magnificent Nilgiri Mountains forms the background, and river Kabini, Mavinahall, Nugu and Moyar and 12 of their seasonal tributaries slither through the park area. River Nugu flows in the heart of the park. Moyar River is found to form the natural boundary between Madhumalai Widlife Sanctuaryand Bandipur National Park, while the River Kabini separates Nagarhole from it.
The vegetation present in here is mixed type. The eastern parts of the national part is covered with scrub, the central area is found to be covered with forests which is dry deciduous and also forests of moist mixed deciduous covering the western region of this sanctuary. The place is famous for its sandalwood.
This national park gives protection to some of the endangered and most rare species of Indian Wildlife. It’s reported that tigers and elephants with high population is present in the sanctuary. According to census carried out during 1997, around three thousand of Asian elephants and over seventy tigers have sheltered this sylvan park as their abode. It is recognized as one of the Important Bird Area, this national park houses 180 species of birds and more, including about eight restricted type of species.
Bandipur National Park is considered as one of the most protected areas present within the Nilgiri Biosphere Reserve. It is found to be an International Biosphere Reserve located in the Western Ghats. The park is bounded by Wynad Wildlife Sanctuary, Nagarhole National Park and the Mudumalai National Park .
Flora: Teak, Dalbergia latifolia, Pterocarpus marsupium, Adina cordifolia, Grewia tiliaefolia, Emblica officinalis, Lagerstroemia lanceolata, Terminalia tomentosa, Anogeissus latifolia, Terminalia chebula, Schleichera trijuga, Odina wodiar, Butea monosperma, Cassia fistula, Dendrocalamus strictus, Bambusa arundinacea , Chloroxylon swetenia, Acacia catechu, Shorea talura, Randia uliginosa
Fauna: Tiger, Gaur,Elephant, Chital, Sloth Bear, Wild dog, Mouse deer, Hyena, Barking deer, Leopard, Sambar (deer), Four horned Antelope, Wild boar, and more.
Reptiles: King Cobra, Common Cobra, Python, Adder, Viper, Rat Snake, Water Snake, Marsh Crocodile, Lizard, Chameleon, Monitor Lizard, Frog, Tree frog, Toad and Tortoise.
Avian-Fauna: Honey Buzzard, Pompadour Green Pigeon, Red-headed Vulture, Grey Junglefowl, Brown Hawk Owl, Grey-headed Fish Eagle, Bay Owl, Nilgiri Flycatcher, Malabar Trogon, Malabar Pied Hornbill, Plain Flowerpecker, Little Spiderhunter, and more.
Tiger and Elephant Population: Animals in the park roam around in large numbers, and elephants and tigers, present in respectable numbers, form the main attraction of this park
Jungle Safari: Bandipur National Park is one of the best managed havens for wildlife species, and it houses a number of rare and endangered species. During the safari, one can spot spotted deer, tigers, elephants, antelope, grey langurs, and more. Also, one can observe the riotously coloured winged beauties.
Other Places to Visit:
Madhumalai Widlife Sanctuary: This sanctuary is located adjacent to National Park at Bandipur, and is considered to be a division of the Nilgiri Biosphere Reserve present in the Western Ghats. It’s located at an elevation of 1000 m, and is spread in an area of 321 sq. km. One can spot deer, tiger, wild boar, sloth bear, and more. Also, the sanctuary hosts raptors.
Nagarhole National Park: Nagarahole National Park, now renamed Rajiv Gandhi National Park, is surrounded by shallow valleys and gentle slopes on all sides. Declared a national park in 1974, Nagarahole National Park is said to be the best habitat for Asian elephants. Kabini River separates Nagarhole from Bandipur National Park.
Location: It is located in the Chamarajanagar district of southern Karnataka in Karnataka.
Area: 874 sq. km
Route: This National Park is located on the highway connecting Mysore and Ooty. There are regular bus services on the Mysore-Ooty route. All the buses that ply on this route stop at the Forest Department Center of the Park. There are regular bus services from Bangalore to Bandipur via Mysore. The nearest airport and railhead is in Mysore, and the nearest international airport is in Bangalore.