back, backward, backwards, rearward, rearwards(adverb)
at or to or toward the back or rear
"he moved back"; "tripped when he stepped backward"; "she looked rearward out the window of the car"
in a manner or order or direction the reverse of normal
"it's easy to get the `i' and the `e' backward in words like `seize' and `siege'"; "the child put her jersey on backward"
Toward the back.
In the opposite direction of usual.
The clock did not work because the battery was inserted backwards.
In a manner such that the back precedes the front.
The tour guide walked backwards while droning on to the bored seniors.
Oriented toward the back.
The battleship had three backwards guns at the stern, in addition to the primary complement.
The backwards lettering on emergency vehicles makes it possible to read in the rear-view mirror.
Behind current trends or technology.
Modern medicine regards the use of leeches as a backwards practice.
Clumsy, inept, or inefficient.
He was a very backwards scholar, but he was a marvel on the football field.
Origin: . See -s#Etymology 3
with the back in advance or foremost; as, to ride backward
toward the back; toward the rear; as, to throw the arms backward
on the back, or with the back downward
toward, or in, past time or events; ago
by way of reflection; reflexively
from a better to a worse state, as from honor to shame, from religion to sin
in a contrary or reverse manner, way, or direction; contrarily; as, to read backwards
Backwards is the fourth Red Dwarf novel. It is set on the fictional backwards universe version of Earth. The novel was written by Rob Grant on his own. It follows on directly from the second Grant Naylor novel, Better Than Life, ignoring Last Human. As well as continuing the general conceit from the episode Backwards, it contains minor elements from the episode Dimension Jump, and all of the plot from Gunmen of the Apocalypse. An audiobook of Backwards was also produced, read by the author.
British National Corpus
Written Corpus Frequency
Rank popularity for the word 'backwards' in Written Corpus Frequency: #2814
Rank popularity for the word 'backwards' in Adverbs Frequency: #306
The numerical value of backwards in Chaldean Numerology is: 6
The numerical value of backwards in Pythagorean Numerology is: 1
Sample Sentences & Example Usage
Life can only be understood backwards but it must be lived forwards.
Nobody gets to live life backwards. Look ahead -- that's where your future lies.
Technological progress has merely provided us with more efficient means for going backwards.
Remember, Ginger Rogers did everything Fred Astaire did, but she did it backwards and in high heels.
Chavista, i wish I could say I still am but the situation is too hard. Everything is going backwards.
Images & Illustrations of backwards
Translations for backwards
From our Multilingual Translation Dictionary
- επαναφορά επιστροφή, προς τα πίσωGreek
- hacia atrás, a contrapelo, invertidoSpanish
- tagurpidi, tahapoole, peegelpilt, vanamoodne, saamatu, tagasisuunasEstonian
- takaperin, kelvoton, taaksepäin, vanhanaikainen, väärinpäinFinnish
- دواکهوتو, بهرهودوا, پاشهوپاشKurdish
- направленный, назад, смотрящийRussian
- bakåtriktad, bakvänd, efterbliven, baklänges, omvänd, efterSwedish
Get even more translations for backwards »
Find a translation for the backwards definition in other languages:
Select another language: