- v. present participle of co-occur.
“Much of this tragically short lifespan is due to the inadequate management of co-occurring health conditions.”
“People with mental disorders are more likely to have physical disorders, and people with co-occurring physical and mental and/or substance use disorders are at higher risk for disability and premature death and have far higher medical costs than those with physical disorders alone.”
“The center is a residential and extended-care, all-addictions treatment facility that specializes in treating eating disorders and co-occurring addictions.”
“The National Sheriff's Association and the Treatment Advocacy Center's disturbing report has sounded yet another alarm about our need to stop incarcerating people who are seriously mentally ill, homeless, and suffer from co-occurring disorders such as alcoholism and drug addiction.”
“First using genetic sequences he reconstructs the evolutionary history of co-occurring species in order to understand how the evolution of traits and niches affects species coexistence.”
“Many of them have Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) and a co-occurring conduct disorder.”
“People in the early or mid stages of a dementia, such as Alzheimer's Disease, are likely to also be depressed and/or anxious, and these co-occurring mental conditions reduce already compromised cognitive functions.”
“Thus, a high-diversity habitat, which maintains high population sizes and many co-occurring species, likely results in increased diversity in nearby poorer patches by supplementing populations that would otherwise go extinct.”
“Single-factor manipulation experiments now have limited applicability because it is clear that there are many interactive effects among co-occurring environmental change variables.”
“It is also difficult to identify the complex interactions among all the co-occurring environmental change variables, and ecological processes determined from experiments in one geographic area may not relate sufficiently to other areas because of different ecological conditions and histories.”
These user-created lists contain the word ‘co-occurring’.
... to use these words in spoken English and reap esteem. In the SPOKEN corpus of the COCA (full corpus: 450 million words) none of these occur.
Adjectively used nominal phrases with a "-" inside.
Looking for tweets for co-occurring.