Ancient Mesopotamia and West Asia
The storage essentials, including food in the Sumerian and Babylonian, were distributed in the gate of the city and palace. It was also carried out the sale of craft products in the Bazaar. Distribution system of irrigation type national decline soon, commercial of the Islamic world is to penetrate, food market in the region was also to serve as the Bazaar. Foreign trade for has been carried out separately from the regional market, but foreign market did not yet exist in Babylonia. Do not understand the market system of the Greeks, Cyrus II of later accused.
Ancient Greek, Hellenistic
In ancient Greek Police, Agora was also used as a market. Foreign market and regional market is divided, Agora regional market, Emporium was present in the foreign market. Cage is retailer that Kaperosu In Agora, who called Enporosu In Emporium have done the foreign trade. In addition, there is a market for the soldier expedition, had been made to dispose of the loot and supply to the army. Grain market as an international market for the first time a price change, Kureomenesu of Naukratis is a vassal of Alexander III has been run by the present, but this system was not handed down in ancient Rome.
In the 7th century, there is a regulated market of a kind, such as (one of mulberry after) Omonetokuwa and the city (Noichi paintings) Esako City Light and the city (Tsubaki-shi), Kawachi sea pomegranate City of Asuka in Japan I understood from the description of the "Chronicles" that was. In addition, from the "Topography", I understood that the city has been established from money previously issued at strategic points in the traffic and where farmers and fishermen such as Izumo countries 促戸 passed and Hitachi country Takahama to traffic.
In the ancient state, while referring to the system in China, was established a municipal organization by Seki Ordinance of Taiho Code. Regulatory agency that is placed Shitsukasa city is located in the east and west of the city, east and west of the city government-run has been operated in such Fujiwarakyo-Heijokyo Namba Kyo-Nagaokakyo-Heian-kyo. This regulated market open at noon, close to sunset, city Tsukasa has determined the price of goods. In addition, not only function as a commercial facility, it was also used as the location where you can honor the person who has success, punish the public a person who has committed the crime.
Commercial in a specific area other than that specified in the authorities had forbidden initially, but as the regular city by the city stand in a pre-defined day of the moon is formed in the places where people such as strategic points in the transportation gather with relaxation of Ritsuryosei became. Local market was born in the manor around the Kinki, peddlers were activities. "The Day of the eight" is often as (city date) market day, "Santoki city" (wild plants one) in many cases. If it is "the day of the eight", the city date stand is in 8, 18 and the 28th. The (Open City), is from morning till evening "Morning" and "evening city" time to open the city. Stalls was written with such Yomise, Night Market and evening city. The 15-6 century, six times a month "Rokutoki city" is born.
East-west city of Kansei decline with Ritsuryo nation, those who carry out the wholesale dealer from the city who settled appears to city, the wholesale market by wholesaler set is born. Which formed the seat, but the seat is dismantled by Rakuichi-Rakuza of the 16th century and later, Yuku divided into retail market and the central market of the castle town, militia in the market town for the residents around the country. While wholesaler gather in the middle market, the retail market, Friuli, Noichi, sell out, and stand selling was seen. Exclusive monopoly occurs in markets patronized by the wholesale market wholesale merchants flourished, was driven to the lords, especially in the early modern period. While subject to Kin'atsu, market Machikata Zaikata and became the responsibility of the residents is the buyer and the general brokerage (paid fish, Osamena) is paid for the market patronized by this.
The old city, Gojome (Akita Minamiakita County), Yokote (Yokote City, Akita Prefecture), Atsumi (thickness, Yamagata Prefecture Nishitagawa County), Rikuzentakata (Iwate Prefecture Rikuzentakata), Otaki (Chiba Isumi), Katsuura (Katsuura, Chiba Prefecture), Takayama (Takayama, Gifu Prefecture), Wajima (Wajima, Ishikawa Prefecture), tin (tin, Ishikawa Prefecture Suzu) Echizen Ono (such as Fukui Prefecture Ono City) is traced back to the Edo period. In addition, remnants of the past can be seen in the name formerly Shiga Yokaichi City (Genhigashi Omi City) and Yokkaichi, Mie Prefecture, Hiroshima Prefecture Hatsukaichi, such as the former Chiba Prefecture Youkaichiba City (now Sosa City).