ANSI Standards cover slip-resistant flooring and power-driven brushes.January 24, 2011 -
ANSI/NFSI B101.1-2009 specifies procedures and devices used for laboratory and field testing to measure wet static coefficient of friction of common hard-surface floor materials. Using voluntary standard, walkway slip resistance can be measured and categorized as high, moderate, or low. Embracing all configurations of brushing tools whose functional performance is accomplished by power-driven operation, ANSI B165.1-2010 includes rules for proper storage, handling, mounting, and use of brushes.
Voluntary Standards Cover the Spectrum: from Slip-Resistant Flooring to Power-Driven Brushes
(Archive News Story - Products mentioned in this Archive News Story may or may not be available from the manufacturer.)
American National Standards Institute (ANSI)
11 West 42nd St., 13th Flr.
New York, NY, 10036
Press release date: January 18, 2011
In an effort to communicate the vital role that standards play in daily life, the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) will publish, on an ongoing basis, a series of snapshots of the diverse standards initiatives undertaken in the global and national standards arena, many of which are performed by ANSI members and ANSI-accredited standards developers. Two of the latest selections follow:
According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), in 2008 more than 8.5 million Americans sustained injuries from an unintentional slip or fall-the leading cause of all nonfatal injuries treated in U.S. hospital emergency rooms. According to the National Floor Safety Institute (NFSI), a member and accredited standards developer of the American National Standards Institute, 55% of slips and falls are caused by a hazardous floor, but are preventable if slip-resistant flooring is in place.
A recently released American National Standard (ANS) from NFSI aims to protect Americans from dangerous surfaces by providing test methods for flooring materials. ANSI/NFSI B101.1-2009, Test Method for Measuring Wet SCOF of Common Hard-Surface Floor Materials, specifies the procedures and devices used for both laboratory and field testing to measure the wet static coefficient of friction (SCOF) of common hard-surface floor materials.
Using ANSI/NFSI B101.1-2009, walkway slip resistance can be measured and categorized in one of three traction ranges: high, moderate, or low. Floors categorized as high-traction present a low risk of a slip and fall, while moderate- and low-traction floors present a higher risk. The standard does not apply to carpeting of any type or mechanically polished tile such as polished porcelain or marble, but does address common hard-surfaced flooring materials such as ceramic tile, vinyl floor coverings, and wood laminates, as well as coatings and polishes.
NFSI is a non-profit organization representing product manufacturers, insurance underwriters, trade associations, and independent consultants that work to aid in the prevention of slips, trips, and falls through education, research, and standards development.
Power-driven brushing tools are used in a wide array of industries, from agriculture and automotive processes to printing and packaging. A new standard from ANSI member and accredited standards developer the American Brush Manufacturers Association (ABMA) establishes safety specifications for the design, use, and care of these tools.
ANSI B165.1-2010, Power Tools - Power-Driven Brushing Tools - Safety Requirements for Design, Care, and Use, embraces all configurations of brushing tools whose functional performance is accomplished by power-driven operation. The ANS includes rules for the proper storage, handling, mounting, and use of brushes.
The standard covers brushing tools made up of any combination of ferrous wire, nonferrous wire, plastic, abrasive filaments, vegetable fibers, animal hair, or other materials. Brushing tools whose primary function is vehicle or train washing, carpet sweeping, dental hygiene, floor maintenance, sewer cleaning, street sweeping, and brushing tools manufactured in accordance with other applicable ANS are not covered.
ABMA is a membership organization of North American brush manufacturers seeking to enhance industry knowledge, provide networking opportunities, and promote profitability for its members and the industry through public awareness, health benefits, legislation, exchange of information, and standards development.