Types of Anxiety disorders
Types of Anxiety disorders
There are many types of anxiety, from occasional mild to moderate feelings of anxiety due to the stressors of daily life to frequent, unpredictable, and/or extreme feelings of anxiety that can be classified as a mental health condition. Common anxiety disorders include panic disorder, in which a person feels a crippling sense of panic and frequently report that they fell like they are having a heart attack. Agoraphobia is excessive anxiety when in open or public places, and there are many other specific phobias that are abnormal fears of objects or situations. People with obsessive compulsive disorder try to reduce their anxieties through ritual and repeated behaviors. A persistent fear of public social situations is called social anxiety disorder, and generalized anxiety disorder manifests as excessive worry and anxiety that is out of proportion to the actual situation.
What Are the Different Kinds of Anxiety Disorders?
- Panic Disorder—Repeated episodes of intense fear that strike
often and without warning. Physical symptoms include chest pain, heart
palpitations, shortness of breath, dizziness, abdominal distress,
feelings of unreality, and fear of dying.
- Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder—Repeated, unwanted thoughts or
compulsive behaviors that seem impossible to stop or control.
- Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder—Persistent symptoms that occur
after experiencing or witnessing a traumatic event such as rape or other
criminal assault, war, child abuse, natural or human-caused disasters,
or crashes. Nightmares, flashbacks, numbing of emotions, depression, and
feeling angry, irritable or distracted and being easily startled are
common. Family members of victims can also develop this disorder.
- Phobias—Two major types of phobias are social phobia and
specific phobia. People with social phobia have an overwhelming and
disabling fear of scrutiny, embarrassment, or humiliation in social
situations, which leads to avoidance of many potentially pleasurable and
meaningful activities. People with specific phobia experience extreme,
disabling, and irrational fear of something that poses little or no
actual danger; the fear leads to avoidance of objects or situations and
can cause people to limit their lives unnecessarily.
- Generalized Anxiety Disorder—Constant, exaggerated worrisome
thoughts and tension about everyday routine life events and activities,
lasting at least six months. Almost always anticipating the worst even
though there is little reason to expect it; accompanied by physical
symptoms, such as fatigue, trembling, muscle tension, headache, or
(Source: excerpt from Facts About Anxiety Disorders: NIMH
Anxiety disorders: Rare Types
Rare types of medical conditions and diseases in related medical categories:
Anxiety disorders: Related Disease Topics
More general medical disease topics related to Anxiety disorders include:
Research More About Anxiety disorders
» Next page: Causes of Anxiety disorders
Medical Tools & Articles:
Tools & Services:
Forums & Message Boards
- Ask or answer a question at the Boards: