The social and personal benefits of learning: A summary of key research findings
(2008) Compiled and edited by Leon Feinstein, David Budge, John Vorhaus and Kathryn Duckworth.
This report reveals what researchers have discovered about how education affects individual well-being, family dynamics and community cohesion. It focuses particularly on the impact of learning on health, crime, parenting and citizenship. It also provides a brief introduction to the theoretical work that has helped the Centre for Research on the Wider Benefits of Learning (WBL) to understand the often complex consequences of education. Many of the findings in this report are derived from WBL analyses of the cohort studies that are tracking the lives of people born in Britain in 1958 and 1970. Some findings are drawn from reports by other researchers, both in the UK and in other countries, who share an interest in this fascinating and profoundly important area of study.
If you would like a hard copy of the report, please contact WBLadmin@ioe.ac.uk.
The benefits of learning
The impact of education on health, family life and social capital
(2004) Tom Schuller, John Preston, Cathie Hammond, Angela Brassett-Grundy and John Bynner
ISBN 0-415-32801-2 (paperback)
ISBN 0-415-32800-4 (hardback)
'The case studies, in particular, make fascinating reading: a reminder, if one was needed of the inadequacies of much of our statutory school provision.' - Michael Duffy, TES
'The Benefits of Learning is an important book. Everyone who works with adult learners will find benefits from reading it the authors are to be congratulated in enriching our understanding of what education can and cannot be expected to achieve.' - Alan Tuckett, Director of NIACE in Adults Learning
'This is a scholarly and carefully argued book.' - Mental Health Today
How do education and learning really impact on people's lives?
The benefits of learning is a detailed, systematic and vivid account of the impact of formal and informal education on people's lives. Based on extended interviews with adults of all ages, it shows how learning affects their health, family lives and participation in civic life, revealing the downsides of education as well as the benefits.
At a time when education is in danger of being narrowly regarded as an instrument of economic growth, this study covers:
- The interaction between learning and people's physical and psychological well-being
- The way learning impacts on family life and communication between generations
- The effect on people's ability and motivation to take part in civic and community life
Full of detail from adults' own accounts of their lives, the book reveals how learning enables people to sustain themselves and their communities in the face of daily stresses and strains, as well as sometimes transforming their lives.
The book opens up new avenues for debate. It will be a valuable resource for education researchers and of particular interest to education policy makers, adult education practitioners, health educators and postgraduate students in education.
Published by RoutledgeFalmer
This book can be purchased from the Institute of Education bookshop (www.johnsmith.co.uk/ioe).