Youth unemployment has proven a chronic problem for Britain’s policy-makers, with about one in five young people aged 16-24 out of work. The Government is pinning its hopes on high-quality vocational training that leads directly to a job and boosts Britain’s ability to compete on a global scale.
Last week Tim Oates, the head of the coalition’s curriculum review, said almost half of teenagers should go on an apprenticeship-style course to learn a trade. He believes as many young people should go on to apprenticeships after leaving school as they do A-levels.
Some of the most successful economies, including Germany and Switzerland, have focused on vocational learning routes rather than a classroom-based approach, he says.
But questions remain over whether Britain can adapt to a vocational route. One in four apprentices drop out on average, figures show, with British teenagers simply losing interest or struggling with the hours.
The Government’s latest cash injection of up to £250m aims to create another 75,000 adult apprenticeships by 2014-5. But making apprenticeships work in Britain requires more than throwing money at the system, experts warn.
Philip Whiteman, chief executive of UK engineering skills council Semta, says: “Apprenticeships have been largely forgotten. No teacher or careers adviser I have met in the last 15 years actually spends a lot of time talking about apprenticeships because there isn’t a target to get kids into them.” This is despite many people at the top of industry having worked their way up through the apprenticeship route, he says.
By contrast, Germany’s strong apprenticeship culture and relatively low youth unemployment rate of 8.1pc stems from employers targeting school pupils from an early age.
Engineering giant Siemens currently employs about 7,000 apprentices in Germany. The company advertises its scheme to school leavers, giving them a real choice between vocational training and university degrees.
Completion rates are high, with 86pc receiving a permanent contract at the end of training. Katja Ripkens, Siemens’ marketing manager, says: “From the first day, they are 100pc [treated as] an employee. Compared with someone who comes straight from university, they don’t have a long period of getting to know the company.”
However, Siemens’ UK apprenticeship scheme boasts a drop-out rate of just 2pc, suggesting the formula for success lies in having a “good partnership” with schools.
Flexibility is also important. Australia, where apprentices make up 39 out of every 1,000 in the workforce compared with just 11 in England, also provides a lesson for the UK.
Jim McDowell, chief executive of BAE Systems in Australia, says companies keen to reduce drop-out rates should introduced a proper mentoring scheme.
“Many drop out because they don’t like their boss, they don’t know how to handle money, they’ve just broken up with their girlfriend,” he says.
“[Companies] need experienced people who are trained to help people through all life’s problems, particularly for young people.”