Yucatan is amongst the few locations in the world that holds ecosystems that are well preserved and richly diverse. Blanketed by a semi-tropical rain forest, the Yucatan Peninsula is home to lots of tropical wildlife, this includes tropical bird species, reptilians and amphibians.
The Yucatan peninsula has rich jungles and many islands which can offer countless of spectacular things. Probably, the best you will ever see is the flora and fauna of the place. These are the reasons why Yucatan is considered to be a travel destination that is more than ideal.
The Peninsula’s Ecology And Habitation
Most of the islands within the Yucatan Peninsula are not inhabited. Several islands are totally conserved because of their historical sites or delicate biospheres, while some have indigenous settlements of hunters who hunt in the jungle deep. You will find roads crisscrossing paths to small villages when you drive deeper inland. Aside from that, merely the thick greenery also brown marshes can be found. The lagoons are overflowing with orchids and mangrove of several colors. If you want to discover what kinds of wildlife that thrive there, you can join boarding rides along the lagoons.
Akin to Northern Ontario, the entire Yucatan is also a rugged terrain. In lots of places, the ground is flat however coated by thick tropical jungle areas. Because the islands are a home a lot of Mexico’s endemic as well as endangered bird species, numerous regions in the Peninsula are guarded as well as transformed to biospheres, reserves, protected areas and national parks.
Owing to the ecology of the Yucatan, it makes a great habitat for various wildlife making it an enchanting destination to travel. The natural coasts around the islands are more often than not massing with mobs of seabirds, specifically during the migration seasons. With the avian-based ecology, bird watching has really become one very popular fun activity inside the whole peninsula. In the area, you can find amazing array of the avian species such as the Boat Billed Herons, Roseate Spoonbills, Egrets, Little Blue Herons, White Ibis, Frigates, Green Herons, Night Herons, Tri-Colored Herons, and Pelicans
Reserves, Biospheres And Other Great Places To Explore
There are actually specific places where benefits directly from the abounding ecosystem of the peninsula and its seemingly almost endless stock of wildlife. Just to name a few, the Sian Ka’an Biosphere, Celestun Reserve, Colombia Lagoon are among the many interesting ecological places to visit. Natural parks are full of animals of all kinds; amphibians, fishes, reptiles and birds. There are several must-see places like crocodile parks and must-see species such as the Morelet’s crocodile.
All over the Peninsula, you can find many caves scattered. Usually you’d need tour operators or guides to go to these caves. Most of the caves hold a lot of history from the Mayan individuals who formerly lived in the Peninsula. The abundant plant life all over the place enshrouds the ancient Maya ruins like molasses on rock. Other well known destinations in the Yucatan are waterfalls as well as Sacred caves.
The thing that causes it to be really special is the fact that although there are ancient ruins and settlements in each and every area of the Peninsula, it appears as though the stone structures are naturally grown out of the dense jungles. The ecology of the Yucatan Peninsula remains undisturbed even with an ancient civilization having lived on the Peninsula, and now, people settling in communities.
Duende Tours is a tour oprator with a great number of Yucatan adventure tours that visit Biosphere Reserves and other amazing places. For more specific information on the Yucatan Peninsula see the Yucatan Travel News section.Like this blog post? Buy me a coffee or send me a tip!!!