Greenville, NC (PRWEB) February 28, 2013
GO-Science, a regional science and technology center located in Greenville, NC has released a free interactive guide to educational technology resources for Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics Teachers. Teachers can access the free resource at http://www.go-science.org.
The guide provides an overview of the top 25 online resources for STEM teachers. The guide provides a detailed overview of each resource along with information about how to access the resource online.
“Most teachers do not realize that there are many free educational tools available to make their job easier and give their students a better educational experience,” indicated Mary Rothschild, Education Director of GO-Science.
Millions of federal, state, and private dollars have been invested to create innovative educational technologies that enable students to receive more personalized instruction and empower teachers with advanced assessment and instructional tools.
“We are very excited to provide this resource for teachers to access. These top 25 online free services can help transform today’s K-12 classroom and it is our hope that it will do just that.” noted Roger Conner, Executive Director, of GO-Science.
GO-Science is a first-class learning experience for Eastern North Carolina that provides inspirational, motivational, and educational programs and activities for children, adults, and schools in order to help participants appreciate the role of science in our lives; believing that the knowledge of science, technology, engineering, mathematics, and medicine (STEM) is a core understanding and capacity of an educated community.
GO-Science, a registered 501(c)(3) non-profit organization established to bring informal science education programs to the public through hands-on learning, recently announced the development of a Science Center in Greenville. While the fundraising and renovation of the current site at 729 Dickinson Ave., in Greenville, NC proceeds the organization is offering extensive public and school outreach services in over 29 counties in Eastern North Carolina.