Sweden GenealogyEdit This Page
From FamilySearch Wiki
The term genealogy is used in this Wiki article and in the Family History Library Catalog to describe a variety of records containing family information gathered by individuals, researchers, societies, or archives. These records may include pedigree charts, compiled information on families, correspondence, ancestor lists, research exchange files, record abstracts, and collections of original or copied documents. These can be excellent sources of information that can save you valuable time. Because they are compiled from other sources of information, evaluate them carefully for accuracy.
Major Collections and Databases
The Family History Library has several sources that contain previous research or that can lead you to others who are interested in sharing family information. These sources include:
International Genealogical Index. This index provides names and vital information for deceased persons who lived in Sweden. This valuable research tool lists information about birth, christening, and marriage dates. The index for Sweden includes names extracted from parish registers by volunteers and names submitted by researchers.
Also individual names are available at www.familysearch.org.
The FamilySearch catalog lists Swedish names under both given names and surnames.
Ancestral File. This file contains family history information, arranged in family groups and pedigrees, that has been contributed since 1979. Ancestral File contains records for thousands of Swedish families. It can print pedigree charts, family group records, and individual summary sheets for any person in the file. Be very carefulwhen using this file, as data merges through the years may have lead to incorrect pedigree linkages, particularly where only patronymic surnames were used.
Family Group Records Collection . More than eight million family group record forms have been microfilmed in the Family Group Records Collection. This includes many Swedish families. There are two major sections: the Archive Section and the Patrons Section. The film numbers for both sections are listed in the Author/Title Search of the Family History Library Catalog under:
FAMILY GROUP RECORDS COLLECTION
Many Swedish families have produced histories that include genealogical information, biographies, photographs, and other excellent information. These histories usually include several generations of the family.
The Family History Library has a large collection of Swedish family histories listed in the Surname Search of the catalog. Only the major surnames discussed in the family history are included in the catalog. Also see Sweden Biography.
Many Swedish genealogies are compiled in the following works:
Örnberg, Lars Magnus Viktor, ed. Svensk slägt-kalender (Genealogies of Swedish Families). Stockholm, Sweden: [s.n.], 1885-1888. (FHL book 948.5 D25s; films 1124513 items 12-13; 0924726 items 1-2.)
This work has been superseded by:
Örnberg, Lars Magnus Viktor, ed. Svenska ättartal (Genealogies of Swedish City Dwellers). Stockholm, Sweden: [s.n.], 1889-1908. (FHL book 948.5 D25s; films 0924726-30; 1124513 item 14.)
The above yearly publications have a joint index 1885-1908 (FHL book 948.5 D25s index).
Elgenstierna, Gustaf and Ulla Elgenstierna, comp. Svenska sälktkalendern (Genealogies of Well-Known Swedish Families). Stockholm, Sweden: Albert Bonniers förlag, 1912-1950. (FHL book 948.5 D25sk.)
This work has been superseded by:
Berg, Gösta, ed. Svenska släktkalendern. Ny följd (Genealogies of Well-Known Swedish Families. Continued). Stockholm, Sweden: Albert Bonniers förlag, 1962-. (FHL book 948.5 D25sk.)
The above two publications have a joint index 1912-1982 (FHL book 948.5 D25sk index).
The Family History Library also has some collections of pedigree charts and notes by individual researchers. These include published and unpublished collections. They are listed in the catalog under:
SWEDEN - GENEALOGY
SWEDEN, [COUNTY] - GENEALOGY
SWEDEN, [COUNTY], [CITY] - GENEALOGY