Many children enjoy day camps and overnight camps. Research has shown that a camp experience can boost a child's self-esteem, social and leadership skills, and more.
camps usually offer activities during school holidays or breaks. These
activities may have a special theme, such as basketball or horseback riding.
Private homes, local youth centers such as the YMCA, churches, schools, or
child care centers for younger children may all offer day camp programs. Some
states license day camps and usually include training requirements and behavior
guidelines for all staff.
Overnight camps range from one-night
sleepovers to a few weeks. They usually involve a trip to a nearby destination,
such as forest cabins or a beach. Overnight camps can be accredited by the
American Camp Association. For more information, go to
All camps should have written health policies and disaster plans. They should also tell parents and children how to get the most out of the camp program.1 All campers should have a
recent health evaluation and
immunization record on file. Camp records should
include how to contact parents in case of an emergency.
Some children feel distressed (homesick) about leaving their home and loved ones to go to camp. Some of the things you can do to help prevent homesickness are:2
CitationsCouncil on School Health, American Academy of Pediatrics (2011). Policy statement: Creating healthy camp experiences. Pediatrics, 127(4): 794–799.Thurber CA, et al. (2007). Clinical report: Preventing and treating homesickness. Pediatrics, 119(1): 192–201. Also available online: http://pediatrics.aappublications.org/content/119/1/192.full.pdf.Other Works ConsultedAmerican Camp Association (2005). Directions: Youth Development Outcomes of the Camp Experience. Available online: http://www.acacamps.org/research/enhance/directions.
September 14, 2012
Susan C. Kim, MD - Pediatrics & John Pope, MD - Pediatrics
How this information was developed to help you make better health decisions.
To learn more visit Healthwise.org
© 1995-2013 Healthwise, Incorporated. Healthwise, Healthwise for every health decision, and the Healthwise logo are trademarks of Healthwise, Incorporated.