We all expect our doctors to wash their hands before examining us, let alone before performing an operation, to prevent the spread of infection. But surprisingly, the lifesaving power of this simple act was not discovered by physicians until 1847.
Dr. Sherwin B. Nuland, a surgeon and a winner of the National Book Award, brings this discovery to life in his new book, ''The Doctors' Plague: Germs, Childbed Fever and the Strange Story of Ignac Semmelweis'' (Norton/Atlas Books).
Dr. Nuland tells a medical detective story about the ambitious yet troubled physician who figured out how to prevent a deadly infection spread by doctors to childbearing women. It is known as childbed or puerperal (from the Latin words for child and parent) fever.
Dr. Nuland's book, a result of years of study on this topic, is certain to stir up a storm in the normally staid world of medical historians.
Ignac Semmelweis, a Hungarian obstetrician at the famed Vienna General Hospital, is best recalled for exhorting his fellow physicians to wash their hands before examining women about to deliver babies. Unfortunately, few listened.
In the 19th century, roughly 5 women in 1,000 died in deliveries performed by midwives or at home. Alarmingly, when the delivery was performed by doctors in the best maternity hospitals in Europe and America, the death rate for women was often 10 to 20 times as great.
The cause was invariably childbed fever. And a miserable death it was: raging fevers, putrid pus emanating from the birth canal, painful abscesses in the abdomen and chest, and an irreversible descent into an absolute hell of sepsis and death -- all within 24 hours of delivering a baby.
Medical students and their professors at the elite teaching hospitals of Semmelweis's era typically began their day performing autopsies on the women who had died the day before of childbed fever. They then proceeded to the wards to examine the women who were in labor or about to start it.
Soon after being appointed to run the first division of the obstetrics service at the Vienna General Hospital in 1846, Semmelweis became obsessed by the childbed fever epidemics that were killing nearly a third of his patients. He described to another colleague the ''heart-rending scenes'' of women assigned to his ward begging to be discharged because ''they believed that the doctor's interference was always the precursor of death.''
He was wise enough to listen to his patients.
The obstetrician made the brilliant observation that puerperal fever was caused by the transfer of some type of ''morbid poison'' from the dissected corpses in the autopsy room to the women in labor.
Semmelweis was not the first to make the connection. Both Alexander Gordon of Edinburgh and Oliver Wendell Holmes of Boston suggested this mode of transmission in 1795 and 1843, respectively.
The morbid poison is now known as the bacteria called Group A hemolytic streptococcus.
But it was Semmelweis, in 1847, who ordered his medical students to wash their hands in a chlorine antiseptic solution until the smell of the putrid bodies was no longer present.
Soon after, the mortality rates dropped considerably.
Unfortunately, Semmelweis's ideas were not accepted by all of his colleagues. Indeed, many were outraged at the suggestion that they were the cause of their patients' miserable deaths, and Semmelweis met up with enormous resistance and criticism. A remarkably difficult man, he refused to publish his ''self-evident'' findings until 13 years after making them.