Many international holidays have been created by the United Nations, governments, and organizations to celebrate peaceful relationships and human rights, and to protect our environment. Listed below are holidays and key web sites to help you learn about the holidays.
If you have created classroom activities related to the holidays, we would like to post your pictures and lesson plan. E-mail them to firstname.lastname@example.org. Please send pictures in jpeg format.
Save a monthly calendar with holidays and graphics or view the list with helpful lesson planning web site links. (Please allow time for monthly calendar graphics to load.)
January 1- Global Family Day
January 11- International Thank-You Day
January 21 - World Hug Day
Month of International Friendship
March 8 - International Women’s Day
March 21 - The International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination is observed annually on 21 March.
Last Friday of April is Arbor Day, a state holiday in Nebraska. Arbor Day encourages people to appreciate plant and care for trees.
April 22 - Earth Day
May 15 International Conscientious Objector Day
May 15 International Day of Families
May 22- The International Day for Biological Diversity is an occasion to increase the global understanding and awareness of issues and challenges around biodiversity. On May 22, 1992, the text of the Convention on Biological Diversity was adopted by the of the United Nations at a conference in Nairobi, Kenya. Since 2001, the International Day for Biological Diversity is celebrated each year on the anniversary of this date.
June 16 - International Day of the African Child
First Sunday in August is International Friendship Day, a time to recognize your friends and their contribution to your life. Friendship helps to bring peace and positivity to the globe - a great reason to celebrate! Accordingly, first Sunday of August was declared as a holiday in US in honor of friends by a Proclamation made by US Congress in 1935. Since then, World Friendship Day is being celebrated every year on the first Sunday in the month of August. In 1997, the United Nations named Winnie - the Pooh as the world's Ambassador of Friendship.
- National Friendship Day is on the first Sunday in August.
- Women's Friendship Day is on the third Sunday in August
- International Friendship Month is February
- Old Friends, New Friends Week is the third week of May
September 16 - International Day for the Preservation of the Ozone Layer
September 21 – World Peace Day
September 21 World Gratitude Day
September 22 World-Car Free Day
October 10 - World Mental Health Day
October 16 - World Food Day
October 17 - International Day for the Eradication of Poverty
October 24 - United Nations Day
United Nations Day (UN Day) is observed worldwide annually on October 24 to commemorate the signing of the UN Charter in San Francisco and the founding of the United Nations in October of 1945. One of the purposes of United Nations Day is to disseminate knowledge and make known to the people of the world the goals, objectives, aims, and accomplishments of the United Nations. United Nations Day traditionally has been characterized throughout the world with discussions, meetings, and exhibits about the goals and achievements of the UN.
November 24 - Thanksgiving Day
November 25 - International Day for the Elimination of Violence Against Women
December 5 - International Volunteers Day
December 10 - Human Rights Day