An effort to appease enemies of vice by limiting prostitution to a red-light district at the edge of the French Quarter instead made New Orleans infamous. Storyville, taken from the name of the elected official who introduced the plan, was a 38-block district created in 1897 that consisted of saloons, mansions known as “$5 houses” and inexpensive “cribs.”
Alderman Sidney Story had come up with the plan to make prostitution illegal elsewhere in the city. He was appalled when the district was named for him.
At its height, Storyville employed as many 2,000 prostitutes and generated millions of dollars in economic activity from the tourists and locals who patronized the brothels.
Some brothel owners were shrewd and wealthy, even if they were shunned by New Orleans society. Tom Anderson, a businessman and state legislator known as the mayor of Storyville, ran several restaurants, saloons and brothels. Madam Josie Arlington, a former prostitute, owned a mansion on Esplanade Avenue and a country retreat on the north shore.
The birth of jazz coincided with legalized prostitution in New Orleans and is often associated with it, although bordellos with music often employed just one pianist, not full-fledged bands that were hallmarks of the early years of jazz.
Flourishing prostitution in New Orleans was an embarrassment to the conservatives in the Legislature. A crackdown took shape in 1909, with bans on musical instruments in saloons and on women entering establishments that sold alcohol but not food. Black and white people were also barred from drinking together, a measure problematic for the district because many prostitutes marketed as exotic to their white patrons were black or of mixed racial heritage.
Soon after the United States entered World War I in 1917, Storyville was shut down at the insistence of the Navy, which cited concerns about the spread of venereal diseases among soldiers passing through the port city on their way to Europe. Some brothels continued to operate illegally, but by the mid-1940s most of the district was razed to make way for the Iberville public housing development.
Storyville remains a romanticized part of New Orleans lore. A series of images of prostitutes from the district taken by photographer E.J. Bellocq was discovered after his death in 1949 and became celebrated in the art world. The pictures, many of them nudes, inspired fictional portrayals in several books and movies, including 1978’s “Pretty Baby,” starring 12-year-old Brooke Shields, which was filmed in New Orleans at the Columns Hotel.
— By James P. Karst and Katie Ide