October 2, 2012
A new study released by climate change alarmists conclude that CO2 emissions are causing 24% of fish species to become smaller due to lack of oxygen in the oceans.
The fertility rates and normal patterns of these fish are also expected to be disrupted because of the failure of governments to control the release of carbon into the atmosphere.
Based on data provided by the UN Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), these scientists claim that the bodies of fish are shrinking. William Cheung, lead author of the study asserts that as ocean temperatures rise, so they “directly increase the metabolic rate of the fish’s body function. This leads to an increase in oxygen demand for normal body activities. So the fish will run out of oxygen for growth at a smaller body size.”
Back in 2010, the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission (IOC), which is part of UNESCO, published a study that approved of ocean fertilization as a “preventative” measure of sequestering CO2 in the deep oceans.
This is a by-product of iron fertilization (a.k.a. ocean fertilization) which uses iron and “other nutrients” that induce microscopic marine plants to absorb CO2 through the natural process of photosynthesis. As they inject the CO2, the plankton releases it back into the ocean at a lower depth.
The Royal Society, a globalist think-tank, released a study in 2009 that surmised that cutting man-made CO2 emissions is the first priority over safely dealing with our changing environment. Geoengineering, although a drastic measure, is justified because different attempts to mitigate carbon in our atmosphere will solve all of our problems.
Victor Smetacek, of the Alfred Wegener Institute in Germany, said: “I am hoping that these results will show how useful these experiments are.”
Smetacek says ocean fertilization should be controlled by the UN. He also believes that private corporations should not be allowed to conduct experiments unless mandated by the UN. Under current treaties for carbon credit tax schemes, this mode of sequestering CO2 should be combined with solar geoengineering efforts.
The IOC claim that ocean fertilization address the urgent need for environmental, social and legal schemes that international regimes must implement in their efforts to continue geo-engineering experiments. By reducing CO2 emissions by the use of all forms of geo-engineering, the UN simultaneously wants to control those efforts as an exploration for potential monetary gains. However the scientific community asserts that policymakers and the general public need to participate in these secret discussions as they are directly affected by their ethical, social and geopolitical potentials.
Another hazard created by iron fertilization is that the method used to sequester the CO2 in phytoplankton may produce domoic acid, a potent neurotoxin that can weaken fish, birds, sea mammals and potentially humans who eat the contaminated seafood.
Coastal areas are at the greatest threat to iron overdose due to the large amounts of local seafood consumed, as well as ingesting the neurotoxin.
Charles Trick of the University of Western Ontario and lead researcher explains: “If we added the normal amount of iron that one would add for these fertilization experiments, the level of toxins in each of the cells goes higher. It allows (Pseudonitzschia) to grow faster. And as they grow, they stop the other species from growing. They become dominant. The surprising part was not just that it made toxin,” Trick said, “but that it made lots of toxin, and it stopped the other species from getting the nutrients.”
Mak Saito of the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, said: “If we’re going to actively change the planet’s chemistry or biology to actively reverse global warming, what are the unintended consequences? Here he’s already documented one of the concerns. What are the ones we don’t even know about?”
John Cullen, an oceanographer with Dalhousie University in Halifax, Canada, has analyzed the data on ocean fertilization and published his findings. He concludes that these experiments are dangerous on large scales that globalists are insisting take place. We will be polluting our oceans and this will have drastic consequences on ocean life and the delicate balance of our biosphere.
In essence, if ocean fertilization is pursued, they scheme would cause an Ice Age because of the effect of extreme cooling on our planet.
Scientists are looking to take advantage of the oceans to justify natural cycles and contributions to the Earth’s climate, while simultaneously finding new ways to exploit this resource for their globalist agendas. Under the guise of using plankton for CO2 sequestering, data is being entered into computer models to see how this new integration can be used to maximize carbon credit profits.