Special Selections from Perrot's Youth Services Staff
Education is not the
filling of a pail,
but the lighting of a fire
-- W. B. Yeats
Homeschooling can be a whole new way of learning and growing and sharing and living together as a family.
There is no one "right way" to home school; your child’s experience– and yours– will be entirely unique!
Here are a few favorite titles that emphasize the importance of personal growth, the excitement of experience, and the appreciation of the individual. Happy reading!
by Barbara Cooney
[Picture Book] Miss Rumphius follows her dreams; they bring her around the world and back to her home by the seaside. It is there that she follows her dear grandfather’s advice of doing something to make the world more beautiful. Barbara Cooney wrote and illustrated this simple, beautiful and very personal story that will inspire us all to leave our mark in a meaningful way.
written and illustrated by Peter Reynolds
“Just make a mark and see where it takes you.” This sage advice, offered here by an intuitive, intelligent teacher, sets our young heroine on a journey of self-expression, artistic experimentation, and success. Honoring effort and overcoming convention are the themes here, and everything about this little gem speaks to them.
The Little Red Hen (Makes a Pizza)
retold by Philemon Sturges, illustrated by Amy Walrod
EASY J 398.2 LITTL
[Picture Book] The story of the industrious Little Red Hen is not a new one, but when this particular hen spies a can of tomato sauce in her cupboard and decides to make a pizza, the familiar tale takes on a fresh new twist. Kids will love following along as the hen, with no help from her friends the duck, the dog, and the cat, goes through the steps of making a pizza-shopping for supplies, making the dough, and adding the toppings. But despite their initial resistance, the hen's friends come through in the end and help out in a refreshing and surprising way.
One Grain of Rice: A Mathematical Folktale
written and Illustrated by Demi
EASY J 398.2 ONE
This book, based on a traditional Indian folktale, tells the story of Rani, a clever girl who outsmarts a very rich and very greedy raja and saves her village. When offered a reward for a good deed, she asks only for a single grain of rice, doubled each day for 30 days. By the time the final day arrives, 256 elephants come bearing 536,870,912 grains of rice, enough to feed the entire kingdom.
The Wheel on the School
by Meindert DeJong, illustrated by Maurice Sendak
Why do the storks no longer come to the little Dutch fishing village of Shora to nest? It was Lina, one of the six schoolchildren, who first asked that question, which set the others to wondering. And sometimes when you begin to wonder, you begin to make things happen. So the children set out to bring the storks back. Despite many obstacles, including the fierce and threatening sea., the children refused to give up. Eventually their determination and their vision got the whole village working, until, at last, the dream began to come true. Winner of the Newbery Medal in 1955.
by Roald Dahl
Matilda is an extraordinarily gifted four-year old. Unfortunately, her father is a crooked car salesman father and her mother is a loud, bingo-obsessed dimwit. Life with her beastly parents is bearable only because Matilda teaches herself to read (at age 3), finds the public library, and discovers literature. Matilda begins to use her lively intelligence to perpetrate daring acts of revenge on her father. She further develops this talent when she enrolls in Crunchem Hall Primary School, whose headmistress, Miss Trunchbull, is a "fierce tyrannical monster," who torments Matilda's beloved teacher, Miss Honey.
by Astrid Lindgren
What happens when Pippilotta Delicatessa Windowshade Mackrelmind Efraim Longstocking decides to give school a try? Laugh along with her classmates when Pippi asks about “pluttification,” completes a full-sized drawing of her horse, and otherwise bends the rules of appropriate behavior both at school, the circus and everywhere else in the whole wide world. Pippi is always full of surprises.
by Christopher Paolini
When Eragon finds a
polished blue stone in the forest, he thinks it is the lucky
discovery of a poor farm boy; perhaps it will buy his family meat
for the winter. But when the stone brings a dragon hatchling, Eragon
realizes he has stumbled upon a legacy nearly as old as the Empire
itself. Overnight his simple life is shattered, and he is thrust
into a perilous new world of destiny, magic, and power. With only an
ancient sword and the advice of an old storyteller for guidance,
Eragon and the fledgling dragon must navigate the dangerous terrain
and dark enemies of an Empire ruled by a king whose evil knows no
bounds. Can Eragon take up the mantle of the legendary Dragon
Riders? The fate of the Empire may rest in his hands... This book
was written when its homeschooled author, Christopher Paolini, was
Check this page monthly for recommendations from our staff! Each month will focus on a different category of books.
We'll pick our favorites, and tell you all about them! Each book cover is a hyperlink to that item in the catalog, so click there to place a hold.
Have questions about our picks, or need other recommendations? Call us! Our number is 203-637-8802.
[ Back to May We Recommend... ]