Title: Spanish Through Time
Subtitle: An Introduction
Series Title: LINCOM Coursebooks in Linguistics 17
Publisher: Lincom GmbH
Author: Flora Klein-Andreu
Paperback: ISBN: 9783895864308 Pages: 209 Price: Europe EURO 42.80
Spanish Through Time is an introduction to the development of the Spanish language, designed for readers with little or no prior experience in linguistics. It therefore stresses explanation of the workings of language and its development over time: they are viewed as attributable to characteristics of human speakers, in particular social and historical circumstances, as illustrated by the history of Spanish. The development of Spanish from Latin is presented divided into three broad periods--"Vulgar Latin", Castilian, and Spanish--characterized by specific linguistic developments and the historical circumstances in which they occurred. In each case the mechanics of particular language changes are explained in detail, in everyday terms. Emphasis is on the more general developments that differentiate, first, various Romance languages, and finally different current varieties of Castilian-- Peninsular and Atlantic (American). Evidence is also presented for the chronology of some major changes, so as to familiarize the reader with traditional linguistic reasoning. The presentation is designed to be covered in a normal semester or trimester unit, and is based on the author's experience teaching the subject for more than twenty years in U.S. Universities.
Contents: l. Introduction: On language and language change
Part I: Romance 2. Spanish as a Romance language: theory and evidence 3. 'Vulgar Latin' 4. Vulgar Latin Lexicon 5. Developments in grammar 6. Another word on words and reinterpretations 7. The production of speech sounds, and the sounds of Classical Latin 8. Early changes in consonants 9. Changes in vowels 10. Evidence of early developments 11. The Germanic invasions 12. The Arab invasions 13. French influence
Part II: Castilian 14. Characteristics of Castilian 15. Early evidence of Castilian 16. Morphology: Developments in form 17. The Rise of Castilian 18. Standardization 19. Modern changes in sound and major current varieties 20. More reinterpretations
Part III: Spanish
21. Spanish beyond Spain 22. The Academy. Modern changes in spelling. 23. Spanish in our time: Some ongoing developments.
ISBN 9783895864308. LINCOM Coursebooks in Linguistics 17. 209pp. 2010.
Students' discounts available! Please ask.