The other week it was my dad’s birthday, and we wanted to hang birthday balloons in the house for decoration, but we had no tape!! So we had to run to the store and buy some tape, just to hang the balloons. But now that I have learned good physics and understand the concept of static electricity and charge, I will never have to run to the store for tape again. All i have to do is rub the balloon on my head, giving it a charge, and touch it to the wall. The balloon will be attracted to the wall and stay suspended. Also i will never have to worry about the words I wrote on the balloon not showing. If i write on the balloon and apply a charge to the opposite side, the words on the balloon will always be facing out. This is because even if you try to flip the balloon over it will flip back to the charged side. After the party is done all you have to do is grab the balloon, grounding it, and then it wont stick to the wall anymore. Thanks physics for saving me lots of time and money!
Whenever I am doing home repairs, or building something in 3D physics is all around me. Every screw I tighten, or nail or pound can be explained through physics. Whenever you pound a nail you can feel the different amounts of force created by holding the handle far away or close to the head of the hammer. This power couldnt be explained before, until now. This force is torque. Torque is found by multiplying the lever arm squared times the mass of the object. Therefore when you hold the hammer farther down the handle away from the head you create more torque and more force.
Mililani freeway on ramp.
I never understood how speed limits were chosen until Physics showed me the light. This freeway on ramp near my house has a circular path, and a speed limit of 25 miles per hour. If you look closely you will also see that the road is banked at an angle that prevents cars from sliding and losing control.
Engineers can determine the appropriate speed limit by using centripetal acceleration and force. Centripetal force is equal to mass times the velocity squared all over the radius. By using physics engineers can make the roads much safer. Engineers not only determine the speed limit, but also make the road with a slight angle. This angle allows the road to push against the car creating more friction and more control for the car.
Air Hockey!! The energy from the puck was completely transferred into the stack of pucks launching the bottom puck forward.
This is the boys and girls varsity bowling teams.
Bowling is packed with physics. The bowling lane is 60 feet long and about 42 inches wide. Then the lane is covered in a layer of oil to reduce its friction. My ball is fourteen pounds and has a diameter of about 8.5 inches. I release the ball 60 feet away from the first pin, at an average initial velocity of 13 miles per hour, it then converts its potential energy into kinetic energy as it charges towards the pins. This total kinetic energy is relatively unchanged, due to the oil and low kinetic friction.
Is this actually possible?
The answer is no. This trick is impossible. The forces that hold the water up, are too weak to push against gravity.
Some people say the spinning motion would allow the water to spin and retain its cup like shape. However when the water is spun it will have a centripetal force. This force makes the water want to expand outwards as it spins. An example of centripetal force is in ceramics. The clay on the wheel is constantly spinning in a counter clockwise motion, this gives the clay centripetal force, which is why if left alone your pot will continue to spin until it opens up and flies in all directions.
For this trick to work the force exerted from the water would have to push more than the gravity and mass that pushes it down. Also the water would have to keep from changing shape.
With basketball season right around the corner it is important to practice. I shoot around for hours trying to perfect my free throws. However now that I have physics, all I need to do is apply the right speed, velocity, and trajectory, and the ball will fall right through the hoop every time. Once the ball leaves my hand it becomes a projectile flying the the air. SWISH
The ball travels with forward and vertical motion. If it the basket didn’t interfere with the ball’s path, it would rise then fall for equal amounts of time. With a constant acceleration of -9.8 meters per second squared. With Physics I will never miss a free throw again. Thanks physics!