Take a trip back to Colonial times and visit
Sands Ring Homestead Museum
invite you and your students to travel back with us to colonial
times. We offer house tours and hands-on workshops led by costumed
For over 30 years students have participated in the living
history programs at Sands Ring Homestead Museum. Give your students this unique experience.
living history programs run from April to November.
Sands Ring Homestead Museum is one of the oldest Dutch colonial frame houses in the Hudson Valley. Here Nathanial Sands built a home for his family in 1760. The house has stood strong through the changes in our history.
We offer a 2 hour combination House Tour and Workshop Program for students. To fully appreciate the hands-on experience students need to understand its historical context.
Our Homestead is furnished primarily with pieces from the 1800ís though our historical emphasis is on colonial life. During the house tour, our teachers relate antidotal stories of the Sands Ring Families so as to put a face on history. Students are encouraged to ask questions, to touch, and to examine various artifacts. As students become immersed in colonial history, they are encouraged to compare life in the 1700ís with their life today.
For groups who are visiting us a second time, we offer a tour of David Sandís General Store. Stories of the role the family and the store played in the Revolutionary War and an examination of the artifacts housed here make up this part of the program.
currently offer these one hour hands-on workshops.
Spinning and Weaving
Learn how colonists used natural fibers to make their
clothing. Explore the process of turning fleece into
fiber by carding, spinning, and weaving.
Learn how food was prepared in the colonial kitchen.
Churn butter, make bread, and learn about the uses of
Learn how natural materials, like cornhusks,
were used to make useful items. Each child makes his
own cornhusk doll.
Includes a one hour colonial house tour and a one
hour hands-on workshop. The cost for each student is $15.00.
The maximum number of students we can accommodate is 28. If there
are less than 15 students in your group, the minimum cost is $225.
offer a choice of two time slots:
Morning 10:00 a.m.—12 p.m.
Afternoon 12:30 p.m.—2:30 p.m.
First time visitors, tour the house. Second
time visitors, tour the General Store. Due to space considerations,
each student group can only participate in one workshop.
We offer free admission for two chaperones (teacher,
aid, or parent). Additional chaperones are charged $10 each and
prior approval is required as space is limited.
To reserve a date and time for your tour
and workshop, or for more information call 845-534-4829 or email us at Friends@SandsRing.org
Once your reservation has been confirmed, a non-refundable
deposit of $50 per class/group is required. The remainder is
due the day of the workshop in the form of cash or one check.
A separate registration form will be sent to you outlining the
details of your registration.
If cancellations are made at least 3 weeks before the trip, the
deposit will be refunded less a $50 processing fee. If a group
cancels with 3 days or does not show up, they will be billed
the full cost of the visit.
|For Your Comfort
Dress in layers. Our historical home has limited heating
and no air conditioning.
We do not have lunch facilities, but there is a lovely public park across the street for picnics.
Enjoying lunch at Ring’s Pond provides a wonderful way to either
end or begin your visit.