NASA video of a solar flare that erupted this week, resulting in a so-called solar storm expected to reach Earth on Thursday.
Solar storms like the one that buffeted Earth’s magnetic field on Thursday will soon become a common occurrence.
Magnetic eruptions on the Sun on Tuesday and Wednesday released two huge bursts of lights — two of the largest solar flares over the last five years — and accelerated a blob of high-speed particles headed toward us. As the charged particles slam in the Earth’s magnetic field, funneled toward the north and south poles, they generate the nighttime light now known as auroras or northern and southern lights.
Giant solar storms can wreak havoc on satellites and power grids. One storm knocked out power in a large swath in Quebec in 1989. The current storm, which started Thursday morning, is nowhere large enough to cause that much trouble. “At this point it’s a minor storm,” said C. Alex Young, a senior solar physicist at NASA’s Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Md. “It’s not going to be that big even if the levels increase a bit. This is really not something to be concerned about.” Read more…
Images of a recent solar prominence eruption taken NASA’s Solar Dynamics Observatory, showing a solar loop thirty times the size of the Earth. These images were made before an image stabilization system was fully operational.
This video clip shows images of the sun seen by a magnetogram and then by the telescopes in different wavelengths. NASA notes that the telescopes cover “a wide range of temperatures and will answer important questions about the temperature and energy structure of the Sun’s atmosphere.”
An Israeli government review panel asserted that a French television report broadcast that appeared to show the death of a 12-year-old Palestinian boy named Muhammad al-Dura during clashes in Gaza was deeply flawed.
A tornado touched down south of Oklahoma City on Monday afternoon, causing widespread destruction in the suburb of Moore after a severe weather outbreak that spawned more than two dozen tornadoes in Oklahoma, Kansas, Illinois and Iowa over the weekend.
Questions have been raised about Mayor Rob Ford’s conduct, temperament and public statements since his early days as a member of the Toronto City Council.
About The Lede
The Lede is a blog that remixes national and international news stories, adding information gleaned from the Web or gathered through original reporting to supplement articles in The New York Times and draw readers in to the global conversation about the news taking place online.
Readers are encouraged to take part in the blogging by using the comments threads to suggest links to relevant material elsewhere on the Web or by submitting eyewitness accounts, photographs or video of news events. Read more.