Homeland Security & EPA's Strategic Plan
Contributing to our nation's homeland security through response and recovery efforts – including prevention, preparedness, and research — is highlighted throughout the Agency's 2006-2011 Strategic Plan as well as in the new 2009-2014 Strategic Plan, expected to be released in the fall of 2009.
Below you can find selected information on homeland security responsibilities from EPA’s Strategic Plan:
Objective 1.4: Radiation. Through 2011, working with partners, minimize unnecessary releases of radiation and be prepared to minimize impacts to human health and the environment should unwanted releases occur.
EPA continues to meet statutory mandates for managing radiation waste and controlling radioactive emissions and to fulfill its responsibilities under presidential decision directives for radiological emergency preparedness and response. These responsibilities form the core of our strategy to protect the public and the environment from unnecessary exposure to radiation.
Read more about EPA's Radiological Emergency Response Program.
Objective 2.1: Protect Human Health. Protect human health by reducing exposure to contaminants in drinking water (including protecting source waters), in fish and shellfish, and in recreational waters.
More than 280 million Americans count on the safety of tap water provided by their local water systems. EPA’s strategy for ensuring safe drinking water includes strengthening the security of water systems.
Water Infrastructure Protection.
The President has given EPA Primary responsibility for coordinating federal, state and local authorities in the protection of drinking water systems. The Bioterrorism Act of 2002 requires communities serving more than 3.300 people to develop vulnerability assessments and to certify emergency response plans. With most of this work now completed, EPA has shifted its focus to reducing risks associated with these vulnerabilities.
Read more about EPA’s Water Security programs and initiatives.
Objective 3.2: Restore Land. By 2011, control the risks to human health and the environment by mitigating the impact of accidental or intentional releases and by cleaning up and restoring contaminated sites or properties to appropriate levels.
EPA leads the federal effort to reduce risks posed by contaminated land by responding to releases and potential releases of harmful substances and undertaking cleanups and other activities to return land to beneficial use.
- National preparedness is essential to ensure that emergency responders are able to deal with multiple, large-scale emergencies, including those that may involve chemicals, oil, biological agents, radiation, or weapons of mass destruction.
- EPA will continue to enhance its core emergency response program by providing specialized training on the Incident Command System; developing additional health and safety materials; participating in exercises with federal, state, and local government agencies, including Regional Response Teams; and strengthening response readiness across multiple regions.
Read more about EPA's Emergency Preparedness & Response programs and initiatives.
Objective 4.1: Chemical, organism, and pesticide risks. By 2011, prevent and reduce pesticide and industrial chemical risks to humans, communities and ecosystems.
- EPA is working to identify, better understand, and prevent potential risks from accidental chemical releases. The Agency will continue to analyze data collected under the Risk Management Program (RMP) and Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know programs to identify the types and locations of facilities with the greatest potential for chemical accidents and releases and to identify susceptible and sensitive populations that may be at higher risk.
Read more about EPA's Risk Management Program.
- EPA provides emergency personnel with information they need to take necessary precautions and treat individuals who may be on the scene. The Agency is collaborating with other federal, private, and academic organizations to more quickly develop Acute Exposure Guideline Levels, which emergency responders use in planning and mitigation efforts.
Read more about EPA's Acute Exposure Guideline Levels.
Objective 4.4: Enhance Science and Research.Through 2011, identify and synthesize the best available scientific information, models, methods, and analyses to support Agency guidance and policy decisions related to the health of people, communities, and ecosystems. Focus research on pesticides and chemical toxicology; global change; and comprehensive, cross-cutting studies of human, community and ecosystem health.
The following homeland security research is highlighted under objective 4.4:
- Threat and consequence assessment research.
- Water infrastructure protection research.
- Decontamination and consequence management
Read more about EPA's Homeland Security Research.