A Vision for Technology in
With over 400 educators, parents, interested community
members, and business leaders present in a Department of Education forum in
1995, a vision for education was cultivated to guide districts
and school systems. This section will show you their conclusions.
Learning in the 21st Century
The following requirements were identified for learning in the
- A greater dependence on new communication and computing
technologies that support new levels of student
creativity and research.
- A change in the role of teachers from "sages on the
stage" to mentors, researchers, publishers,
technology users, knowledge producers, risk takers and
- Involvement of parents to play a major role in the
education of their children and to work actively with
teachers to connect formal and informal education.
- Partnering of local businesses and other community
organizations so they become actively involved in the
- Collaborations that bring students, teachers, and
researchers together to create new curriculum for K-12
learners and adult learners.
Building Schools of the Future
The following conditions were recognized as critical elements
of future schools:
- Schools of the future must be open and flexible.
- New communication should promote new collaborations and a
higher level of cooperation and creative problem-solving.
- Teachers must be supported in their use of new
technologies for learning and also in their use of
technology for professional development and
- Learners must be able to use technology to achieve new
levels of learning and to acquire new information age
skills and abilities.
- Educational managers need to use technology as a tool for
managing schools and learner communities.
- Free from one geographic location.
- Supportive of all learning styles.
- Teachers must be researchers and mentors (Maryland
Virtual High School WEBSITE)
- New skills required in info-society: abilities to quickly
adapt to new situations and new technologies and to be
able to process bast amounts of information
- "The only way a school or district will get
sustained support for quality professional development in
technology is when the line administrators and top
administrators are active technology users"
- Administrators and managers need professional development
as much as their staff.
- Principals, superintendents and school boards must
provide teachers with adequate training and support to
effectively use the technology in their classrooms. They
need to understand how the current structure of a
teachers and learners day impact on their
effective use of the technology. In effect, managers must
provide the vision of change that includes empowering
teachers and learners in new ways and then must learn how
to effectively manage these empowered teachers and
- New on-line communities
- "Education needs to SELL its beliefs to
industry and start a cooperative partnership."
Perry Brown, Anderson County Schools Office of Technology
in Clinton, Tennessee. "If we can make
students life-long learners, then industries would not
have to pay 20% of their manpower budget on retaining!
The point is, if we can do the job right, then industry
would be SMART to help fund us we would be saving
them money in several ways."
- Give to the community as well as asking from it. Create a
vision and a reality in which the school is creating
value for the community and the technology is enabling
the technology to be created.