Pearl Harbor Oral Histories with Ann Hoog
Meet Ann Hoog, Folklife Specialist, American Folklife Center, Library
Hoog discusses After the Day of Infamy: 'Man-on-the-Street'
Interviews Following the Attack on Pearl Harbor.
Note: To view the Webcast, you must have the RealPlayer
software, available at the RealNetworks
player download site.
of Congress Web Sites of Interest
the Day of Infamy: "Man-on-the-Street" Interviews Following
the Attack on Pearl Harbor, American Memory
- Opinions recorded in the days and months following the bombing
of Pearl Harbor from more than two hundred individuals in cities
and towns across the United States.
- Alan Lomax,
1915-2002 by James B. Hardin
- An appreciation written recently upon the death of Alan Lomax
(1915-2002), one of the original staff members of the Library
of Congress's Archive of American Folk Song (now known as the
Archive of Folk Culture, American Folklife Center) and a pioneer
in documentary recording, and one of the instigators of the Pearl
Harbor oral history project.
- The Archive
of Folk Culture
- The Library of Congress's Archive of Folk Culture Web page.
Includes finding aids, links, and other resources.
- The Veterans History Project
- Information on the Library of Congress's Veterans History Project,
which is creating a repository of oral histories of United States
- Witness and Response:
September 11 Acquisitions at the Library of Congress
- Original material including prints, photographs, drawings,
poems, eye-witness accounts and personal reactions, headlines,
books, magazines, songs, maps, videotapes and films collected
by Library of Congress staff.
Web Sites of Interest
- A multimedia presentation from the National Geographic Society
on the attack on Pearl Harbor. Includes an interactive map, an
hour-by-hour synopsis of events, and first-hand accounts of the
day from participants on both sides.
- Naval Station at
- The official Web site of the Naval Station at Pearl Harbor.
It contains a link to a separate site on the history of the Dec
7, 1941, attack, as well as information on such diverse subjects
as the ships present during the attack, the events marking the
60th anniversary of the attack, and a virtual tour of the historic
- Naval Station
Pearl Harbor Historic Tour
- Another Web site produced by the U.S. Navy on the events of
Dec 7, 1941. Includes a transcription of President Franklin Roosevelt's
speech on December 8, 1941: "Yesterday, Dec. 7, 1941 -- a date
which will live in infamy -- the United States of America was
suddenly and deliberately attacked by naval and air forces of
the Empire of Japan..."
1942: United We Stand
- An online exhibition from the Smithsonian Institution documents
the story behind "United We Stand," a media campaign designed
to boost the morale of the American people demoralized several
months earlier by the attack on Pearl Harbor. The campaign put
the flag on the cover of magazines across the United States throughout
- Center for Oral
History, University of Hawai'i at Manoa
- Thirty-three civilians -- reflecting Hawaii's diverse occupations,
lifestyles, and ethnicities -- talk about World War II and how
it affected their everyday lives. The site includes two audio
clips featuring eyewitness accounts of the bombing of Pearl Harbor.
More Perfect Union
- Another online exhibition from the Smithsonian Institution,
this one exploring the relationship between the Japanese Americans
interned during World War II and the civil rights provided for
citizens under the United States Constitution.
Materials of Interest
- Pearl Harbor and Oral History
Berry, Henry.This is No Drill!: Living Memories of the Attack
on Pearl Harbor. New York: Berkley Books, 2001. LC call number:
D767.92 .B47 1992
Hoopes, Roy, ed. Americans Remember the Home Front: An Oral Narrative
of the World War II Years in America. New York: Berkley Books,
2002. LC call number: E806 .A642 2002
Travers, Paul Joseph. Eyewitness to Infamy: An Oral History
of Pearl Harbor. Lanham, Md.: Madison Books: Distributed
by National Book Network, 1991. LC call number: D767.92 .T68
About Oral History and Fieldwork
Allen, Barbara, and William L. Montell. From Memory to History:
Using Oral Sources in Local Historical Research. Nashville:
American Association for State and Local History, 1981. LC call
number: D16 .A38
Bartis, Peter. Folklife
and Fieldwork: A Layman's Introduction to Field Techniques. Washington,
D.C.: Library of Congress. Revised edition, 2002
Georges, Robert A., and Michael Owen Jones.People Studying
People: The Human Element in Fieldwork. Berkeley: University
of California Press, 1980. LC call number: H62 .G46
Ives, Edward D. The Tape-Recorded Interview: A Manual for Field
Workers in Folklore and Oral History. 2nd edition. Knoxville:
University of Tennessee Press, 1995. LC call number: GR45.5 .I93
Jackson, Bruce.Fieldwork. Urbana: University of Illinois
Press, 1987. LC call number: GR45.5 .J33 1987
Oral History Association
- Web site has links to many other sources for doing oral history
and locating other oral history collections.
- American Folklore Society
- Web site includes information about the study of folklife and
additional resources on conducting fieldwork.