In the case of Cameroon the situation is made worse by weak regulations and a culture of violence that is some how in born of the African. In a simple survey in Ngoketunjia Division of the North West Region like in many other areas of the Republic of Cameroon, 90% of violent people learned and adopted this while in school, 50% of school drop outs result because of bullying ,70% of individuals lack citizenship and are bullies.
In Cameroon, 7 in 10 students believe gangs are present in their school. Membership to gangs usually results in lower academic achievement and has a chilling effect on other students in the same school; many students who are victims of gang violence are reluctant to go to school and also suffer from lowered academic achievement.
In addition to the violence that gangs inflict on others, they are also sometimes responsible for weapons and illicit drug use that make their way into school life, which creates an unsafe place for learning. As a result, students will avoid going to school or carry weapons.
In Cameroon bullying most often is a consequence of large class or school sizes, or of the competition for grades and other pressures that school generates. Another common assumption is that under a tough surface bullies, in fact, suffer from poor self-esteem and insecurity.
In reality, certain personality characteristics and typical reaction patterns, combined with the level of physical strength or weakness in the case of boys, can help to explain the development of bullying problems in individual students. At the same time, environmental influences, such as teachers’ attitudes, behaviour and supervisory routines play a crucial role in determining the extent to which these problems will manifest themselves in a classroom or a school.
The Cameroon Anti-Bullying C.I.G, CABCIG is carrying out a campaign in schools in Cameroon, starting with the schools in the Ngoketunjia division of the North West Region. This campaign we expect will go through the 34 schools in this division. CABCIG is also running a weekly radio program called anti-bullying corner, to educate the public about the bad effects of bullying, steps to recognise and stampout bullying in our communities.
Our action plan have the following SUGGESTIONS ON HOW SCHOOL VIOLENCE AND BULLYING CAN BE STOPPED IN CAMEROON
Awareness and involvement on the part of adults/Parents
MEASURES AT SCHOOL LEVEL
Questionnaire survey and distribution of brochures and pamphlets for schools and communities to educate about bullying and possible solutions.
School conference day (centred on school violence and bullying)
Effective supervision during break times
Educational teacher discussion groups
Formation of coordinating group or organising reconciliation forums and setting them up in schools.
MEASURES AT CLASS LEVEL
Class rules against bullying
Class meetings with students
Meetings with parents of the class
MEASURES AT THE INDIVIDUAL LEVEL
Serious talks with bullies and victims
Serious talks with parents of involved students
Development of individual intervention plans
CONCLUSION: Bullying is a large problem in Cameroon schools, but with a suitable intervention programme, it is possible to considerably reduce it. An effective anti-bullying programme can be implemented in collaboration with the Ministry concern and the school authorities relatively easily and without major cost; it is primarily a question of changing attitudes, knowledge, behaviour and routines in school life.