Are these 15 signs that the Pacific earthquake and volcano zone known as the Ring of Fire is is getting ready for an eruption of epic proportions?
Back in July 2012 TPC published an earthquake map that showed the sizable amount of seismic activity in the Ring of Fire region since 1898. The fact is that over time the Ring of Fire has accounted for about 90% of global earthquake and 75% of global volcanic activity.
So should there be increased concern that occurrence of "the big one" could be imminent at some location around the Ring of Fire?
From The American Dream come these 15 signs that the year 2013 could see some kind of significant and potentially devastating natural activity.
15 signs from along the Ring of Fire!Source
#1 Mount Lokon, which is located in Indonesia, has erupted more than 800 times since July. On Monday, volcanic ash from the volcano reached heights of up to 10,000 feet.
#2 An “orange alert” had been issued for towns and villages near the Tungurahua volcano in Ecuador. On Tuesday it erupted and shot lava up to a half mile above its crater.
#3 Lava is still flowing out of the Tolbachik volcano which is located on the Kamchatka Peninsula. Anyone that has ever played the board game “Risk” knows where Kamchatka is located.
#4 Lava also continues to flow and ash also continues to rise from the Fuego volcano in Guatemala.
#5 On Tuesday, an ash plume more than 2.5 kilometers high had risen from the Paluweh volcano in Indonesia.
#6 There was an average of about 4 seismic events per hour at the Popocatépetl volcano in Mexico on Tuesday.
#7 Scientists recently discovered “one of the world’s weirdest volcanoes” on the floor of the ocean just off the coast of Baja, Mexico.
#8 Mt. Fuji (located not too far from Tokyo, Japan) has been dormant for about 300 years, but in recent months there have been increasing signs of activity there. One study recently found that a “magma chamber under the mountain has come under immense pressure“, and one prominent scientist is warning that Mt. Fuji is due for “a big-scale explosive eruption“. Authorities were alarmed when a tunnel leading to Mt. Fuji collapsed on December 2nd, killing 9 people.
#9 Scientists are now warning that there is a very dangerous build up of magma at a large number of Japan’s 110 active volcanoes.
#10 A magnitude-6.1 earthquake struck off the coast of Sulawesi, Indonesia on Monday.
#11 A magnitude-6.0 earthquake hit the New Britain region of Papua New Guinea on Saturday.
#12 A magnitude-6.5 earthquake struck the Gulf of Alaska in mid-November.
#13 A magnitude-7.3 earthquake hit Japan earlier this month.
#14 There has been a substantial increase in earthquake activity in the Long Valley caldera region of California, and authorities tell us that “magma is indeed moving down there“.
#15 Over one recent five week period, more than 170 significant earthquakes were detected in one town in Chile. That town is now being called “one of the shakiest places on earth”.