See also:minister of
See also:Henry VII. of England, was a son of
See also:Dudley of Atherington,
See also:Sussex, and a member of the
See also:great baronial
See also:family of Sutton or Dudley . After studying at
See also:Oxford and at
See also:Inn, Dudley came under the
See also:notice of Henry VII., and is said to have been made a privy councillor at the early age of twenty-three . In 1492 he helped to negotiate the treaty of Etaples with France and soon became prominent in assisting the
See also:king to check the lawlessness of the barons, and at the same
See also:time to, replenish his own ex-chequer., He and his colleague
See also:Empson (q.v.) are called fcales judices by Polydore Vergil, and owing to their extortions they became very unpopular . Dudley, who was
See also:speaker of the
See also:House of
See also:Commons in 1504, in addition to aiding Henry, amassed a great amount of
See also:wealth for himself, and possessed large estates in Sussex, Dorset and
See also:Lincolnshire . When Henry VII. died in
See also:April 1509, he was thrown into prison by
See also:order of Henry VIII. and charged with the
See also:crime of constructive treason, being found guilty and attainted . After having made a futile attempt to
See also:escape from prison, he was executed on the 17th or 18th of
See also:August 1510 . Dudley's nominal crime was that during the last illness of Henry VII. he had ordered his friends to assemble in arms in case the king died, but the real reason for his
See also:death was doubtless the unpopularity caused by his avarice . During his imprisonment he sought to gain the favour of Henry VIII. by writing a
See also:treatise in support of absolute
See also:monarchy called The
See also:Tree of
See also:Commonwealth . This never reached the king's hands, and was not published until 1859, when it was printed privately in Manchester . Dudley's first wife was Anne, widow of Roger
See also:Corbet of
See also:Shropshire, by whom he had a daughter,
See also:Elizabeth, who married
See also:William, 6th
See also:Lord Stourton . By his second wife, Elizabeth, daughter of
See also:Lisle, he had three sons: John, afterwards duke of
See also:Northumberland (q.v.); Andrew (d . 1559), who was made a knight and held various important posts during the reign of Edward VI.; and
See also:Jasper .
See also:History of Henry VII., edited by J . R . Lumby (Cambridge, 1881) ; and J . S .
See also:Brewer, The Reign of Henry VIII., edited by J .
See also:Gairdner (
See also:London, 1884) .
BARONS AND EARLS OF DUDLEY
SIR ROBERT DUDLEY (1573—1649)
There are no comments yet for this article.
Do not copy, download, transfer, or otherwise replicate the site content in whole or in part.
Links to articles and home page are encouraged.