Novel combined therapy extends life, diminishes pain in brain cancer patients
Bob Carter, MD, PhD, (left) is UCSD Chief of Neurosurgery and performs this technique for patients at Moores Cancer Center. Santosh Kesari, MD, PhD, (right) who led this study, is chief of neuro-oncology at UC San Diego Moores Cancer Center. Credit: Courtesy of UCSD; Nick Abadilla Photography
Approximately five to ten percent of patients with primary or metastatic cancer suffer from devastating neurological complications such as headaches, seizures, confusion, difficulty swallowing and visual disturbances. These deficits are caused by a life-threatening form of brain invasion from cancer called neoplastic meningitis. Santosh Kesari, MD, PhD, at the University of California, San Diego School of Medicine and colleagues have utilized a novel combined technique to treat cancer patients by bathing the brain in chemotherapy and relieving pressure from spinal fluid build-up (hydrocephalus). The results of this multicenter study are described in Journal of Neurosurgery, now available online.
"What we have developed is a single intervention to treat both neoplastic meningitis and hydrocephalus," said Kesari, chief of neuro-oncology at UC San Diego Moores Cancer Center and associate professor of neurosciences at the UCSD School of Medicine. "Cancer should be fought by every method available, and this is an aggressive option that can dramatically improve function and survival for select patients."
When cancer cells infiltrate the spaces within the brain, the cells prevent the flow and absorption of spinal fluid. This blockage causes increased pressure and fluid accumulation. By inserting an externally operated "off-on" valve along with an Ommaya reservoir a small plastic device used to carry medicine to fluid in the brain and spinal cord and shunt, doctors can both deliver chemotherapy directly to the brain's surfaces and drain excess fluids to the abdomen via a thin internal catheter.
"This dual-purpose technique allows for both diversion of excess spinal fluid and treatment of the underlying cancer," said Bob Carter, MD, PhD, UCSD chief of neurosurgery who performs the technique for patients at Moores Cancer Center. "When brain tumor care is coordinated by a multidisciplinary team such as ours, the results can significantly improve quality of life."
Kesari, who performed the original research on this technique at Harvard Medical School and Brigham and Women's Hospital, said that further studies need to be done to better understand and optimize this combined approach. Kesari and Carter are planning larger, prospective clinical studies to further optimize outcomes in metastatic brain cancer patients.
Provided by University of California - San Diego
- Biomarker treatment for brain tumors studied Jun 15, 2010 | not rated yet | 0
- Anti-cancer drug damages brain vessels Feb 11, 2008 | not rated yet | 0
- Clinical trial evaluating brain cancer vaccine is underway Oct 19, 2007 | not rated yet | 0
- Drug combination shrinks breast cancer metastases in brain Dec 16, 2007 | not rated yet | 0
- Biomarker detects, regulates brain tumors Nov 16, 2006 | not rated yet | 0
- Motion perception revisited: High Phi effect challenges established motion perception assumptions Apr 23, 2013 | 3 / 5 (2) | 2
- Anything you can do I can do better: Neuromolecular foundations of the superiority illusion (Update) Apr 02, 2013 | 4.5 / 5 (11) | 5
- The visual system as economist: Neural resource allocation in visual adaptation Mar 30, 2013 | 5 / 5 (2) | 9
- Separate lives: Neuronal and organismal lifespans decoupled Mar 27, 2013 | 4.9 / 5 (8) | 0
- Sizing things up: The evolutionary neurobiology of scale invariance Feb 28, 2013 | 4.8 / 5 (10) | 14
How can there be villous adenoma in colon, if there are no villi there
11 hours ago As title suggest. Thanks :smile:
How can there be a term called "intestinal metaplasia" of stomach
May 21, 2013 Hello everyone, Ok Stomach's normal epithelium is simple columnar, now in intestinal type of adenocarcinoma of stomach it undergoes "intestinal...
Pressure-volume curve: Elastic Recoil Pressure don't make sense
May 18, 2013 From pressure-volume curve of the lung and chest wall (attached photo), I don't understand why would the elastic recoil pressure of the lung is...
If you became brain-dead, would you want them to pull the plug?
May 17, 2013 I'd want the rest of me to stay alive. Sure it's a lousy way to live but it beats being all-the-way dead. Maybe if I make it 20 years they'll...
MRI bill question
May 15, 2013 Dear PFers, The hospital gave us a $12k bill for one MRI (head with contrast). The people I talked to at the hospital tell me that they do not...
Ratio of Hydrogen of Oxygen in Dessicated Animal Protein
May 13, 2013 As an experiment, for the past few months I've been consuming at least one portion of Jell-O or unflavored Knox gelatin per day. I'm 64, in very...
- More from Physics Forums - Medical Sciences
More news stories
(HealthDay)—The American Cancer Society, which is celebrating on Wednesday a century of fighting a disease once viewed as a death sentence, is making a pledge to put itself out of business.
Cancer 47 minutes ago | not rated yet | 0
National Lung Screening Trial (NLST) investigators also conclude that the 20 percent reduction in lung cancer mortality with low-dose computed tomography (LDCT) versus chest X-ray (CXR) screening previously reported in the ...
Cancer 1 hour ago | not rated yet | 0
Researchers have developed a new drug delivery system that allows inhalation of chemotherapeutic drugs to help treat lung cancer, and in laboratory and animal tests it appears to reduce the systemic damage ...
Cancer 4 hours ago | not rated yet | 0 |
When turned on, the gene p53 turns off cancer. However, when existing drugs boost p53, only a few tumors die – the rest resist the challenge. A study published in the journal Cell Reports shows how: tumors that live even i ...
Cancer 4 hours ago | not rated yet | 0 |
Study leader, Professor John Mathews from the University of Melbourne said this small increase in cancer risk must be weighed against the undoubted benefits from CT scans in diagnosing and monitoring disease.
Cancer 8 hours ago | not rated yet | 0
(HealthDay)—Implementation of systematic monitoring for medication adherence will allow for identification of barriers to adherence and tailoring of interventions, according to a viewpoint piece published ...
47 minutes ago | not rated yet | 0
(AP)—A federal panel of medical experts says that an experimental insomnia drug from Merck & Co Inc. appears safe and effective, despite evidence from company trials that the pill can cause daytime sleepiness and difficulty ...
7 minutes ago | not rated yet | 0
(HealthDay)—Migraines and depression can each cause a great deal of suffering, but new research indicates the combination of the two may be linked to something else entirely—a smaller brain.
1 hour ago | 5 / 5 (1) | 0 |
Until now, little was scientifically known about the human potential to cultivate compassion—the emotional state of caring for people who are suffering in a way that motivates altruistic behavior.
2 hours ago | not rated yet | 1 |
As the world prepares for what may be the next pandemic strain of influenza virus, in the H7N9 bird flu, a new UC Irvine study reveals that the 2009 H1N1 swine flu pandemic was deadliest for people under the age of 65, while ...
1 hour ago | not rated yet | 0