1900s Fashion on Men and Women
Welcome to fashion timeline, girls. Today I will write about 1900s fashion and what changed from there to now. I think at the end of article, you will be surprised because so fewer things are changed till those days. You will read strange, some funny but influential. Those were the days and people were wearing the first pieces of modern dresses.
When we start to talk about 1900s fashion, first thing to say is Gibson Girl. Gibson girl is illustrator Charles Dana Gibson’s illustrations about ideal woman. Gibson girl illustrations were so effective on 1900s that it accepted as American Women’s ideal portrait on fashion and life. Gibson Girl affected 1900s women on all fashion categories. But Gibson girl is mostly remembering by Gibson hairstyle.
Stiff collars were the significance part of 1900s women dresses. Women started to wear stiff collars shirts from pupil age to older. It was a symbol with its sharp style for all women that trying to change their position against men in social life. Shirtwaists were the symbol of educated women. Especially women graduated from important schools were wearing shortwaist.
Women’s sportswear was mostly tailored dresses. There was no fashion as sport fashion but track suits were firstly seen in these years especially for girls.
Fashion was changing for women rapidly because Haute Couture fashion was rising. Tailors from France were releasing different luxury dresses that the world never seen before.
Men fashion was not changing rapidly like women fashion in 1900s. But there were some signs for a big potential. Athletic silhouette on man was the ideal that all dresses were tailoring. Business life were starting to rise and getting more and more professional. So sack coats were some frivolous. Then frock coat released by Italian tailors. It made a big impact at 1900s men fashion. Dress was creating the ideal man with curly moustaches and short hair. Then wearing frock coat became a must on meetings.
Men were going to hunt and it was very popular. Norfolk jacket was the main piece of hunting fashion. Knickerbockers were known as breeches and it was also popular to wear them under Norfolk jacket. In the daily life, Morning coats were popular. Mostly rich men were wearing the Morning coat and it was a symbol of being free and strong in life.
Hats were the main accessories of men. Top hats were popular but also men liked to wear bowler hats. Ankle boots were popular shoes but men were wearing oxford shoes on daily life.