Pictorial history of Einstein and other important physicist who lived during the same time period.
Site introduces the atomic nucleus which contains almost all of the mass in the universe and also has experiments for chemistry and physics classes.
Web based activities designed for the classroom.
American Rivers is a national non-profit conservation organization dedicated to protecting and restoring healthy natural rivers and the variety of life they sustain for people, fish, and wildlife." Visit this site to study rivers close to where you live!
Amusement park rides use physical laws to simulate danger. How does physics affect amusement park ride design? In this exhibit, you'll have a chance to find out by designing your own roller coaster. You can also experiment with bumper car collisions. Check the physics glossary to find terms used in this exhibit. Copyright Annenberg/CPB (Center for Public Broadcasting). Includes history of coasters, related links, info on carousels, concepts of free fall and pendulum, as well as safety factors.
Do you know about anatomy? Fifteen teachers present interactives activities about the skeleton, eye, skull, digestive system, respiratory system, and skin. In different playing-views, learning the human-body will be a pleasure for everyone. A work book is available to keep a written part.
Arctic Alive is a distance-learning environment for learners. Although the actual interaction with researchers has already taken place, teachers can use the backgroud materials on the arctic, earth systems, and climate with students.
This multimedia website deals with NASA careers and astrobiology research. The concept is to search for and design a habitable planet. Students enter training, are quizzed on their knowledge, and adjust the features of potentially habitable planets to see what makes a planet habitable and why. The recording of student observations ties this activity to the basics of the scientific process.
Site offers educational materials related to Astronomy, Weather, and Energy and Environment.
Site has information about how they were formed and detected. It is written in non-technical terms.
The Nine Planets is an overview of the history, mythology, and current scientific knowledge of each of the planets and moons in our solar system. Each page has text and images, some have sounds and movies, most provide references to additional related information.
Applet that shows the location of the planets in the night sky.
Download a free PDF printout of the sky for each month.
Zoom Astronomy is a comprehensive on-line site about space and astronomy. It is designed for people of all ages and levels of comprehension. It has an easy-to-use structure that allows readers to start at a basic level on each topic and then to progress to much more advanced information as desired.
This web page is designed to give everyone an idea of what our universe actually looks like. There are nine main maps on this web page, each one approximately ten times the scale of the previous one.
In this interactive activity try to build the carbon atom by combining up and down quarks and electrons.
Teachers and students may download Audacity software for FREE at this site. Audacity is a free program that allows students to create blogs so that teachers may incorporate them into their curriculum.
This site contains beautiful pictures of auroras and an explanation on how they occur.
Site includes subject-specific experiments and activities designed for students and teachers.
Awesome Library has organzied the web with 31,000 carefully reviewed resources,which include the top 5 percent in education.
BAM! is a current, credible, and applicable interactive content that students can use to investigate health and science topics for school. It also is a resource for teachers who would like to incorporate the health topics covered on the site in their classrooms.
Welcome to this special website about bats, designed for all children, and created with the hope you will like, respect, and help protect these endangered species. We want you to have fun learning all about this very unique and helpful animal.
This award-winning interactive program is part of the "Whole Frog" project. You can interactively dissect a (digitized) frog named Fluffy, make movies, and play the Virtual Frog Builder Game. The interactive Web pages are available in a number of languages.
Actionbioscience.org is a non-commercial, educational web site created and managed by BioScience Productions, Inc. to promote bioscience literacy.
A comprehensive, searchable animal database. Enter the scientific or common name to receive detailed classification information (e.g. phylum, etc.), often accompanied by an image.
This superb resource from The Wildscreen Trust will be 'the world's electronic archive of photographs, moving images and sounds of endangered species and habitats.' An interactive library of the world's rarest animals and plants.
A visually impressive exploration of the fossil evidence, anatomical and physical changes and cultural development of the human species. It is best experienced with a Flash 5 plug-in, at least 64MB of RAM and a fast connection.
Nova's online web site for the program on Electric Heart. This site includes a map of the human heart, facts on the heart, and interview with a heart surgeon.
Ready for a grand tour of DNA and more? Gene, Polly, Chloe and RayNA are waiting show you all around their cool world.
"Two of man's closest relatives in the animal kingdom will be on the edge of extinction within a decade, unless drastic conservation measures are put in place immediately."
A global study of wildlife migration free from Annenberg that will involve the students for months as they get involved in the on going project of following the Monarch Butterfly.
Information of Monarch butterfly including a film on a butterfly emerging from a chrylasis state.
Download free lesson plan and activity that can be reproduced for the structure of a flower.
The Bugscope project is an educational outreach program for K-12 classrooms. The project provides a resource to classrooms so that they may remotely operate a scanning electron microscope to image "bugs" at high magnification. The microscope is remotely controlled in real time from a classroom computer over the Internet using a web browser.
What stones do we use to build? Which stones weather best? Some of these questions can be answered at this website, which examines a test wall of building materials constructed in 1948. A great feature allows students to look at stones from different states or countries (many of the stone samples were collected in 1880) and examine the differences between the materials stored inside and those built into the wall and exposed to the elements.
Visit CCC's Web site to learn about endangered sea turtles. View research notes from the field, join their mailing list, see amazing photos of sea turtles, and more!
The Cassiopeia Project is a effort to make science education videos available for FREE to anyone who wants them. Teachers and students are particularly welcome to use these materials.
Site includes video clip on mitosis with real picture and animation, cell gallery with pictures and description, and much more.
This site is a collection of study cards for AP and General Chemistry classes.
A comprehensive list of indicators for acids and bases.
List of constants used in Chemistry.
Choose any element from the periodic table and learn about its isotopes. Also provided is a animated glossary of nuclear terms.
Chickscope is a project to study chicken embryo development using controlled magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) instrument. Students may increase understanding of the process of gathering scientific data.
Register your class for an online field trip to Colonial Williamsburg! There are seven individual electronic field trips that you may register for or one rate for all field trips. Individual trips for the 2007 - 2008 school year at $120. The set of seven trips is $500. Each field trip incorporates many activities beyond the set date of the electronic field trip. A segment titled Web Adventures is available to your class throughout the year with the paid field trip. It provides web-based interactive activities and videos to extend learning. A special section titled, "In Their Own Words," uses primary sources to teach students more about the period. Each trip has opportunities for students to use email, online voting and a forum to actively participate in the experience. Students may have their individual questions regarding colonial times answered by history experts by posting or emailing questions. Each field trip is aligned to National Standards of Learning in History and a bibiliography are included. A Teacher's Guide, additional internet links, TV broadcast and an online video preview to show prior to the field trip are also included. Field trip dates are scheduled from October through April. The 2007 - 2008 schedule is available at http://www.history.org/History/teaching/eft.cfm. This year's lessons include: Jamestown Unearthed, Emissaries of Peace, Founders or Traitors?, For Ready Money, No Master Over Me, Treasure Keepers, The Industrious Tradesmen. For a small price, your students can truly experience Colonial Williamsburg! Technical support is provided throughout the school year to make your experience a success. Purchase orders are accepted.
See of picture of the Columbia crew and discription on some of their experiments they conducted on their ill fated mission.
Constructor animates and edits two-dimensional models made out of masses and springs. The springs can be controlled by a wave to make pulsing muscles, and you can construct models that bounce, roll, walk, etc.
Creeping more slowly than a human fingernail grows, Earth's massive continents are nonetheless on the move.
The Howard Hughes Medical Institute invites curious kids to explore biology...on screen, off screen, and in between. Students find answers to questions such as what is the connection between a butterfly and a caterpillar as well as why we eat roots and stems.
DesertUSA.com contains images, stories, movie and audio clips, virtual reality tours and hard data about, virtually any desert-related topic: plants, animals, geology, cultural and natural history, recreation, parks, cities, travel and people.
Site has worksheet generator, games, quizzes and much more.
A huge, beautiful undertaking, the DNA Interactive site is divided into sections: Timeline; Code (what is it); Manipulation (how do you work with it); Genome (analyzing, mapping, sequencing); Applications (how DNA applies to healthcare and our past); and Chronicle (using knowledge responsibly, can we do it?). Flash required.
The activity in this section places you within the cell, involving you with the processes of DNA replication and protein synthesis.
Dragonfly links children and scientists in an open community of investigation. Our principle objectives are to involve children in the creative process of science, to help children see how science relates to their lives, to engage minority and at-risk children in science, and to help teachers and parents guide active, experiential learning more confidently.
Few subjects in the Earth sciences are as fascinating to the public as dinosaurs. The study of dinosaurs stretches our imaginations, gives us new perspectives on time and space, and invites us to discover worlds very different from our modern Earth.
This activity lets you manipulate tectonic plates. Pull the plates apart and push them together and watch what happens to the Earth.
This booklet gives a brief introduction to the concept of plate tectonics and complements the visual and written information in This Dynamic Planet.
Earthmaps is focused on combining earth science data inventories from private sources.
The mission of the Earthwatch Institute is to promote sustainable conservation of our natural resources and cultural heritage by creating partnerships between scientists, educators and the general public.
Explore and identify over 50 different Simple Machines, from the super simple to the hideously hard! This site also includes virtual surgeries and an interactive weather activity.
A complete resource for all subject areas. Includes lesson plans, worksheets, vocabulary, and much more!
Drill games are for students grades K-12 including Math, Social Studies, Vocabulary and Science. Topics for the drills include U.S. President, U.S. and World Geography, Periodic tables, and Math tables. Good site for high school review. Site requires membership but has several free drills.
This site has selected free information available for students, teachers, and parents. (It has become a subscription site.) Students can learn all about dinos, Surf the Web with LITTLE EXPLORERS which is a picture dictionary with links to over 1000 educational activities, read a map and answer questions about it, and color US state flags and answer questions about them. Fun, educational pages for preschoolers. Why oceans are salty and blue? What causes waves and tides? Do ocean crafts and print out ocean animal pages. Read amazing facts about whales and dolphins. Important inventors and inventions of all time as well as explorers who mapped the world and went into space.
Official energy statistics from the U.S. government.
This site is loaded with a variety of ideas for energy education including science projects, puzzles, super scientists, and education resources.
Eric Weisstein's World of Science contains budding encyclopedias of astronomy, scientific biography, chemistry, and physics.
Site offers materials for learning about particle physics.
This is an interactive website that uses humor and storytelling to help kids ages 8-13 learn about places and cultures around the world through a wide range of subjects, including geography, math, science, music and history.
Field Trip Earth is the global resource for teachers, students, and proponents of wildlife conservation.
Astronomy materials on the planets, galaxy, and more.
Click on Wright Brothers Game to learn about the Wright brothers and the history of flight.
Forensic Entomology is the knowledge of insects used to aid legal Investigations. The creators of this website are consultants in forensic entomology, but also explain how insects at a crime scene can offer clues. Learn about the life cycle of insects, protocol (how to observe the scene and collect specimens), the equipment you need to work with, and how to ship specimens.
“Building a frog can be harder than it looks.” This activity was suggested as a great follow up to Froguts (a Blue Web’n pick from April of 2002). Students can read the guide and take the hints that appear after a few wrong moves.
Under the button for Fusion Basics find information from the basics on fusion energy to how a fusion reactor works.
"In this exhibit, you can find out how to improve next year's environmental record. You'll learn how waste is handled now and how some communities are doing it better. In the activities, you can test your knowledge about hazardous waste we generate in our homes and try to shrink a landfill."
Web site with comprehensive coverage of general chemistry topics.
Annimation explaning the formation of different types of rocks.
If you look deeply into the night sky, you'll see Mars glowing brightly. The red planet is making its closest pass to the Earth in 60,000 years. For millions of years, the planet has rocked and rolled with six different geological processes, all of which are examined on this site.
At this Web site, you can explore scientific data relating to the atmosphere, the oceans, the areas covered by ice and snow, and the living organisms in all these domains.
Learn how to do the basics so you are comfortable teaching with Google Earth. Suitable for Lectures, Presentations, whole class discussions, etc. Also includes mini-lessons - Lesson starters for looking at various topics.
Graphics Gallery is a series of labeled diagrams with explanations representing the important processes of biotechnology. Each diagram is followed by a summary of information, providing a context for the process illustrated.
The High School Hub is a noncommercial portal to excellent free online academic resources for high school students. It features learning activities, a daily news quiz, a reference collection, SAT practice, college information, and subject guides for English, mathematics, science, social studies, world languages, arts, health, and technology.
HippoCampus offers multimedia lessons and course materials to help you with your instruction, homework, and studies. You can browse multimedia lessons or complete courses, and find help with the topics covered in popular textbooks.
Students can explore the science behind the way a baseball moves when it is hit using the interavtive provided courtesy of the University of Wisconsin Board of Regents. Students can explore air resistance by manipulating altitude, speed and angle as they try to discover the best angle for successful batters?
Receive the latest pictures from space including pictures of a dying star and much more. There is also an educational section with interactive activities.
Take a deep breath and rise above the clouds to enjoy some of the most elusive snapshots ever captured. Veiled in mist and riddled with glaciers and pitfalls, Everest has captivated throngs of climbers for over half a century.
This site has a printable collection of twenty integrated lessons with science and math activities that use live insects. These lessons are aligned with National Science Education Standards
Resources for physics and math from the University of Winnipeg. Some notes include videos (often preceded by advertising).
This site contains Interactive Plasma Physics Topics, ranging from electricity, magnetism, energy, and fusion. Please visit the "Virtual Tokamak" and our "Virtual Magnetic Stability Module" to learn about Plasma and Fusion Containment.
Resource materials in chemistry, earth science, biology, anatomy, botany, physics and space science.
A library of resources for teaching and learning. Contains a reference center, reading room, a subject collection as well as other resources.
A game site that stresses multiplication, division, subtraction, and addition with games such as Concentration, Hidden Pictures, and Bingo to teach math concepts.
Kidport is an Internet-based educational service designed to help K-8 students excel in school. It provides a unique, multi-step program to create empowered learners, not simply good students.
Defenders of Wildlife produce this page particularly for children with games to identify animal sounds, coloring pages, information on endangered species and much more.
Choose from online activities and printable worksheets for math.
Great materials across the curriculum at all grade levels.
A database of lesson plans for educators.
A virtual zoo filled with exotic specimens. Instead of lions, elephants, and zebras, this zoo is stocked with strange creatures from the microscopic worlds around, inside of, and on us. The zoo includes pictures of microbes; data about their size, scientific classification, feeding habitats, and more; and descriptions of how the microbes fit into and interact with their environment and other microorganisms.
Gemstones are listed by class with beautiful pictures and great descriptions of how they were formed.
Instructions on how to build one of the basic machines to explain Newtonian physics.
Instructions given on how to build a paper model of a spacecraft.
Hot or Cold, Land or Water...Differences in color tell you a lot about the data NASA is collecting about the Earth. Try your hand at coloring these ESE pictures.
The object of the activity is to get Droplet, the water molecule, through the forest and into the sea.
Engineering Design Challenges Program connects students in their classrooms with the challenges faced by NASA engineers as they design the next generation of aerospace vehicles.
Interactive activities can be found under Resouces for Educators and Multimedia Resources.
Find out when the space shuttle and space station will be flying over your city and how you can spot them in the night sky.
The Imagine Mars Project is a national arts, sciences and technology education initiative that has harnessed America's fascination with space and led young people to work together with educators and civic leaders to design a Mars community for 100 people.
Learn about food, clothes and activities conducted in space.
Photos and mission posters available that can be printed on your personal printer or purchased from NASA.
Find out the date that interesting things happened that pretained to space and science.
This interactive storybook explains aeronautics and rotorcraft research to young children. The story can be heard in English, Chinese, and soon in Spanish.
Learn about recent Shuttle missions, crew, and activities. There are also archives of past missions.
What do a paper clip, a driver’s license, and a calculating machine have in common? They are all part of a technology timeline scavenger hunt located at NASA’s Wright Flyer Online Website.
National Gardening Association was established in 1972, its founders had two goals: helping gardeners and helping people through gardening. Today the nonprofit NGA is focused primarily on children and the ways that gardening enhances education and helps build environmentally responsible adults. Online access to how-to projects, Q&A library, gardening articles, regional reports…etc.
This website contains a lot of information about nature and science.
View lessons and activities by selecting a grade range and topic. Areas covered include Art, Health and Fitness, Math, Reading and Language Arts, Science and Technology, Social Studies, Early Childhood, Library Media and Technology Coordinators.
It's in our clothes, CDs, painkillers, and plastic. Oil is everywhere -- fueling modern life. Follow the BTC pipeline's winding geographic and political route from the Caspian through to the global market. Then dig into oil's dark past to uncover how fossil fuels first formed, when we learned to tap it, and how crude became a commodity.
Gives information on properties, and arrangement into groups and families for the elements.
Power point and animations for teachers to use in their classroom. All content areas included.
This website houses a great collection of ready made power points and interactive activities for many subject matters.
With different types of resources available, this website from the American Physical Society covers a variety of needs of physics teachers at all levels. For high school and college students, the features from Physics in Action and People in Physics let students see how physics applies to the "real world."
Is physics difficult for you to visualize? Do you need to see it to understand it? Then visit the Multimedia Physics Studio.
Interactive activities for physics in the study of waves from electromagnetic to quantum.
Interactive site that explains how a rainbow is formed and allows you to input
Why are things colored? Wonderful explanation of light and how it acts to produce colors.
Interactive program that allows you to change the eccentricity of the circle to show how the speed of the object changes as it goes around in orbit
Interactive program dealing with the operation of a nuclear power plant where you control the valves for operating the plant.
Lesson plan is poised as a problem that students must solve using what they have learned in physics class recently.
Physics Lessons, Tutorials, and Help by Science Joy Wagon contains lessons on high school physics. There are animations included for most of the lessons.
In this interactive activity change the frequency and watch the signal change as it is transmitted by an AM radio signal.
An environmental education program designed for teachers and other educators, parents, and community leaders working with youth from preschool through grade 12.
Project 2061 is the long-term initiative of the American Association for the Advancement of Science working to reform K-12 science, mathematics, and technology education nationwide.
The website states its purpose is to "provide educators and students access to the highest quality practices and resources in reading and language arts instruction."
Tutorial site to help high school students pass the New York State Regents Exam. It contain help in math, physics, chemistry, and more.
Satellites come in many shapes and sizes and have many uses. On this site you can even build three different types of satellites interactively.
Test your knowledge of the Table of Elements on-line with our Element Flash Card, Element Hangman, Element Matching, Element Concentration and Element Math games! A printable Periodic Table of Elements is also available! An interesting version of Millionaire activity is available to test general math and science knowledge. More activities will be added as they are completed.
"Science Knows No Boundaries" web site highlights this international nature of science—and the importance of math and science education.
Explore, Discover, Learn: Art and culture, history and travel, science and nature. Explore all the Smithsonian has to offer at Smithsonian Students. From interactive "Idealabs" to homework help to strange but true facts, you'll find it here!
Using music to promote learning. Ideas and resources for using music to teach content across the curriculum to students of all ages.
This site is an interactive habitate for the planet Mars. The goal of this site is to inspire learning about space science and technology through a web-based Mars simulator.
This site takes you on a virtual space-trip to the depths of the Universe. All of SpaceWander's pictures are real NASA images! The tour takes about 10 minutes. You can sit back and enjoy it or you can press buttons on the spaceship to see additional in-context information.
"You are about to take a virtual space-trip to the depths of the Universe! All of SpaceWander's space pictures are real NASA images! Our award-winning multimedia space tour takes about 12 minutes. You can sit back and enjoy it or you can press buttons on the spaceship to see additional in-context information."
Site has the science of sports such as baseball, cycling, skateboard, and hockey.
Great site for teachers were they can specifiy grade level and subject area to download and print free worksheets and activity sheets.
"TeachersFirst is a rich collection of lessons, units, and web resources designed to save teachers time by delivering just what they need in a practical, user-friendly, and ad-free format. We offer our own professional and classroom-ready content along with thousands of reviewed web resources, including practical ideas for classroom use and safe classroom use of Web 2.0. Busy teachers, parents, and students can find resources using our subject/grade level search, keyword search, or extensive menus."
The Atoms Family is a Science Learning Network resource based on The Atoms Family exhibit is on display at The Miami Museum of Science. The site contains interactive educational activities relating to different forms of energy.
This site contains videos about each element on the periodic chart. Produced by The University of Nottingham.
The Physics Classroom Tutorial is an online physics tutorial written for high school physics students.
Satellites come in many shapes and sizes and have many uses. On this site you can even build three different types of satellites interactively.
Usenet newsgroup devoted to the discussion and debate of biological and physical origins. Most discussions in the newsgroup center on the creation/evolution controversy, but other topics of discussion include the origin of life, geology, biology, catastrophism, cosmology and theology.
An interactive program designed to examine the head, thorax, abdomen, pelvis, and thigh.
Scroll down and click on the map of Geologic Information by Region to get a much wider source of information on geology for the United States.
Find out the latest weather forcast and see what radar is picking up for your area on this great site sponsored by University of Kentucky, Ag Dept.
A great website that has many interactive games, videos, and quizzes for high school science students. Also contains an anatomy lab with videos.