Influential Women of Washington
When the 19th Amendment was ratified, women were finally given the right to vote, and over the years many courageous women have stepped onto the national political stage as well. In 1916, Jeannette Rankin became the first woman elected to Congress and almost a century later Sonia Sotomayor became the first Latina woman to serve on the Supreme Court. And within the last two decades, the esteemable Hillary Clinton has served as First Lady, a New York senator and Secretary of State. These women, and many more, are setting the stage for the future of female leaders in Washington.
Visit Biography.com's Women's History group to explore more biographies, photos and videos of some the world's most fascinating women."
Featured Influential Women of Washington
Learn more about some of the most influential leaders in Washington, including Nancy Pelosi, Condoleezza Rice and Eleanor Roosevelt.
Women's Rights Activist, U.S. First Lady, Government Official / 1947 -
When Hillary Clinton was elected to the U.S. Senate in 2001, she became the only American first lady to hold national office. She became the 67th U.S. secretary of state in 2009, serving until 2013.
U.S. Representative / 1956 -
Michele Bachmann is a congresswoman best known for her conservative Tea Party politics, and her candidacy for the 2012 Republican presidential nomination.
Government Official / 1954 -
Condoleezza Rice is the first black woman to serve as the United States' national security adviser, as well as the first black woman to serve as U.S. Secretary of State (2005-09).
Diplomat, U.S. First Lady / 1884 - 1962
The wife of President Franklin D. Roosevelt, Eleanor Roosevelt changed the role of the first lady through her active participation in American politics.
Got something to say?blog comments powered by Disqus
Explore Biography.com's collection of exceptional women from past and present arranged by topic, such as:
- Notable Female Leaders
- Daring Female Adventurers
- Women's Rights Activists
- Women Who Rock
- Female Athletes
- Female Scientists