|Southern Ethiopia - Ethnographic Route|
The southern part of Ethiopia is an ideal place for a visitor who wants to experience natural attractions, landscapes, archeological sites and massive cultural diversity of more than 56 nations and nationalities. This region is rich in lakes with abundant bird life, ancient churches and mosques, natural spring waters, underground caves, as well as national parks and sanctuaries.
Melkakuntere is a famous place where pre-historic tools used by Homo sapiens have been discovered. Adadi Maryam Church is the only monolithic rock hewn church in the area and Tiya is the place that contains 40 stelaes with the highest 2 meters tall.
This area is also rich of various lakes and natural resources worth visiting. Lake Ziway is the largest of the northern group of rift valley lakes and is best known for bird life, and also home to Fishery Center, making it an interesting destination for those who love fishing. There are also five volcanic islands and three monasteries on the lake.
Langano, Abyata & Shalla Lakes are also found in this area. Lake Langano is a recreational lake with clean and bilharzias free water. Apart from its fauna and flora, Lake Abyata is also source of food for birds found around Lake Shalla. Lake Shalla is, however, a fine site for various species of birds.
Lake Abaya is the largest, the longest and the most remarkable lake from the Rift Valley chain, lying side by side with Lake Chammo.
Wondo Genet is enriched with hot spring water, green dense forest, birds, vegetables and fruits. Senkele Wild Life Sanctuary is also where the indigenous wild animals and bird life are found.
Yabello Wildlife Sanctuary, covering 2,500 km2 is also the best place to see bird and endemic wild life like Swayne’s Hartebeest, Zebra, Gazelle and other predators.
The Crocodiles Market is one of the fascinating places in the Southern Ethiopia that displays big crocodiles. Nechisar National Park reflects the diversity of birds and wild animals.
Lower Omo Valley, on the way to Kenya, 1000 km from Addis Ababa, is where not only wild life but the most fascinating, colorful and the last truly tribal people of the African continent including the Mursi and the Hammer are found.
Cultures like Bull Back Jumping, Mursi Men Stick Fight, Women with Lip Plate and Evangadi (Hammer people night dance) are some of the attractions in this area.
Bale Mountain National Park is home for wild life such as Nyala, Ethiopian Wolf and birds like malachite and sunbirds.
The major site for Muslim pilgrimage, Sophomore Cave, the longest underground cave in the world, is also found in this region.
Tour Itinerary to the Ethnographic South Route