Most Downloaded Journal of Hydrology Articles
5 August 2011
Timothy R. Green | Makoto Taniguchi | Henk Kooi | Jason J. Gurdak | Diana M. Allen | Kevin M. Hiscock | Holger Treidel | Alice Aureli
Summary: Global change encompasses changes in the characteristics of inter-related climate variables in space and time, and derived changes in terrestrial processes, including human activities that affect the environment. As such, projected global change includes groundwater systems. Here, groundwater is defined as all subsurface water including soil water, deeper vadose zone water, and unconfined and confined aquifer waters. Potential effects of climate change combined with land and water management on surface waters have been studied in some detail. Equivalent studies of groundwater systems have lagged behind these advances, but research and broader interest in projected climate effects on groundwater have been accelerating in recent years. In this paper, we provide an overview and synthesis of the key aspects of subsurface hydrology, including water quantity and quality, related to global change.Adaptation to global change must include prudent management of groundwater as a renewable, but slow-feedback resource in most cases. Groundwater storage is already over-tapped in many regions, yet available subsurface storage may be a key to meeting the combined demands of agriculture, industry, municipal and domestic water supply, and ecosystems during times of shortage. The future intensity and frequency of dry periods combined with warming trends need to be addressed in the context of groundwater resources, even though projections in space and time are fraught with uncertainty. Finally, potential impacts of groundwater on the global climate system are largely unknown. Research to improve our understanding of the joint behaviors of climate and groundwater is needed, and spin-off benefits on each discipline are likely.
14 September 2010
Ashok K. Mishra | Vijay P. Singh
Summary: Owing to the rise in water demand and looming climate change, recent years have witnessed much focus on global drought scenarios. As a natural hazard, drought is best characterized by multiple climatological and hydrological parameters. An understanding of the relationships between these two sets of parameters is necessary to develop measures for mitigating the impacts of droughts. Beginning with a discussion of drought definitions, this paper attempts to provide a review of fundamental concepts of drought, classification of droughts, drought indices, historical droughts using paleoclimatic studies, and the relation between droughts and large scale climate indices. Conclusions are drawn where gaps exist and more research needs to be focussed.
12 April 2013
Nigel W. Arnell | Simon N. Gosling
Summary: This paper presents an assessment of the impacts of climate change on a series of indicators of hydrological regimes across the global domain, using a global hydrological model run with climate scenarios constructed using pattern-scaling from 21 CMIP3 (Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 3) climate models. Changes are compared with natural variability, with a significant change being defined as greater than the standard deviation of the hydrological indicator in the absence of climate change. Under an SRES (Special Report on Emissions Scenarios) A1b emissions scenario, substantial proportions of the land surface (excluding Greenland and Antarctica) would experience significant changes in hydrological behaviour by 2050; under one climate model scenario (Hadley Centre HadCM3), average annual runoff increases significantly over 47% of the land surface and decreases over 36%; only 17% therefore sees no significant change. There is considerable variability between regions, depending largely on projected changes in precipitation. Uncertainty in projected river flow regimes is dominated by variation in the spatial patterns of climate change between climate models (hydrological model uncertainty is not included). There is, however, a strong degree of consistency in the overall magnitude and direction of change. More than two-thirds of climate models project a significant increase in average annual runoff across almost a quarter of the land surface, and a significant decrease over 14%, with considerably higher degrees of consistency in some regions. Most climate models project increases in runoff in Canada and high-latitude eastern Europe and Siberia, and decreases in runoff in central Europe, around the Mediterranean, the Mashriq, central America and Brasil. There is some evidence that project change in runoff at the regional scale is not linear with change in global average temperature change. The effects of uncertainty in the rate of future emissions is relatively small.
1 October 2002
Erich J. Plate
Abstract: Risk management has been established as a well defined procedure for handling risks due to natural, environmental or man made hazards, of which floods are representative. Risk management has been discussed in many previous papers giving different meanings to the term—a result of the fact that risk management actually takes place on three different levels of actions: the operational level, which is associated with operating an existing system, a project planning level, which is used when a new, or a revision of an existing project is planned, and a project design level, which is embedded into the second level and describes the process of reaching an optimal solution for the project. The first two levels will be briefly described in the paper. It will be emphasized that the transition from the first to the second level is a dynamic process. As the value system of a nation changes, and as the natural boundary conditions are modified by human actions or global changes, an existing system will be found not meeting the demands of the present society, and actions on the second level are initiated. The decisions for change depend on the changes in options available for handling a flood situation, as well as on the changes in risk perception and attitudes towards risk. On the third level, the actual cost of a design are evaluated and compared with the benefits obtained from the planned project. In particular, on this level the residual risk is considered, i.e. the risk which remains even after a project is completed and fully operational.
5. Impacts of land use change on watershed streamflow and sediment yield: An assessment using hydrologic modelling and partial least squares regression
25 March 2013
B. Yan | N.F. Fang | P.C. Zhang | Z.H. Shi
Summary: Understanding how changes in individual land use types influence the dynamics of streamflow and sediment yield would greatly improve the predictability of the hydrological consequences of land use changes and could thus help stakeholders to make better decisions. Multivariate statistics are commonly used to compare individual land use types to control the dynamics of streamflow or sediment yields. However, one issue with the use of conventional statistical methods to address relationships between land use types and streamflow or sediment yield is multicollinearity. In this study, an integrated approach involving hydrological modelling and partial least squares regression (PLSR) was used to quantify the contributions of changes in individual land use types to changes in streamflow and sediment yield. In a case study, hydrological modelling was conducted using land use maps from four time periods (1978, 1987, 1999, and 2007) for the Upper Du watershed (8973km2) in China using the Soil and Water Assessment Tool (SWAT). Changes in streamflow and sediment yield across the two simulations conducted using the land use maps from 2007 to 1978 were found to be related to land use changes according to a PLSR, which was used to quantify the effect of this influence at the sub-basin scale. The major land use changes that affected streamflow in the studied catchment areas were related to changes in the farmland, forest and urban areas between 1978 and 2007; the corresponding regression coefficients were 0.232, −0.147 and 1.256, respectively, and the Variable Influence on Projection (VIP) was greater than 1. The dominant first-order factors affecting the changes in sediment yield in our study were: farmland (the VIP and regression coefficient were 1.762 and 14.343, respectively) and forest (the VIP and regression coefficient were 1.517 and −7.746, respectively). The PLSR methodology presented in this paper is beneficial and novel, as it partially eliminates the co-dependency of the variables and facilitates a more unbiased view of the contribution of the changes in individual land use types to changes in streamflow and sediment yield. This practicable and simple approach could be applied to a variety of other watersheds for which time-sequenced digital land use maps are available.
6. Assessment of uncertainty in river flow projections for the Mekong River using multiple GCMs and hydrological models
12 April 2013
J.R. Thompson | A.J. Green | D.G. Kingston | S.N. Gosling
Summary: Hydrological model-related uncertainty is often ignored within climate change hydrological impact assessments. A MIKE SHE model is developed for the Mekong using the same data as an earlier semi-distributed, conceptual model (SLURP). The model is calibrated and validated using discharge at 12 gauging stations. Two sets of climate change scenarios are investigated. The first is based on a 2°C increase in global mean temperature (the hypothesised threshold of ‘dangerous’ climate change), as simulated by seven GCMs. There are considerable differences in scenario discharge between GCMs, ranging from catchment-wide increases in mean discharge (up to 12.7%; CCCMA CGCM31, NCAR CCSM30), decreases (up to 21.6% in the upper catchments; CSIRO Mk30, IPSL CM4), and spatially varying responses (UKMO HadCM3 and HadGEM1, MPI ECHAM5). Inter-GCM differences are largely driven by differences in precipitation. The second scenario set (HadCM3, increases in global mean temperature of 1–6°C) shows consistently greater discharge (maximum: 28.7%) in the upper catchment as global temperature increases, primarily due to increasing precipitation. Further downstream, discharge is strongly influenced by increasing PET, which outweighs impacts of elevated upstream precipitation and causes consistent discharge reductions for higher temperatures (maximum: −5.3% for the main Mekong). MIKE SHE results for all scenarios are compared with those from the SLURP catchment model and the Mac-PDM.09 global hydrological model. Although hydrological model-related uncertainty is evident, its magnitude is smaller than that associated with choice of GCM. In most cases, the three hydrological models simulate the same direction of change in mean discharge. Mac-PDM.09 simulates the largest discharge increases when they occur, which is responsible for some differences in direction of change at downstream gauging stations for some scenarios, especially HadCM3. Inter-hydrological model differences are likely attributed to alternative model structures, process representations and PET methods (Linacre for MIKE SHE and SLURP, Penman–Monteith for Mac-PDM.09).
14 February 2013
Monireh Faramarzi | Karim C. Abbaspour | Saeid Ashraf Vaghefi | Mohammad Reza Farzaneh | Alexander J.B. Zehnder | Raghavan Srinivasan | Hong Yang
Summary: This study analyzes the impact of climate change on freshwater availability in Africa at the subbasin level for the period of 2020–2040. Future climate projections from five global circulation models (GCMs) under the four IPCC emission scenarios were fed into an existing SWAT hydrological model to project the impact on different components of water resources across the African continent. The GCMs have been downscaled based on observed data of Climate Research Unit to represent local climate conditions at 0.5° grid spatial resolution. The results show that for Africa as a whole, the mean total quantity of water resources is likely to increase. For individual subbasins and countries, variations are substantial. Although uncertainties are high in the simulated results, we found that in many regions/countries, most of the climate scenarios projected the same direction of changes in water resources, suggesting a relatively high confidence in the projections. The assessment of the number of dry days and the frequency of their occurrences suggests an increase in the drought events and their duration in the future. Overall, the dry regions have higher uncertainties than the wet regions in the projected impacts on water resources. This poses additional challenge to the agriculture in dry regions where water shortage is already severe while irrigation is expected to become more important to stabilize and increase food production.
8. Using the Soil and Water Assessment Tool (SWAT) to assess land use impact on water resources in an East African watershed
12 April 2013
Tracy J. Baker | Scott N. Miller
Summary: Land cover and land use changes in Kenya’s Rift Valley have altered the hydrologic response of the River Njoro watershed by changing the partitioning of excess rainfall into surface discharge and groundwater recharge. The watershed contributes a significant amount of water to Lake Nakuru National Park, an internationally recognized Ramsar site, as well as groundwater supplies for local communities and the city of Nakuru. Three land use maps representing a 17-year period when the region underwent significant transitions served as inputs for hydrologic modeling using the Automated Geospatial Watershed Assessment (AGWA) tool, a GIS-based hydrologic modeling system. AGWA was used to parameterize the Soil and Water Assessment Tool (SWAT), a hydrologic model suitable for assessing the relative impact of land cover change on hydrologic response. The SWAT model was calibrated using observation data taken during the 1990s with high annual concordance. Simulation results showed that land use changes have resulted in corresponding increases in surface runoff and decreases in groundwater recharge. Hydrologic changes were highly variable both spatially and temporally, and the uppermost reaches of the forested highlands were most significantly affected. These changes have negative implications for the ecological health of the river system as well as Lake Nakuru and local communities.
6 June 2011
Ashok K. Mishra | Vijay P. Singh
Summary: In recent years droughts have been occurring frequently, and their impacts are being aggravated by the rise in water demand and the variability in hydro-meteorological variables due to climate change. As a result, drought hydrology has been receiving much attention. A variety of concepts have been applied to modeling droughts, ranging from simplistic approaches to more complex models. It is important to understand different modeling approaches as well as their advantages and limitations. This paper, supplementing the previous paper (Mishra and Singh, 2010) where different concepts of droughts were highlighted, reviews different methodologies used for drought modeling, which include drought forecasting, probability based modeling, spatio-temporal analysis, use of Global Climate Models (GCMs) for drought scenarios, land data assimilation systems for drought modeling, and drought planning. It is found that there have been significant improvements in modeling droughts over the past three decades. Hybrid models, incorporating large scale climate indices, seem to be promising for long lead-time drought forecasting. Further research is needed to understand the spatio-temporal complexity of droughts under climate change due to changes in spatio-temporal variability of precipitation. Applications of copula based models for multivariate drought characterization seem to be promising for better drought characterization. Research on decision support systems should be advanced for issuing warnings, assessing risk, and taking precautionary measures, and the effective ways for the flow of information from decision makers to users need to be developed. Finally, some remarks are made regarding the future outlook for drought research.
10. Impacts of large dams on downstream fluvial sedimentation: An example of the Three Gorges Dam (TGD) on the Changjiang (Yangtze River)
14 February 2013
Zhijun Dai | James T. Liu
Summary: Under the influence of climate and human activities, fluvial systems have natural ability to make adjustments so that the river hydrology, sediment movement, and channel morphology are in dynamic equilibrium. Taking the Changjiang (Yangtze River) for example. In the early stages after the Three Gorges Dam (TGD) began operational ten years ago, the suspended sediment content (SSC) and fluxes in the middle and lower reaches of the river decreased noticeably. At present, they appear to be in a stable state on the decadal scale. Although the river runoff has not shown any trends, the water level in the river decreased appreciably in time. In the meantime, channel down cutting along the thalweg almost existed throughout the river course. The riverbed has turned from depositional before the dam construction to erosional afterwards. In other words, the riverbed had turned from being sediment sinks to sediment sources. In the main channel of the Changjiang between Yichang and Nanjing, a distance of 1300km, the riverbed sedimentation mode displays strong, intermediate, and weak erosion depending on the closeness to the TGD.
13 March 2013
Alice E. Brown | Andrew W. Western | Thomas A. McMahon | Lu Zhang
Summary: The effect of forest cover changes on mean streamflow is well understood and worldwide data have shown that increasing forest cover decreases the total volume of flow at the catchment scale. However, due to the different methods used to assess the impact of forest cover at the annual and sub-annual timescale general conclusions can be difficult to draw. In this paper, consistent methods of analysing paired catchment data are used to assess the impact of forest cover change in afforestation and deforestation experiments on annual streamflow and flow duration curves (FDCs). The results indicate that in catchments undergoing a permanent change in forest cover it takes between 8 and 25years for a catchment to reach a new equilibrium. Analysis of FDCs showed that three types of responses could be observed. These are: catchments with changes in the number of zero flow days (response group 1), catchments with proportionally larger changes in low flows compared to high flow (response group 2), and catchment with a uniform changes in all flows (response group 3).
19 December 2012
Riasat Ali | Don McFarlane | Sunil Varma | Warrick Dawes | Irina Emelyanova | Geoff Hodgson | Steve Charles
Summary: About three – quarters of all water used in the south-western Australia is from groundwater. A decline in rainfall since about 1975 and increased abstraction has resulted in some groundwater levels declining and groundwater dependent ecosystems decreasing in health and extent. Levels are rising under some areas used for dryland (rainfed) agriculture because crops and pastures are shallow rooted. Almost all global climate models (GCMs) project a drier and hotter climate for the region by 2030. In this project, five climate scenarios were applied to groundwater models to estimate groundwater levels in the region in 2030. The climate scenarios were (i) a continuation of the historical climate of 1975–2007; (ii) a continuation of the more recent climate of 1997–2007 until 2030; and (iii–v) three climate scenarios derived by applying the GCM projected climate under three global warming scenarios of 0.7, 1.0 and 1.3°C by 2030. A sixth scenario considered increasing abstraction levels to maximum allowed levels under a median future climate (1.0°C warming).Groundwater levels were found to be much less affected than surface water resources by a future drier climate as well as for a continuation of the climate experienced since 1975. For a fixed rainfall, recharge was highest where soils were sandy, there was little or no perennial vegetation and the watertable was neither very shallow nor very deep. A feature of the project area is that about half has a watertable within 10m of the soil surface, and about a quarter within 3m. Levels were not as affected by a decline in rainfall when reduced groundwater drainage and evapotranspiration losses offset the reduced rainfall amounts. However once a threshold groundwater level is exceeded, the rainfall fails to refill the available seasonal storage and groundwater levels decline. Projected watertables declined in all areas under a drier climate where perennial vegetation was present and able to intercept recharge or use groundwater directly. In areas under dryland agriculture, projected groundwater levels continue to rise even under a drier future climate. The climate change effects on confined groundwater systems are expected to be modest. This is due to the longer times required for the changed recharge and water level conditions in the overlying aquifers to propagate to the confined aquifers. All water balance components are projected to be impacted by climate change to a greater or lesser extent. This has consequences for the amount of extractable water from both the unconfined and confined aquifers, changes the risk of sea-water intrusion, and has implications for the groundwater dependent ecosystems.
13 March 2013
Yue-Ping Xu | Xujie Zhang | Qihua Ran | Ye Tian
Summary: The hydrological cycle has been substantially influenced by climate change and human activities. It is therefore of utmost importance to analyze the impact of climate change on hydrology, particularly on a regional scale, in order to understand potential future changes of water resources and water-related disaster, and provide support for regional water management. However, during the evaluation of climate change impact on hydrology or water resources, large uncertainty exists. In this paper, the Soil Water Assessment Tool (SWAT) model is used to investigate the potential impact of climate change on hydrology of the upper reaches of Qiantang River Basin, East China, for the future period 2011–2100. The uncertainty is considered by employing upgraded reliability ensemble averaged GCM climate projections under three emission scenarios A1B, A2 and B1 for three different stages of the future period. These projections are downscaled and used in the hydrological model. Impact of climate change on precipitation, potential evapotranspiraton and river runoff is then investigated. The model calibration and validation outcomes show reasonable performance of the SWAT model. The final results suggest that annual river runoff will likely decrease almost under all emission scenarios and time stages of the future period. Particularly, at Jinhua Station, substantial decrease of annual river runoff can be noticed, indicating less water resource possibly available for the region in future. Simulated monthly patterns show that the largest decrease will likely occur in winter while increases will occur in summer, implying possible more water-related disasters in this region. However, it is also noticed that the change signs/amount could be different under different emission scenarios and time stages, indicating large uncertainty involved in the impact analysis.
15 February 2010
Summary: Managing water resources systems usually involves conflicts. Behaviors of stakeholders, who might be willing to contribute to improvements and reach a win–win situation, sometimes result in worse conditions for all parties. Game theory can identify and interpret the behaviors of parties to water resource problems and describe how interactions of different parties who give priority to their own objectives, rather than system’s objective, result in a system’s evolution. Outcomes predicted by game theory often differ from results suggested by optimization methods which assume all parties are willing to act towards the best system-wide outcome. This study reviews applicability of game theory to water resources management and conflict resolution through a series of non-cooperative water resource games. The paper illustrates the dynamic structure of water resource problems and the importance of considering the game’s evolution path while studying such problems.
1 November 2002
M.S. Horritt | P.D. Bates
Abstract: 1D and 2D models of flood hydraulics (HEC-RAS, LISFLOOD-FP and TELEMAC-2D) are tested on a 60km reach of the river Severn, UK. Synoptic views of flood extent from radar remote sensing satellites have been acquired for flood events in 1998 and 2000. The three models are calibrated, using floodplain and channel friction as free parameters, against both the observed inundated area and records of downstream discharge. The predictive power of the models calibrated against inundation extent or discharge for one event can thus be measured using independent validation data for the second. The results show that for this reach both the HEC-RAS and TELEMAC-2D models can be calibrated against discharge or inundated area data and give good predictions of inundated area, whereas the LISFLOOD-FP needs to be calibrated against independent inundated area data to produce acceptable results. The different predictive performances of the models stem from their different responses to changes in friction parameterisation.
12 April 2013
Fateh Chebana | Taha B.M.J. Ouarda | Thuy Chinh Duong
Summary: Hydrological frequency analysis (HFA) relies on a number of assumptions on the data series, especially independence, homogeneity and stationarity. In the univariate setting, these assumptions are generally checked before the modeling step. During the last decade, multivariate HFA approaches have gained popularity since most hydrological events can be described through a number of dependent characteristics, e.g. peak, volume and duration for floods. However, checking the above assumptions remains neglected in the multivariate HFA literature whereas the focus is directly on the modeling. For a reliable analysis and accurate results, these assumptions should also be checked prior to modeling in the multivariate setting. The present paper attempts to start bridging this gap in the multivariate HFA by highlighting the importance of the testing step and focusing on the review and application of nonparametric tests for monotonic trends. The presented multivariate trend tests are usually developed and employed to treat water quality data. In the present work, two types of multivariate applications are performed, multi-variable for flood attributes and multi-site for different locations. The results indicate that, in both types of applications, the univariate and multivariate tests led to the detection of different trend signals. It is hence recommended to jointly apply univariate and multivariate trend tests in order to capture all existing trend components and guide the user towards the appropriate models.
22 April 2013
Guobin Fu | Jingjie Yu | Xiubo Yu | Rulin Ouyang | Yichi Zhang | Ping Wang | Wenbin Liu | Leilei Min
Summary: The spatial and temporal variability of the frequency of extreme precipitation events in China for 1961–2009 was examined using the high quality rainfall dataset provided by the China Meteorology Administration (CMA) for 599 stations. Extreme events were defined by duration and recurrence interval, the event durations chosen were 1, 5, 10 and 30days and the event thresholds were those associated with recurrence intervals of 1, 5 and 10years. The results indicated that temporal variations of extreme precipitation index (EPI) showed interannual and interdecadal variability. Time series of anomalies of the nine regional EPI indices indicated that Northeast China, North China and the Yellow River basin had experienced a decreasing trend of extreme rainfall events during the last 50years, while other six regions, namely the Yangtze River basin, Southeast Coast, South China, the Inner Mongolia, Northwest China and Tibetan Plateau, had experienced an increasing trend of extreme rainfall events. Seasonal results indicated that 95.6% of 1-day, 1-yr recurrence interval extreme rainfall events occurred from April to September in China. The possible attributions of trend and variability of extreme rainfall events at China include, but are not limited to, El Niño – Southern Oscillation (ENSO), the magnitude of East Asian Monsoon, wind circulations, as well as global warming. Obviously these factors are not independent. For example, it has long been recognized that ENSO can exert an important impact on the East Asian monsoon.
16 August 2012
Te Kipa Kepa Brian Morgan | Daniel N. Sardelic | Amaria F. Waretini
Summary: In 1984 the Government of China approved the decision to construct the Three Gorges Dam Project, the largest project since the Great Wall. The project had many barriers to overcome, and the decision was made at a time when sustainability was a relatively unknown concept. The decision to construct the Three Gorges Project remains contentious today, especially since Deputy Director of the Three Gorges Project Construction Committee, Wang Xiaofeng, stated that “We absolutely cannot relax our guard against ecological and environmental security problems sparked by the Three Gorges Project” (Bristow, 2007; McCabe, 2007). The question therefore was posed: how sustainable is the Three Gorges Project? Conventional approaches to sustainability assessment tend to use monetary based assessment aligned to triple bottom line thinking. That is, projects are evaluated as trade-offs between economic, environmental and social costs and benefits. The question of sustainability is considered using such a traditional Cost-Benefit Analysis approach, as undertaken in 1988 by a CIPM-Yangtze Joint Venture, and the Mauri Model Decision Making Framework (MMDMF). The Mauri Model differs from other approaches in that sustainability performance indicators are considered independently from any particular stakeholder bias. Bias is then introduced subsequently as a sensitivity analysis on the raw results obtained. The MMDMF is unique in that it is based on the Māori concept of Mauri, the binding force between the physical and the spiritual attributes of something, or the capacity to support life in the air, soil, and water. This concept of Mauri is analogous to the Chinese concept of Qi, and there are many analogous concepts in other cultures. It is the universal relevance of Mauri that allows its use to assess sustainability. This research identified that the MMDMF was a strong complement to Cost-Benefit Analysis, which is not designed as a sustainability assessment tool in itself. The MMDMF does have relevance in identifying areas of conflict, and it can support the Cost-Benefit Analysis in assessing sustainability, as a Decision Support Tool. The research concluded that, based on both models, the Three Gorges Project as understood in 1988, and incorporating more recent sustainability analysis is contributing to enhanced sustainability.
15 March 2006
Thomas G. Huntington
Abstract: One of the more important questions in hydrology is: if the climate warms in the future, will there be an intensification of the water cycle and, if so, the nature of that intensification? There is considerable interest in this question because an intensification of the water cycle may lead to changes in water-resource availability, an increase in the frequency and intensity of tropical storms, floods, and droughts, and an amplification of warming through the water vapor feedback. Empirical evidence for ongoing intensification of the water cycle would provide additional support for the theoretical framework that links intensification with warming. This paper briefly reviews the current state of science regarding historical trends in hydrologic variables, including precipitation, runoff, tropospheric water vapor, soil moisture, glacier mass balance, evaporation, evapotranspiration, and growing season length. Data are often incomplete in spatial and temporal domains and regional analyses are variable and sometimes contradictory; however, the weight of evidence indicates an ongoing intensification of the water cycle. In contrast to these trends, the empirical evidence to date does not consistently support an increase in the frequency or intensity of tropical storms and floods.
12 April 2013
Benny Selle | Marc Schwientek | Gunnar Lischeid
Summary: The analysis of spatial–temporal patterns of scores, including their association with supplementary data, can refine a principal component analysis of water quality data. We hypothesized that this type of analysis could considerably improve the understanding of processes governing water quality at catchment scales. To test this, water quality data from the 180km2 Ammer catchment in south-western Germany was investigated using principal component analysis. We analyzed data for (a) surface water from the Ammer River and its tributaries, (b) spring water from the main aquifers and (c) deep groundwater from wells. Using the analysis of scores, we found that the quality of both surface and groundwater primarily reflected the input of solutes determined by land use and geology. For water quality in the Ammer catchment, the conservative mixing of water of different origins and ages was more important than reactive transport processes along the flow paths. These results demonstrate the potential of our analysis of principal component scores to identify dominant processes at catchment scales.
21. Performance evaluation of hydrological models: Statistical significance for reducing subjectivity in goodness-of-fit assessments
14 February 2013
Axel Ritter | Rafael Muñoz-Carpena
Summary: Success in the use of computer models for simulating environmental variables and processes requires objective model calibration and verification procedures. Several methods for quantifying the goodness-of-fit of observations against model-calculated values have been proposed but none of them is free of limitations and are often ambiguous. When a single indicator is used it may lead to incorrect verification of the model. Instead, a combination of graphical results, absolute value error statistics (i.e. root mean square error), and normalized goodness-of-fit statistics (i.e. Nash–Sutcliffe Efficiency coefficient, NSE) is currently recommended. Interpretation of NSE values is often subjective, and may be biased by the magnitude and number of data points, data outliers and repeated data. The statistical significance of the performance statistics is an aspect generally ignored that helps in reducing subjectivity in the proper interpretation of the model performance. In this work, approximated probability distributions for two common indicators (NSE and root mean square error) are derived with bootstrapping (block bootstrapping when dealing with time series), followed by bias corrected and accelerated calculation of confidence intervals. Hypothesis testing of the indicators exceeding threshold values is proposed in a unified framework for statistically accepting or rejecting the model performance. It is illustrated how model performance is not linearly related with NSE, which is critical for its proper interpretation. Additionally, the sensitivity of the indicators to model bias, outliers and repeated data is evaluated. The potential of the difference between root mean square error and mean absolute error for detecting outliers is explored, showing that this may be considered a necessary but not a sufficient condition of outlier presence. The usefulness of the approach for the evaluation of model performance is illustrated with case studies including those with similar goodness-of-fit indicators but distinct statistical interpretation, and others to analyze the effects of outliers, model bias and repeated data. This work does not intend to dictate rules on model goodness-of-fit assessment. It aims to provide modelers with improved, less subjective and practical model evaluation guidance and tools.
12 December 2012
John Mackenzie | Poh-Ling Tan | Suzanne Hoverman | Claudia Baldwin
Summary: This article describes the Participatory Action Research (PAR) methodology used to trial and evaluate a suite of planning tools to improve the engagement process for statutory water planning in Australia, and assesses its value and limitations in the Australian context. We argue that the strength of this method is its consistency with a social learning and adaptive management approach.We owe the success of this research approach to five key factors: a high degree of access to the project setting; clear demarcation of roles and responsibilities between researchers and participants; considerable effort spent building and maintaining informal networks and relationships; sensitivity to the relationship between ‘insiders’ (the participants or owners of the issue i.e. government and community) and ‘outsiders’ (the research project team); and continual review of project planning and willingness to adapt timeframes and processes to suit the situation. The value and challenges of Participatory Action Research are discussed with key lessons emerging for improving its practice, as well as the transferability of this knowledge to engagement practice for water planning.
23. Climate change impact and uncertainty analysis of extreme rainfall events in the Apalachicola River basin, Florida
14 February 2013
Dingbao Wang | Scott C. Hagen | Karim Alizad
Summary: Climate change impact on rainfall intensity–duration–frequency (IDF) curves at the Apalachicola River basin (Florida Panhandle coast) is assessed using an ensemble of regional climate models (RCMs) obtained from the North American Regional Climate Change Assessment Program. The suitability of seven RCMs on simulating temporal variation of rainfall at the fine-scale is assessed for the case study region. Two RCMs, HRM3–HADCM3 and RCM3–GFDL, are found to have good skill scores in generating high intensity events at the mid-afternoon (2:00–4:00 PM). These two RCMs are selected for assessing potential climate change impact on IDF curves. Two methods are used to conduct bias correction on future rainfall IDF curves, i.e., maximum intensity percentile-based method, and sequential bias correction and maximum intensity percentile-based method. Based on the projection by HRM3–HADCM3, there is no significant change in rainfall intensity at the upstream and middle stream stations but higher intensity at the downstream station. RCM3–GFDL projected increased rainfall intensity from upstream to downstream, particularly at the downstream. The potential temporal shift of extreme rainfall events coupled with overall increased intensities may exacerbate flood magnitudes and lead to increased sediment and nutrient loadings to the estuary, especially in light of sea level change.
4 February 2013
Aristeidis G. Koutroulis | Ioannis K. Tsanis | Ioannis N. Daliakopoulos | Daniela Jacob
Summary: An assessment of the impact of global climate change on the water resources status of the island of Crete, for a range of 24 different scenarios of projected hydro-climatological regime is presented. Three “state of the art” Global Climate Models (GCMs) and an ensemble of Regional Climate Models (RCMs) under emission scenarios B1, A2 and A1B provide future precipitation (P) and temperature (T) estimates that are bias adjusted against observations. The ensemble of RCMs for the A1B scenario project a higher P reduction compared to GCMs projections under A2 and B1 scenarios. Among GCMs model results, the ECHAM model projects a higher P reduction compared to IPSL and CNCM. Water availability for the whole island at basin scale until 2100 is estimated using the SAC-SMA rainfall–runoff model And a set of demand and infrastructure scenarios are adopted to simulate potential water use. While predicted reduction of water availability under the B1 emission scenario can be handled with water demand stabilized at present values and full implementation of planned infrastructure, other scenarios require additional measures and a robust signal of water insufficiency is projected. Despite inherent uncertainties, the quantitative impact of the projected changes on water availability indicates that climate change plays an important role to water use and management in controlling future water status in a Mediterranean island like Crete. The results of the study reinforce the necessity to improve and update local water management planning and adaptation strategies in order to attain future water security.
10 January 2001
Abstract: The paper intends to review the current status of low-flow hydrology — a discipline which deals with minimum flow in a river during the dry periods of the year. The discussion starts with the analysis of low-flow generating mechanisms operating in natural conditions and the description of anthropogenic factors which directly or indirectly affect low flows. This is followed by the review of existing methods of low-flow estimation from streamflow time-series, which include flow duration curves, frequency analysis of extreme low-flow events and continuous low-flow intervals, baseflow separation and characterisation of streamflow recessions. The paper describes the variety of low-flow characteristics (indices) and their applications. A separate section illustrates the relationships between low-flow characteristics. The paper further focuses on the techniques for low-flow estimation in ungauged river catchments, which include a regional regression approach, graphical representation of low-flow characteristics, construction of regional curves for low-flow prediction and application of time-series simulation methods. The paper presents a summary of recent international low-flow related research initiatives. Specific applications of low-flow data in river ecology studies and environmental flow management as well as the problem of changing minimum river flows as the result of climate variability are also discussed. The review is largely based on the research results reported during the last twenty years.