IMAGINATION EXPRESS DESTINATION: TIME TRIP, USA
Imagination Express Destination: Time Trip, USA is a reading tutorial, story writing, and language tutorial program designed for use by children with physical, cognitive, or visual disabilities. Using the theme of the development of the United States throughout its history, users can create print and interactive electronic books, poetry, and essays as well as movies. Complete with music, sound effects, and historically accurate Main Street, Neighborhood, and indoor backgrounds from 1640, 1776, 1865, 1929, 1945, and the present students create interactive adventures by choosing scenes, and animating characters to plan plots, write stories and narrate pages. The finished story can then be played back on the screen or printed out. Students may use stickers that match the time period or bring stickers from the past to the present. Time machine and attic backgrounds also provide time period transitions. Most backgrounds may also be changed from day to night. Also available are border backgrounds and a blank background. Unique features include a talking scrapbook and tools which enable students to interact with each scene in their story, including autosizing which allows students move stickers around each background scene and have the stickers change size to retain proper perspective to the scene; and smart stickers which go where students drag them and and can be moved inside buildings, and behind or in front of other objects in a scene. The sticker tools include the sticker picker containing hundreds of stickers arranged by categories like people, transportation, and toys. Students can drag and drop stickers from the sticker picker into each scene. The sticker editor allows students to change each sticker's size, rotate stickers, turn animations on or off and attach sounds to each sticker. Among the people stickers available is a child in a three-wheeled sports wheelchair. The program can be configured to meet specific ability levels and needs and a special "configure to the young child" feature transforms the stories into a talking puppet theater. Students with low vision or other visual disabilities can select colors and sizes and types of print to meet their needs. COMPATIBILITY: Available on dual platform CD-ROMs for Macintosh and IBM PC compatibles with Windows. SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS: For Macintosh systems: Color Macintosh (256 colors required), System 7 or higher; CD-ROM drive (double speed or faster recommended); hard disk; 8MB RAM; 13 inch or larger monitor. A printer and microphone are recommended. For IBM Compatibles: Windows 3.1 (enhanced mode); 25 MHz 386 or better; CD-ROM drive (double speed or faster recommended); 256-color SVGA; mouse; 8MB RAM; sound output device. A printer and microphone are recommended. WARRANTY: Lifetime warranty against errors or defects which interfere with program operation.
Notes: Imagination Express and Destination: Time Trip, USA are trademarks of the Edmark Corp. ** Other programs in the Imagination Express series inlude Destination: Rain Forest, Destination: Pyramids, and Destination: Ocean (see separate entries). ** The Imagination Express series has been awarded the 1995 Technology & Learning Award of Excellence in both Home and School Categories; 1995 Newsweek Editor's Choice Award; and 1995 National Parenting Center Seal of Approval. ** Lab packs for five computers are available for this program. ** Macintosh is a registered trademark of Apple Computer, Inc. ** Windows is a registered trademark of Mcrosoft Corporation.
Price: Contact manufacturer.
This product record was updated on April 24, 2003.