|« Back to Article|
Louisiana irises flower best with sun and water
By Kathy Huber | April 6, 2012
Q: We have beautiful Louisiana iris plants but few blossoms. Any suggestions?
A: The best blooms come from sun, particularly in winter; a soil enriched with a good deal of compost; and plenty of water.
Louisiana irises grow in neutral soil, but do even better if the soil is slightly acidic. Expert Josephine Shanks taught me to water irises throughout summer and flood them twice in January when they're growing and preparing their spring blooms. The water is important.
Apply an 8-8-8 fertilizer when it's cool in November and in January. If plants lack vigor, fertilize again after flowering.
If the blooms are yellow, you may have pseudacorus, another water iris that is often confused with Louisiana iris. It can be an especially stubborn bloomer. This yellow flag, once the fleur de lis, takes even more water, food and sun to bloom.
You can tell the difference between the two kinds of iris by running your fingers up a leaf. If you feel a rib along the middle of the foliage, you have pseudacorus. The rhizome is pink inside, rather than white like that of the Louisiana irises.
Q: We need plants for a wet area, especially those with height.
A: Louisiana iris, discussed above, would be an excellent choice for a moist site with sun. They're 2 to 6 feet, depending on the cultivar.
Cannas, various crinums and colocasias such as the 5-foot-tall 'Black Magic' are perfect bog or marginal area plants for sunny areas. Papyrus or umbrella plant would make a handsome contrast to the large, smooth leafy types. This 5- to 6-foot-tall sedge produces clumps of slender stems topped with narrow, grasslike foliage arranged in umbels.
Parsley hawthorn is a native deciduous 25-foot tree with single or multiple trunks, parsleylike foliage that turns red in fall, white spring flowers and red fall berries for the birds.
Native buttonbush (Cephalanthus occidentalis), 10-18 feet tall, likes moisture and is adaptable to sun or shade. So is Virginia sweetspire, a colonizing native that's about 5 feet.
Plants that tolerate poorly draining, partially shady sites include variegated sweetflag (Acorus calamus 'Variegatus'), creeping Jenny, lady fern (Athyrium filix-femina), chain fern (Woodwardia areolata), obedient plant (Physotegia virginiana) and bog sage.
Q: My 25-year-old azaleas used to flower beautifully, but in recent years they hardly bloom at all. I prune each year because they're so large, and I fertilize, hoping it will make a difference come spring. Does the annual trimming discourage blooms? Maybe we are trimming them too much?
S.D., Clear Lake
A: Pruning - or even heavy trimming - immediately after blooming typically doesn't interfere with subsequent spring flowers. But if you've repeatedly headed back the shrubs and not thinned them, they may have grown top heavy with less foliage in the centers. Thinning will allow more light to penetrate the plants and might improve flowering.
Have any surrounding trees grown so they cast the azaleas in too much shade? Spring-flowering azaleas need some sun (morning or filtered is best) to bloom. They'll grow, but not flower well in shade.
Perhaps the plants are getting too much nitrogen, which promotes great growth at the expense of blooms. If this seems a possibility, hold back on the fertilizing. If you fertilize your lawn, are the azaleas close enough that they also pick up this nitrogen as well?.
I assume you fertilize after pruning. Fertilizing before blooms encourages foliage, not flowers.