| The following page is under construction.
Please do not edit or alter this article in any way while this template is active. All unauthorized edits may be reverted on the admin's discretion. Propose any changes to the talk page.
The Republic of Donskoya (Russian: Республика Донскоя); also known as Donskoya (Russian: Донскоя) is a nation located on the border of Greenland and North America.
The name Donskoya is derived from Dmitry Donskoy, the first to openly challenge Mongol authority in Russia. This name is symbolic to the Donskoyans as they first had to live with Russian, then Soviet authority but have always resisted the Soviets and the Romanovans trying to take control of all their lands.
However, during the era of the Soviets, they did have to bow down to them, citing their forces and strength in the area. They were absorbed into the USSR as the Greenland Soviet Socialist Republic and stayed that way for some 55 to 60 years. However, with the expulsion of the Soviets in the late 70s, the country, which now named itself Donskoya, was now independent of any country trying to rule its lands.
Era of the Arctic Company
The area which is now known as Greenland, was originally first explored, then settled by the Russian-Arctic Company. The land was first spotted in 1743, teo years after the land which is now Romanova was discovered. It was colonized a year later and it was in the initial colonization period when the native Inuits were discovered.
The area was mainly colonized by serfs who did not get the rights they deserved, and over time the population of the colony grew as the citizen enjoyed unrivalled freedom. The colony swore alligience to the Emperor and he named it Donskoya, in the honour of Dimitry Donskoy, a Russian rebel who fought for the Russians against the Mongols. By the 19th Century, the RAC's population had touched 2 million.
In 1803, at the outbreak of the Napoleonic Wars, the Russian-Arctic Company declared war on Louisville, along with the Russian-Greenland Company during the Russian Greenland-Louisvillian War. It, however, did not see any active action during the war, but the commander of the Russian Greenland forces, Field Marshal Yevgeniy Porodovsky, hailed from Russian-Arctic Company, specifically its capital Albanov.
The Russian Revolution
The populace of Donskoya, mainly made up of serfs, joined the White Russians in the Russian Civil War, even having their own Russian Arctic Legion. However, there were some people who believed that communism was the way forward for their land, and they supported the Bolsheviks. In turn, the Bolshevik leaders like Vladimir Lenin provided more advanced training and weapons to the Peasants and Partisans' Army of the Russian Arctic, the main Red body of fighters in RAC. After a series of bloody battles, the White Russian Arctics were overrun by the serfs who supported the Communists, and those who managed to make it through the war escaped to neighboring Romanova.
World War Two
Donskoya, under the Soviet-sponsored Soviet-Greenland Company, declared war on the Axis when the Soviet Union was invaded by Nazi Germany. Later on, they begrudgingly agreed to side with the Tsarists of Romanova, signing the Treaty of Kharitonovo. However, the Romanovans still didn't trust the Soviets enough to let their troops inside the country, and the two countries' armies barely worked with each other, if at all. Donskoyan Soviets didn't participate in the Vichy invasion of Romanova, but there were a few Donskoyan battalions that fought in the Eastern Front, and Donskoya served as a staging point for Soviet naval patrols against the dreaded U-boats.
On June 9, 1946, the Soviet-Greenland Company was abolished, and the Greenland Soviet Socialist Republic erected in its place. The primitive port facilities in the town of Badygin were quickly renovated and modernized, and it was here that the Soviet Arctic Fleet was based. Because of this, Romanovan Navy ships based out of Kolomeitsev kept watch on their naval activities, and many minor incidents between the two fleets nearly caused armed conflict to break out between the two sides. The most infamous of these incidents is the B-455 incident, in which a diesel-powered ballistic missile submarine suffered electrical failures that nearly caused a launch of its nuclear missiles.
Eventually, the people of Donskoya grew tired of Soviet rule and on February 27th 1978, in the Donskyan Revolution for Independence, an uprising commenced, followed by a full blown revolution. The revolution was swift and with secret Romanovan and NATO aid and support, many Soviet military bases were captured. The government authoritized the use of force against the revolutionaries, and this seemed to have slowed down the progress of the revolution with most of the country in the hands of GSSR. However, the battle for Albanov was the turning point in the war, where government forces were decisively defeated. The Soviet Union sent tanks and troops, but this proved useless against the determination of the rebels and on the 4th of September, Donskoya was completely controlled by the Transitional Government of Donskoya.
Donskoyan Socialist Revolution
According to the 1979 Provisional Constitution of Donskoya, the formation of parties with the words "communist" and "socialist" is not allowed, but the Communist Party of Donskoya, the remnants of the GSSR's ruling body, got around this by renaming themselves the Democratic Left Party of Donskoya. Allying themselves with Soviet and GSSR forces in hiding, they launched a coup that removed the Transitional Government of Donskoya from power and replaced it with another socialist regime. Both the Donskoyan and Romanovan people were not happy about this, and the TGD, after fleeing the capital Albanov, set up shop in the little hamlet of Kocherginskoye and commanded forces loyal to it there.
In reaction to the coup, Romanova withdrew most of its troops, only sending small contingents of "military advisors" to train the TGD forces. They also urged the United Nations to not recognize the DLPD-led regime of Donskoya, and support the TGD, which they claim is the "legal successor to the government of the former Greenland Soviet Socialist Republic." These events would eventually lead to the Donskoyan Civil War.
The Donskoyan Civil War lasted for twenty-eight years, from 1980 to 2008. During this time, over ten thousand Donskoyans died on both sides, as well as at least five hundred Romanovan military advisors. Finally, after the Second Battle of Albanov, the TGD finally restored its control over Donskoya, and its relations with Romanova and the rest of the world were soon normalized.
However, despite the redemocratization of Donskoyan government offices, some names reminiscent of the Socialist times still exist, such as the Supreme Socialist. Even the full name of the nation, the Socialist Republic of Donskoya, still brings to mind the DPLD regime.
The military of Donskoya is divided into three parts: the Army, the Navy, and the Air Force. They are all mostly made up of soldiers who have served the Transitional Government of Donskoya throughout the Donskoyan Civil War, but there are also some former soldiers of the old DLPD regime who had renounced their socialist beliefs defected to the TGD. Most of their equipment is a combination of old Soviet bloc weaponry and new and advanced Romanovan arms.
The military of Donskoya is an all-volunteer force. After an initial tour of duty, citizens may choose to become part of the reserve until they are 55 years old unless they voluntarily reenlist, in which they are considered career soldiers. The total peacetime strength of the entire armed forces is estimated at 15,000 fully combat-trained troops. An estimated 15,000 more are in the reserves.
- ↑ Prurov, Mikhail, Donskoya. Our Land (Albanov: Leningradskaya Publishing House, 15 March 1999), p. 3
- ↑ Prurov, p. 9
- ↑ de Lourry, Jean-Anton Michel, The Russian Greenland-Louisvillian War (Cartier: Bonaparte Publishing Houses Associated, 7 May 2008), p. 36
- ↑ Grubanov, Iosef, Donskoya in the Russian Civil War (Schmidt: Brezhnevskoye Book House, 15 May 2005), p. 107
- ↑ Tatravina, Tatiana, Donskoya: The Nation During the Second World War (Schmidt: Borodin and Sons Publishing Associates, 7 May 2006), p. 95