Facetious and abstemious contain all the vowels in the correct order, as does arsenious, meaning "containing arsenic."
The only 15 letter word that can be spelled without repeating a letter is uncopyrightable.
The English word with the most consonants in a row is latchstring.
Switching letters is called spoonerism. For example, saying jag of Flapan, instead of flag of Japan.
"Rhythm" and "syzygy" are the longest English words without vowels.
'Strengths' is the longest word in the English language with just one vowel.
The longest place-name still in use is Taumatawhakatangihangakoauauotamateaturipukakapikimaungahoronukupokaiwhenuakitanatahu, a New Zealand hill.
The longest word in the English language, according to the Oxford English Dictionary, is pneumonoultramicroscopicsilicovolcanoconiosis. It is a a pneumoconiosis caused by the inhalation of very fine silicate or quartz dust. The only other word with the same amount of letters is pneumonoultramicroscopicsilicovolcanoconioses, its plural.
The second longest word in the Oxford English Dictionary is "floccinaucinihilipilification," which means "the act of estimating as worthless."
The third longest word in the English language is "antidisestablishmenterianism"
The longest word that can be typed using on the right hand is 'lollipop'.
'Skepticisms' is the longest word that can be typed using alternate hands.
One of the longest English words that can be typed using the top row of a typewriter (allowing multiple uses of letters) is 'typewriter.'
When two words are combined to form a single word (e.g., motor + hotel = motel, breakfast + lunch = brunch) the new word is called a "portmanteau."
There is a word in the English language with only one vowel, which occurs six times: Indivisibility.
The letters H I O X in the latin alphabet is the only ones that look the same if you turn them upside down or see them from behind.
And a fun question for you: which seven letter word in the English language contains ten words without rearranging any of its letters? (Check out the answer below)
Check out Deana Barnhart's Gearin' Up to Get an Agent blogfest, which will take place in July. There's heaps of prizes (including a query critique plus resubmit from me) and lots of bloghopping fun to be had!
The answer is "therein": the, there, he, in, rein, her, here, here, ere therein, herein.