1. A widely distributed system consisting of all the cells able to ingest bacteria or colloidal particles etc, except for certain white blood cells.
4. A very young child (birth to 1 year) who has not yet begun to walk or talk.
8. Any of various units of capacity.
11. A drug combination found in some over-the-counter headache remedies (Aspirin and Phenacetin and Caffeine).
12. A slender double-reed instrument.
13. (used especially of commodities) In the natural unprocessed condition.
14. Relating to or characteristic of or occurring on the sea or ships.
15. Made from residue of grapes or apples after pressing.
16. Fermented alcoholic beverage similar to but heavier than beer.
17. Cubes of meat marinated and cooked on a skewer usually with vegetables.
20. Having undesirable or negative qualities.
23. Red fishes of American coastal tropical waters having very large eyes and rough scales.
26. (Greek mythology) A sorceress who detained Odysseus on her island and turned his men into swine.
30. Any of numerous local fertility and nature deities worshipped by ancient Semitic peoples.
31. The blood group whose red cells carry both the A and B antigens.
33. (of a young animal) Abandoned by its mother and raised by hand.
34. A heavy brittle diamagnetic trivalent metallic element (resembles arsenic and antimony chemically).
35. Having a face or facing especially of a specified kind or number.
37. 16 ounces.
39. A state in northwestern North America.
41. An awkward stupid person.
44. A river in north central Switzerland that runs northeast into the Rhine.
46. (Babylonian) God of wisdom and agriculture and patron of scribes and schools.
49. Type genus of the family Myacidae.
50. Toward the mouth or oral region.
51. The 7th letter of the Greek alphabet.
52. A flexible container with a single opening.
53. A small cake leavened with yeast.
54. A compartment in front of a motor vehicle where driver sits.
1. Danish philologist whose work on Old Norse pioneered in the field of comparative linguistics (1787-1832).
2. A fencing sword similar to a foil but with a heavier blade.
3. Someone who works (or provides workers) during a strike.
4. A city in western India just off the coast of the Arabian Sea.
5. A loose sleeveless outer garment made from aba cloth.
6. A person who evokes boredom.
7. An international organization of European countries formed after World War II to reduce trade barriers and increase cooperation among its members.
8. (informal) Exceptionally good.
9. Round object that is hit or thrown or kicked in games.
10. 100 lwei equal 1 kwanza.
18. Any of various deciduous or evergreen ornamental shrubs of the genus Abelia having opposite simple leaves and cymes of small white or pink or purplish flowers.
19. An agency of the United Nations responsible for programs to aid education and the health of children and mothers in developing countries.
21. Lacking or deprive of the sense of hearing wholly or in part.
22. A radioactive element of the actinide series.
24. A state in midwestern United States.
25. Light informal conversation for social occasions.
27. A unit of absorbed ionizing radiation equal to 100 ergs per gram of irradiated material.
28. Being one hundred more than three hundred.
29. The branch of engineering science that studies the uses of electricity and the equipment for power generation and distribution and the control of machines and communication.
32. African tree having an exceedingly thick trunk and fruit that resembles a gourd and has an edible pulp called monkey bread.
36. Any taillike structure.
38. Common Indian weaverbird.
39. A compartment in front of a motor vehicle where driver sits.
40. A rounded projection or protuberance.
41. A soft silvery metallic element of the alkali earth group.
42. A Chadic language spoken south of Lake Chad.
43. According to the Old Testament he was a pagan king of Israel and husband of Jezebel (9th century BC).
45. A small piece of cloth.
47. A constellation in the southern hemisphere near Telescopium and Norma.
48. The last (12th) month of the year.