Leading light in world of arachnids
VALERIE DAVIES, 1920-2012
Discoveries … Valerie Todd Davies was central to the Queensland Museum's internationally recognised spider collection.
Valerie Davies was a pioneering Australasian arachnologist, responsible for the discovery of many new species of spiders in remote parts of Queensland.
She was also a passionate advocate for women gaining access to higher education and to careers in science.
Valerie Ethel Todd was born on September 29, 1920, the third of four daughters of James and Ethel Todd, sheep farmers in Makirikiri, near Wanganui, in New Zealand.
She went from Wanganui Girls' College to Victoria University in Wellington, and on to Otago University in Dunedin to study zoology.
She took a master's degree with honours with a thesis on trap-door spiders. She was then awarded a travelling scholarship to Somerville College, Oxford, where she completed a PhD.
She returned to Dunedin in 1948 to marry George Davies, who had returned from service in the New Zealand Army Dental Corps in Europe and Japan to take up a lecturing post in dentistry at the University of Otago.
The family moved from Dunedin to Brisbane in 1963 when George was appointed professor of social and preventive dentistry at the University of Queensland.
In collaboration with architect Maurice Hurst, Valerie and George built a striking modernist house, ''Awanui'' (Maori for ''big river''), on the banks of the Brisbane River.
The street was later populated by a number of younger families and by the time Valerie and George moved out some 40 years later, they had become stalwarts of the large and festive annual Australia Day street party.
While busy with her family responsibilities of raising three children and supporting George in his career, Davies always maintained a lively interest in spiders and had part-time appointments as a tutor in the zoology departments of Otago and Queensland universities.
In 1972, she was appointed curator of arachnids at the Queensland Museum. Although twice the age of many of the other curators, she slipped into the group with ease.
She formally retired in 1985 at the age of 65, but continued working at the museum in an honorary capacity until she was 82.
Davies also participated in a number of surveys of the flora and fauna in remote parts of Queensland, including expeditions with museum colleagues to Iron Range in Cape York, and the summit of Mount Finnegan near Cooktown, to Mount Bellenden Ker as part of an Earthwatch expedition and to Hinchinbrook Island, escorted by the army.
These expeditions involved strenuous hiking and climbing and weeks of camping with only primitive facilities.
Dr Geoff Monteith, the insect specialist on these trips, recalled Davies's single-mindedness in pursuing her hunt for specimens, and how she (by then in her 60s), coped easily and without complaint in conditions that challenged several of the young men who took part, including members of the armed forces.
More than 100 new species and 17 new genera of spiders were discovered during these expeditions.
The genus Toddiana and 15 new species, including Austrarchaea daviesae, were named for her.
The meticulously described, illustrated and indexed specimens she collected form the basis of the museum's internationally recognised spider collection.
In 1988, Davies was awarded the Queensland Museum Medal. She served on the executive of the International Society of Arachnology, and was the recipient of a Lifetime Achievement Award in 2010.
Since her Oxford days, she had been an active member of the International Federation of University Women, and she later served on the selection committee for the Rhodes scholarship.
She was a source of encouragement and inspiration for many younger women struggling to balance work and home life and to establish themselves in scientific careers.
Davies largely withdrew from social contact in the last few years of her life because of illness but her memorial service in Brisbane was attended not only by many old friends but also by a large contingent of colleagues from the museum and the wider world of naturalists.
Valerie Davies is survived by her children Christopher, John and Rosemary and five grandchildren. George died in 2010.