108 pages, 260 x 200 mm
David Bateman, New Zealand
Microgreens – the tiny seedlings of herbs and vegetables – are today's hottest gourmet garnish, offering a multitude of colours, textures and distinct flavours, ranging from mild and subtle to spicy, hot or nutty.
Larger than sprouts and smaller than 'baby' salad greens, microgreens are fantastic for those with limited garden space, as they are great to grow in containers on a terrace or windowsill. Immediate and practical, most varieties are ready in a week or so, and you can grow them in winter. As a bonus, as well as tasting great, nutritionally microgreens pack a powerful punch; they contain higher levels of active plant compounds than mature plants or seeds.
How to Grow Microgreens provides detailed information – from planting to harvesting – for 25 popular varieties, along with recipes and ideas on how to use them. There are also chapters on troubleshooting, the nutritional value of microgreens and how to encourage children to grow and enjoy them.
Originally published August 2010. Available from CSIRO PUBLISHING March 2011.
Detailed information on 25 popular varieties of microgreens
Offers an ideal way to utilise small spaces to grow food
Brilliant way to introduce children to growing and enjoying their own food>/li>
1 Introduction: houseplants you can eat
2 Growing microgreens
3 Solving plant problems
5 Individual crops
6 Children growing microgreens
Weights and measures
About the author
General readers interested in growing their own food and sustaining a healthy diet.
"For those who love to grow their own salad greens but think they don't have the space, this book has all the information needed for growing beautiful gourmet garnish or tiny vegetable and herb seedlings...They are packed with nutrition and it's so simple, cheap and such fun to get a crop started."
SA Gardens, Spring/Summer Vol 3, 2011
"...attractive, no-fuss guide..."
Simon Webster, Organic Gardener, July/August 2011
Fionna Hill is a London-trained floral designer who runs her own floral design business. She has always used vegetables decoratively in her designs and has now turned to growing them to eat. Living in a high-rise apartment, Fionna discovered microgreens are ideal for those with limited space who still want to eat fresh. She has written four books, including the internationally successful Country Style Flowers. She contributes to lifestyle and garden magazines, writes travel articles and gives lectures on floral arrangement. Fionna lives in Auckland, New Zealand.