Influence of gymnastics training on the development of postural control.
Summary of "Influence of gymnastics training on the development of postural control."
This study investigated the influence of gymnastics training on the postural control of children with and without the use of visual information. Two age groups, aged 5-7 and 9-11 years old, of gymnasts and nongymnasts were asked to maintain an upright and quiet stance on a force platform with eyes open (EO) and eyes closed (EC) for 30s. Area of the stabilogram (AOS) and mean velocity of the center of pressure (COP) in anterior-posterior (AP) and medial-lateral (ML) directions were calculated and used to investigate the effects of gymnastics training, age, and visual information. Younger gymnasts presented greater postural control compared to younger nongymnasts while visual information did not improve postural control in younger nongymnasts. Younger gymnasts displayed improved postural control with EO compared to EC. The mean velocity of the COP in the ML direction was: less for younger gymnasts than younger nongymnasts with EO. These results suggest that gymnastics training promotes improvements in postural control of younger children only, which results from their use of visual information when available.
Movement Analysis Laboratory, Institute of Physical Activity and Sport Sciences, Cruzeiro do Sul University, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
This article was published in the following journal.
Name: Neuroscience letters
- PubMed Source: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21276829
- DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neulet.2011.01.047
Medical and Biotech [MESH] Definitions
Systematic physical exercise. This includes calisthenics, a system of light gymnastics for promoting strength and grace of carriage.
Financial support for training including both student stipends and loans and training grants to institutions.
A POSTURE in which an ideal body mass distribution is achieved. Postural balance provides the body carriage stability and conditions for normal functions in stationary position or in movement, such as sitting, standing, or walking.
The exertion of a strong influence or control over others in a variety of settings--administrative, social, academic, etc.
Physical Education And Training
Instructional programs in the care and development of the body, often in schools. The concept does not include prescribed exercises, which is EXERCISE THERAPY.
ABSTRACT: Ageing commonly disrupts the balance control and compensatory postural responses that contribute to maintaining balance and preventing falls during perturbation of posture. This can lead to...
Postural sway was assessed [via center of pressure (COP) 95% elliptical area (EA), path length (PL), normalized path length (PL(n)) and sample entropy (SEn)] in four conditions of bipedal upright stan...
Short stature and later maturation of youth artistic gymnasts are often attributed to the effects of intensive training from a young age. Given limitations of available data, inadequate specification...
The prevalence of sustaining a sport injury is high in adults. Deficits in postural control/muscle strength represent important injury-risk factors. Thus, the purpose of this study was to investigate...
This paper proposes a closed-loop optimal control model predicting changes between in-phase and anti-phase postural coordination during standing and related supra-postural activities. The model allows...
The goal of the present study was to objectively evaluate the postural behaviour of type II obese patients as compared to adults showing a normal body mass index (BMI) in critical postural...
The Global Postural Re-Education is a global approach for the treatment of musculoskeletal disease. Using specific progressive posture for stretching particular shortened chain muscle the...
Postural stability and balance are defined as the body's ability to return the body back to its equilibrium point when exposed to a perturbation. This exploratory project is based on the h...
To determine the effects of instrument-applied chiropractic manipulative therapy (CMT) on postural control.
The purpose of this study is to test the effect of high velocity low amplitude (HVLA) chiropractic cervical manipulation on the patient's postural control as measured by a force plate.