you or your doctor thinks you may be at risk for osteoporosis, you may have a screening test to check
your bone thickness. A screening test may be advisable if you have:
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) recommends that
all women age 65 and older routinely have a
bone density test to test for osteoporosis. If
you are at increased risk for broken bones caused by osteoporosis, routine
testing should start sooner.1 USPSTF recommends that you and your doctor check your fracture risk using a tool such as FRAX to help decide whether you should be screened for osteoporosis. Talk to your doctor about your risk factors and when to start bone density screening.
The FRAX tool was developed by the World Health Organization to help predict your risk of having a fracture related to osteoporosis in the next 10 years. You can use this tool. Go to the website at www.sheffield.ac.uk/FRAX, and click on Calculation Tool. If you have had a bone density test on your hip, you can type in your score. If you have not had that test, you can leave the score blank.
Most experts recommend that the
decision to test younger women be made on an individual basis,
depending on the risk of osteoporosis and whether the test results
will help with treatment decisions. To help you decide whether you should be
tested for osteoporosis, see:
Experts suggest that older men talk to their doctors about osteoporosis and have bone density tests if they are at risk.2
For more information, see the topic
CitationsU.S. Preventive Services Task Force (2011). Screening
for Osteoporosis: Recommendation Statement.
Available online: http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/uspstf10/osteoporosis/osteors.htm.Qaseem A, et al. (2008). Screening for osteoporosis in
men: A clinical practice guideline from the American College of Physicians.
Annals of Internal Medicine, 148(9):
680–684. Also available online: http://www.acponline.org/clinical_information/guidelines/guidelines.
November 6, 2012
Kathleen Romito, MD - Family Medicine & Carla J. Herman, MD, MPH - Geriatric Medicine
How this information was developed to help you make better health decisions.
To learn more visit Healthwise.org
© 1995-2013 Healthwise, Incorporated. Healthwise, Healthwise for every health decision, and the Healthwise logo are trademarks of Healthwise, Incorporated.
Last modified on: 19 May 2013