Georgia – Gold Cut of Eurasia
President of Georgian Traditional Medicine League and Homeopathy
Since the ancient times famous thinker and travellers unanimously supported a particular location of the Caucasus and namely Georgia in geographical, cultural and geo-political space of the world. Since the earth was divided up into continents, Georgia has been defined as either Asian or European country or it has been divided in the middle. Our aim is to bring to light the Caucasus-Georgia, as a distinguished cultural and geographic phenomenon, that on the basis of the proportions of ‘Gold Cut’ is located at the crossroads of Eurasia.
Intelligent human eye can distinguish things and living creatures by their color and shape. This or that shape that is formed on the basis of ‘Gold Cut’ and the replacement of symmetry attracts the attention by its harmony and beauty.
‘Gold Cut’ – the proportion of universe harmony is in general a formula of common principles of the development and arrangement of nature. It has been known to mankind since the ancient times. A great scientist Pythagoras found the conceptions of ‘Gold Cut’ in the thoughts and deeds of ancient Egyptians and Babylonians. Euclid used it while dealing with geometry. ‘Gold Cut’ is obviously noticeable in immortal sculptures of Phidias. A great Greek philosopher Plato suggested that the Universe is arranged according to the proportions the ratio of noticeable to ethic principles.
Great representatives of the European Renaissance of the Middle Ages and of later period – Leonardo da Vinci, Michelangelo, Durer preached about God-given harmony of ‘Gold Cut’.
Well-known scientists Pacholini and Einstein were studying the exact mathematical (numerical) meaning f ‘Gold Cut’.
Geometry suggests a formula of the above-shown proportions of ‘Gold Cut’ – a:b = b:c, while c = a+b .
When c = 100 then a = 38,2... b = 61,8... .
Particular abundance of symmetry and proportions of ‘Gold Cut’ is very characteristic of Living nature. It is noticeable in the shape of plants, trees, flowers, leaves, in snail’s spiral, in human body, in the proportions of face and limbs.
The proportions of ‘Gold Cut’ is characteristic not only of living nature but it also acts as life-giving stimulus to mankind generally as well as to Georgian art, literature, architecture, music and painting. More than half of the lines of Shota Rustaveli’s poetic Bible ‘The Knight in the Panther’s Skin’ are asymmetrically close to ‘Gold Cut’. The rest of it, almost half of it is represented by symmetric semi-lines, that results in particular harmony and melody of the poem.
The proportions of two mother continents Europe and Asia subordinates to the principles of ‘Gold Cut’. The Caucasus, namely Georgia is located at the crossroads of Europe and Asia and is extremely separated from oceans. The Caucasus is in Pole and the equator and is separated between the oceans on the basis of the proportions of ‘Gold Cut’.
We would like to turn attention to a space model of chemical elements. It is a spiral located on hemisphere. We arranged the space model of chemical elements on terrestrial Globe so that hydrogen – the first element and the most spreading substance (63%) in the universe coincides with Georgia and the space of removal of main elements to sub-group elements coincides with Himalayas and Tibet. The main elements of the periodic table fully covered the Eurasian and African continents.
In chemistry it hasn’t been identified yet to which group the first element of the periodic table – Hydrogen belong to. We have shown that it is in the middle of the space model of the periodic table, like a central point in a clock and it belongs to none of the element groups. The above-mentioned clearly explains the combination of its rusting as well as restoring features. The Caucasus, Georgia is in the same position as Hydrogen. It, as state, political, cultural phenomena bears features characterized for Europe and Asia continents simultaneously.
That’s why this region of the Universe is considered as s cradle of the East-Western civilization. The Caucasus, Georgia is located in the Gold Midst of Eurasia. Millenniums, centuries ago this ‘gold Midst’ of the Earth used to be a ‘battle-field’ of rivalry between two greatest empires. Then Georgia was allotted to virgin. Then it stretched from Nikopsia to Darubandi. It was a Christian citadel of East, a restraining and destructive fortress against invaders.
Today world current events are especially felt here in geo-political space of the Caucasus and Georgia.
We live in a world that faces political and ecological cataclysm. To prevent ecological and social-political cataclysm we suggest everybody to take a special care of this ‘Gold Midst’. Giorgi Odishvili’s (Georgian monk and poet) world sound like calling: ‘Today I declare Georgia the world reserve’.
Each country should be judged and can show its best in relationship with Georgia. The best and innovative forms of social-political relations should be established. The Caucasus, Georgia is eternal, renewed Phenomenon of ancient traditions, past and culture.
Do you know where is Georgia?
Georgia-Gold Cut of Eurasia