One of the most important components of health is ensuring our bodies have the vitamins and minerals it needs to function properly.
With our busy lifestyles it can be difficult to get all the nutrients our body needs through food alone. For example, it is recommended Canadians eat 7-10 servings of fruits and vegetables each day.
While 7-10 servings of fruits and vegetables each day is recommended, less than half of us manage to get 5 servings of fruits and vegetables a day. This means many of us are not getting the vitamins and minerals we need each and every day.
The Pure North Program provides individual assessment of the nutrients your body is missing and then works with you to develop a personalized program to help optimize your nutrition to feel your best each day and reduce the likelihood of illness in the future.
While everyone has different nutrient needs there are groups of people who have heightened nutrient needs. Pregnant women, athletes and people who choose to drink or smoke have increased nutrient demands on their body.
Vitamins and Minerals
Illness prevention is one of the hallmarks of the Pure North system and ensuring that your body has all the nutrients it needs to stave off illness is one of our primary goals.
There are 13 essential vitamins: Vitamins A, C, D, E, K and the B vitamins. Four are fat-soluble vitamins – A, D, E and K – and are stored in the body’s fatty tissues. The remaining nine vitamins are water-soluble and must be replenished regularly as they are removed from your body through your urine.
There are a myriad of benefits when our body is given the correct balance of vitamins and minerals. Here is an overview of important vitamins and minerals.
Other lifestyle choices, such as drinking or smoking, can increase the body’s need for specific nutrients.
Alcohol can prevent the absorption of vitamins causing nutritional deficiencies. Smoking, and even exposure to cigarette smoke, not only depletes the levels of vitamin C; it increases the rate at which vitamin C and E are used by the body. In addition, vitamin D3 deficiently in smokers has been linked with lower lung function and more rapid decline in lung function.
The Pure North program is especially beneficial for people with heightened nutrient needs as the personalized assessment takes all lifestyle choices into account and identifies exactly what is needed to make measured health improvements.
Pregnancy is a complicated time with increased demands on the mother’s body. Baby gets all his/her nutrients from mom’s body. With the additional requirements of baby and mom, not having enough of certain nutrients can have lifelong consequences for baby and harmful effects on mom. Pure North can help women ensure they have the nutrients they need for themselves and their baby need to ensure both are as healthy as possible.
Athletes are exposed to physical stresses above and beyond those of most individuals. Nutritional supplementation is needed in order to meet the demands of the extra activity, maximize the capability of the body and help repair tissues after a hard workout. The Pure North program is an excellent way for athletes to take the guesswork out of supplementation. In addition to being organic, gluten-free, and free of additives, the supplements provided through Pure North are also free of banned substances for athletes (confirmed by testing).