Antioxidants have a major role in maintaining the optimal health of our body. These natural compounds can help to prevent aging, heart diseases, coronary problems and even cancer. Antioxidants eliminate the surplus of free radicals that are responsible for the apparition of wrinkles and a large number of health damages. There is no need to look for synthetic antioxidants. Artificial supplements can have various health risks and therefore can never compare to the natural antioxidants offered by mother nature. Nowadays, we’ve all heard and read about antioxidants but do we know which are the top antioxidant vegetables and fruits? Find out more about the 5 best natural antioxidant-rich sources in our guide below.
It is spring already and the best time to pay more attention to
our health and our physical fitness. A
balanced nutrition, rich in antioxidants, can do wonders and
refreshen our whole body after a long winter period.
Antioxidants help to improve your health and wellness by eliminating the toxins and free radicals that are formed during metabolism or due to some environmental factors, such as pollution or cigarette smoke. Besides the beneficial effects that these antioxidant-rich fruits and vegetables have, their daily consume make you meal even more delicious and varied. Here is a list of the top 5 natural antioxidants!
1. Berries are full of vitamins, minerals and fiber.
Whether they are blueberries, strawberries or raspberries, they
offer a large amount of antioxidants, that help your brain activity
and also fight cancer.
According to recent studies, raspberries may contain 10 times more antioxidants than broccoli or tomatoes.
2. Tomatoes are one of the richest source of
antioxidants. Thanks to a substance called lycopene, a pigment that
gives them their beautiful red color, tomatoes are even more
powerful disease fighters than beta carotene or vitamin E.
No wonder tomatoes are so popular. Cooking tomatoes and adding some olive oil is even better, because heat makes antioxidants to be more easily absorbed by the body. They are not only delicious but help maintaining the proper mental function also.
3. Broccoli is undoubtedly a highly nutritious vegatable,
which contains more vitamin C than an orange and is rich in calcium
Studies have shown that sulforaphane, a phytonutrient found in broccoli, intensifies the elimination of certain enzymes that are responsible for the detoxification of the body. That is why broccoly fights successfully against heart diseases, at the same time lowering the risk of breast cancer and many other types of cancer.
4. Red Grapes contain resveratrol, an antioxidant
substance known for its anti-inflammatory, and anti-cancer
properties. The seeds of the fruit contain powerful antioxidants
that are important to maintain our heart healthy and to eliminate
the free-radicals, that are causing damages in our body.
Besides consuming this delicious fruit regularly, you can also enjoy the health benefits of red wine occasionally.
5. Garlic is probably the worlds oldest and most popular
herb used for culinary as well as medicinal reasons. Besides the
fact that this tasty food adds a great flavor to all of your meals,
its health benefits as a natural antibiotic are known for
Garlic keeps the heart healthy by decreasing cholesterol and blood pressure, it boosts the antioxidant levels of the body and eliminates the free radicals. It strengthens the immune system, helps the circulation and has a major role in cancer prevention.
This wonderful plant also helps to keep the youthful elasticity of the skin, slowing down the aging process.
These are the 5 best natural antioxidants we can provide our body with, mainly in this time of the year when we can enjoy plenty of fresh fruits and vegetables also.
In addition to the list above, carrots, spinach and whole grains are also great sources of antioxidants that make your everyday meal even more varied and full of vitamins, helping you to develop a healthier lifestyle.