Practical information about Torres del Paine
Declared by UNESCO as a World Biosphere Reserve in 1978, the Torres del Paine National Park is one of the main attractions in the world. It stands out for its beautiful landscapes and diversity of natural elements: glaciers, lagoons, lakes, mountains, accompanied by a beautiful flora and fauna.
Located 113 kilometers in the north of Puerto Natales, between the Andes and Patagonian plateau, the Park covers an area of 242 hectares, in the central part there is Paine mountain range formed by the three towers (Tres Torres). Some of them have a very particular shape, as the famous horns of Paine (Los Cuernos).
If you are planning a trip to this wonderful place, then we give you a series of useful information that will make your trip through the Torres del Paine Park unforgettable.
How to get there
The Torres del Paine National Park is located in the south of Chile. All the year is available direct access by land, through a paved road of 250 km. between Punta Arenas and Puerto Natales. Next, Route 9 North (150 km.) takes us just to the point: Portería Lago Sarmiento and Laguna Amarga.
Recently was enabled the Y-290 road, known as Lago Porteno, route 80 miles long, that connects Puerto Natales with the Park: Portería Serrano and Park Administration.
Between October and April, several bus companies make daily trips from Puerto Natales to the National Park. Their destination is the Administration Office of Park (entrance through Laguna Amarga, via Castle Hill).
For more information about the access roads to the park, review the guide prepared by Hotel Las Torres.
Entrance to Torres del Paine Park can be done through four gates. All of them are open 8.30 – 20.00 in the period October – April, and 8.30 – 17.30 between May and September.
Although the park is classified as a zone of “mild temperate with rain and no dry season”, weather conditions during the year are various, and it is very difficult to define the exact weather.
In terms of rainfall, it is observed that during all months of the year, average rainfall exceeds 40 mm, concentrating between March and April.
The region is characterized by the fresh summer; the maximum temperature in January (the hottest month) does not exceed 16 ° C, but has a large thermal homogeneity with variations that do not exceed 12 ° C.
Anyway, tourists say that in Torres del Paine can be found all four seasons just in one day, so we advise you to prepare for… everything.
The park entrance fees in high season (October – April) are:
- National: $ 4,000
- Foreigners: $ 15,000
- Children: $ 500
During the low season (May to September) rates are:
- Chilean: $ 3,000
- Foreigners: $ 8,000
- Children: $ 400
The Torres del Paine National Park was created in 1959 and declared a Biosphere Reserve by UNESCO in 1978. Since 1975 it is in charge of National Forestry Corporation (CONAF).
His natural creation dates back 12 thousand years ago, when first inhabitants arrived to Patagonia, followed by Tehuelches (“People of the South”), who inhabited a vast area of the park.
Some damages on land which was used for livestock caused the concern of governments and the community to preserve so rich and attractive area. From this moment has begun a period of maintenance that led to the enactment of this National Park area.
Torres del Paine is currently one of the important tourist attractions in the world, with Hotel Las Torres, place that offers everything what you need to make unforgettable trip to Patagonia.