In the summer vacation, kids at home having nothing better to do, can give a devil of a time to their parents, especially momies. Coming up with healthy summer activities help in avoiding trouble and giving something better to their idle hands to fiddle with.
One of the best summer season activities for kids is cooking with them. When it is too hot outdoors, encouraging them to stay inside and preparing healthy, quick recipes with kids, not only allow to ignore the adverse effect of sun but also provides enjoyable experience for everyone. Cooking is a good way to create wonderful memories that will last forever. Not just that but it is a valuable life skill that helps kids t develop confidence and independence and independence. But what is the best way of working in the kitchen with kids?
1- Let Kids Experiment With Tools: It is suggested to allow kids to experiment with tools and teach them the correct way to perform the basic cooking skills like peeling and using a knife. As they practice these basic cooking skills they will be able to help prepare their favourite recipes later on.
2- Provide Sufficient And Comfortable Workspace: The workspace of kids should be comfortable. They enjoy either sitting at the kitchen table or standing on a stool. Their workspace should be about elbow height. Make sure they are using a stable stool. Large enough for them to stand securely.
3- Don’t Criticize: Don’t be aggressive or criticize if things do not go as planned. Don’t emphasize mistakes. Make it an enjoyable experience and remember most mistakes can turn out to be something delicious. Cook with the kids when you are not pressed for time.
4- Select Activities According To Age: Cooking should be according to the age of the child and of course their taste and abilities. For 3-4 year olds, some of the best activities can be fruit and vegetable washing, stirring ingredients in bowls, greasing pans and mashing foods. For 5-6 year olds, measuring ingredients, cutting soft things with a dull knife, peeling oranges and boiled eggs, tossing salads and setting the table. For 7-8 year olds, the activities are spooning and shaping cookies, beating ingredients with a whisk, pouring muffins and cake mixes into pans. For 9-12 year olds, using an oven and a sharp knife under supervision and stirring sauces. Children over age 10 can also peel garlic and use blender, food processor, electronic mixers, microwave or toaster.
5- Kid’s Safety: Make sure that the kids are appropriately dressed with closed fitting clothes and girls should have the hair tied back.
Turn all pot handles inwards (towards the opposite side) to prevent kids from accidentally knocking over the pot or pan. Avoid pans to be too heavy to move. Use silicone utensils for children under 12, as they are safe for kids. If possible use suitable kitchen tools for kids. Make sure to use small knives for small hands. Ensure to take dirty knives on the counter and never in a sink full of water. Appliance cords should not dangle off table edges.
Everything should be switched off after cooking is finished. Be sure to have f fire extinguisher nearby and emergency numbers near the phone. Never leave a child unattended in the kitchen and never let a young child remove heated things from ovens and stoves. Also never leave cooking food unattended. Place hot foods and liquids away from the edge of counters and tables and pay close attention to items on tablecloths or mats so that children do not scald themselves. Unplug appliances cord when not in use and keep them tied up and out of children’s reach.
6- Use Easy and Delicious Recipes: It is important to begin with a recipe that does not require extensive preparation. Try these recipes that are both enjoyable and easy to make that will definitely make your kids mouth water, and make it a memorable experience of cooking with your kid.
Chicken Noodle Omelette
Water 2 cups
Instant noodles 2 packets (chicken flavored)
Chicken 1 cup (boiled, shredded)
Parsley 2 tsp (finely chopped)
Eggs 2 (lightly beaten)
Cheddar cheese 2 tbsp (grated)
Boil water in a small pan.
Add the noodles and flavor sachet to pan.
Cook noodles according to the directions on the packet and drain well.
Put noodles, chicken, parsley and eggs in a bowl. Mix well.
Put the mixture in a non-stick frying pan.
Cook for 5 minutes without stirring.
Sprinkle with the cheese.
Put under a hot grill. Cook for 2 minutes to brown. Serve hot.
Fruity Yoghurt Pops
Vanilla flavoured yoghurt 2 cups
Strawberry syrup 170 g
Strawberries 4 big
Icing sugar 1 tbsp
Melted chocolate 2 tbsp
Put yoghurt and syrup in a mixing bowl.
Pull off green stems from strawberries.
Chop strawberries into small pieces. Put into the bowl.
Add icing sugar to bowl. Mix well.
Spoon mixture into ice-cream moulds or paper cups.
Put in freezer for 1 hour.
Press a wooden ice-cream stick in the centre of each pop. Put back in freezer for 2 hours.
Turn pops out of mould or pull paper cup away. Drizzle with chocolate before eating.
Fruit Salad Smoothie
Milk 1 ½ cup
Vanilla ice-cream 2 scoops
Strawberries 1 cup (cherries and bananas, chopped)
Ice-cubes ½ cup
Honey 2 tbsp
Put all ingredients in the blender.
Blend together until smooth.
Pour into glasses and serve.