The map below provides a global overview of some of the key datasets contained within WWF-SIGHT. If you would like to learn more about how this data is being applied, please visit our Project page.Go To Projects
A global map of biomass carbon stored in above and below ground living vegetation created using the International Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Good Practice Guidance for reporting national greenhouse gas inventories. Data from the Carbon Dioxide Information Analysis Center.
The Water Risk Filter is the first tool to quantify water-related risk for all industries in all countries. Data from WWF, GIZ, EDEKA
HydroSHEDS provides hydrographic information in a consistent and comprehensive format for regional and global-scale applications. It offers a suite of datasets, including stream networks, watershed boundaries, drainage directions, and other data layers such as flow accumulations, distances, and river topology information.
The Global Lakes and Wetlands Database draws upon the best available maps, data and information to display lakes and wetlands on a global scale. Data from WWF, the Center for Environmental Systems Research, and University of Kassel, Germany.
This data set shows the relative human influence in each terrestrial biome expressed as a percentage. The purpose is to provide an updated map of anthropogenic impacts on the environment in geographic projection which can be used in wildlife conservation planning, natural resource management, and research on human-environment interactions. Data from Wildlife Conservation Society - WCS, and Center for International Earth Science Information Network - CIESIN - Columbia University
This data set represents the least human influenced or wild areas of major terrestrial biomes based on the Human Footprint Index data set. The purpose is to provide an updated map of wild areas in geographic projection which can be used in wildlife conservation planning, natural resource management, and research on human-environment interactions. Data from Wildlife Conservation Society - WCS, and Center for International Earth Science Information Network - CIESIN - Columbia University
The IUCN Red Listed Species Richness is a GIS data layers on terrestrial vertebrate diversity, from http://biodiversitymapping.org
This data set refers to an area allocated by a government or other body for industrial-scale oil palm plantations. This data set displays oil palm concessions as a single layer assembled by aggregating concession data for multiple countries. The data may come from government agencies, NGOs, or other organizations and varies by date and data sources.Data from the World Resources Institute.
The Round Table on Responsible Soy (RTRS) is a civil society organization that promotes the production, processing and marketing of responsible soy globally. It aims to promote sustainable production to reduce the social and environmental impacts of soybeans.