Our medical community has brought much effort and research to find news ways to treat the difficulties of these diseases. Physicians and medical doctors have the capability of repairing and fixing broken bodily systems by restoring tissues that begin to weaken and boosting systems
To understand the reasons of how and why stem cells work to repair our bodies, it is paramount to understand the basics of what is a stem cell is and how it functions. Stem cells are biological cells that can be found in all multi-cellular organisms. Adult stem cells, which are in a variety of our bodily tissues, act as part of the body’s system of reconstructing and replenishing injured tissues. Scientists have the capability of harvesting and supplying adult stem cells from human bone marrow, umbilical cord blood, brain cells, baby teeth and other organ tissue.
In addition, medical scientist have attempted to use embryonic stem cells. Embryonic stem cell research uses a one-week-old fetus cell, called a blastocyst, which has been developing in a petri-dish and is frozen.
While embryonic stem cell research is currently being tested, there has been no success whatsoever. Embryonic stem cell research has proven to be a financial and medical failure. No treatments or lifesaving cures have been developed from this method, and many veteran scientists believe that embryonic stems cells have no real future of success. Unfortunately, when they run tests with stems cells extracted from embryos, it does more damage than healing. California has invested $3 billion and 10 years on embryonic stem cell research. With what we know now, it would have been more productive if they had focused on adult stem cells.
They have seen a promising future with adult stem cell research. It's medically and scientifically proven that adult stem cells and stem cells extracted from umbilical cord blood actually work quite effectively. Adult stem cells have shown success in therapy for multiple sclerosis, stroke, sickle cell anemia, diabetes, Parkinson’s disease and more.
When scientists use stem cells, it is vital that the cells be in a virgin-like stage. To gain clean and pure Stem Cells, it seems as if Embryonic Stems Cells were the most attractive option. However, with the impressive advances in our technology, we have the capability to turn the clock back on our Adult Stem Cells . Using genetic reprogramming we can compose Adult Stems Cells back to their original, Embryonic -like stage, . These advances have actually changed the way we are thinking of diseases and aging. We can generate a unlimited supply of Stems Cells from a few extracted Stem Cells. Adult Stem Cells can divide and self-renew diligently and generate the type of organs from which they originated. Because of their aggressive reproduction, Stem Cells could produce a healthy and fully operational organ from only a few Stem Cells. With time and patience, they can use these Stem Cells to develop nerves, heart cells, or any other living tissue.
These opens a door to some very exciting potential; people suffering from Type 1 Diabetes could have Stems Cells generate them new insulin making pancreatic cells, or if we could rebuild dying brain cells and replenish neurons that affect memory, patents who suffer from Alzheimer’s could be greatly and positively benefited. Because Stem Cells replenish cells as such a rapid rate, Stem Cells will be able to aid senior citizens who have greater difficulty recovering from injuries.
Treating a disease is one matter, however what about the possibility of curing a disease. You have to go beyond repairing the broken pieces, to almost replacing them all together. You have to remove the pathological nucleus of the problem and erase it from ever returning again, which is another way doctors hope to utilize stem cells.
Adult stem cells have been a major advance. Many scientists are calling adult stem cells the “fountain of youth.” As Harvard University stem cell researcher Douglas Melton explained, “In the absence of disease, why would we die? With stem cells, can we get control of the aging process.” As the hype and potential mount, it only seems a matter of time before patients who are awaiting researchers to discover cures and treatment will get the attention and therapy they need. Hopefully, with these no less than spectacular advancements in medical science we can say hello to a healthier future, largely thanks to stem cells.
Cal Andrew Berry is a home-educated high school senior. His family has a small-scale, organic farm which raises a variety of vegetables and animals in White Cloud. s