In the 1930s, a German painter became famous among Indian royalty for his portraiture skills. But he chose to point his camera on our nation's Father. Here's why
On a warm summer day in March, 1936, Hannes Fritz Munich sat outside the newly built Harijan quarters in New Delhi's Kingsway Camp, waiting for an audience with Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi. Wiping the sweat off his brow, the dapper 40-year-old German artist thought about what he would say to the man, who was clearly one of the most important personages in Indian politics. "Hello, Mr Gandhi. I'm Fritz Munich, a royal painter, and I'd like to make a portrait of you."
Gandhi refused to sit for a portrait — according to historian G. Venkatachalam, Gandhi never allowed any artist, no matter how eminent, to paint him — but he let Munich use his camera.
Seventy six years later, this previously unseen footage will form part of a documentary film, Munich in India, which premieres on November 26, at the ongoing International Film Festival of India in Goa. Directed by Walter Steffen, the documentary follows the artist's grandson, Konstantin Fritz, as he traces his grandfather's journeys in India from 1932 to 1937.
Munich had first landed in Bombay aboard The Floating Palace in February 1932 with his dancer wife, Editha. The couple visited several Indian princely states, including Baroda, Udaipur, Mourvi, and Kapurthala and mingled with royalty while Munich drew lavish portraits of the members of the palace. The duo returned the following year, and spent several months travelling across the country. Editha, even wrote a column for a German paper that described their 'exotic' travels.
In November 1935, Munich visited India for the third time. This time, however, he was alone, since Editha had just given birth to their first son at their lake home in Seeshaupt, Germany. Munich spent the first two months of the New Year at the royal palace of Mourvi, completing what he thought was his best work yet, a portrait of the maharaja. In March, he decided to head to New Delhi to meet — and paint a portrait of — Gandhi.
The national leader, who wasn't keeping too well, was at the capital city to get some much-deserved rest. In a letter to Jawaharlal Nehru dated March 9, 1936 — around the same time he met Munich — Gandhi wrote from the Harijan quarters, "There is nothing organically wrong with me. The body has even gained in weight. But it has lost the vitality it seemed to have only three months ago. Strange to say, I never felt any illness. And yet the body had become weak and the instrument registered high bloodpressure. I have to be careful. I am in Delhi to rest for a few days."
Munich readily agreed to shoot Gandhi on film. On a 16-mm reel, Munich caught a three-minute video showing Gandhi walking down a staircase and on a road with his companions. Munich also took several photos of Gandhi, including one at a prayer meeting with other Congress leaders.
"I am presented to Mr Gandhi (sic). It is a huge honour for me, and I want to portray him. But Gandhi lets no one portray him in any manner. I have got permission to film him on his daily walk and to photograph him. This footage has turned out well!" Munich wrote in his diary the same month.
This was the only time Munich met Gandhi. The following year, he was told by some sympathetic Indian artistocrats that Germans were no longer welcome in British colonies due to the political climate created by Hitler in Germany. Munich stopped visiting India after that and retired to his village near Munich city.
"My grandfather had over 2.5 hours of video footage that he gathered on his travels in India. Market scenes, colonial rulers, the viceroy, political figures like Gandhi, the royals whose portraits he painted — it is a treasure trove," said Fritz, who discovered the footage in the attic of the family's lake house.
Fritz intends to share some of these photographs and footage with the Sabarmati Ashram in Ahmedabad, which houses an enormous collection of literature and archival material on Gandhi.