The only birds that own true red and green color and mobile outer toes, capable of rotating forward or backward! Meet the attractive and colorful turacos of Africa.
The Livingstone’s Turaco
The Livingstone’s Turaco (Tauraco livingstonii) is found in the subtropical lowlands and humid forests of southeastern Africa. Similar in appearance with the Knysna Turaco and Schalow’s Turaco, this attractive bird can be distinguish from both birds by its distinctive loud calls. On average, the species is about 45cm long including the tail and weighs about 262-380 grams. A dominant feature of the Livingstone’s Turaco is its white-tip, raised crest measuring around 65-75mm long. This species feeds mainly on available fruits.
The White-crested Turaco
The White-crested Turaco (Tauraco leucolophus) are near-passerine birds endemic to eastern Nigeria and western Kenya. They prefer open woodland and riverine forests. The species is easily recognized by its striking white crest, chin, neck and nape. Overall body plumage is dark blue mark with lime green feathers on its breast. It feeds mainly on fruits but also eats flowers, buds, insects and snails.
The Red-crested Turaco
The Red-crested Turaco (Tauraco erythrolophus) is a medium-sized passerine bird endemic to western Angola. On average, it measures between 47.5-50 cm (19-20 in) from beak to tip of tail and weighs 210-325 g. The species has green body plumage, characteristic tall, red crest, red eyes, yellowish-green beak and long tail. Its diet includes: fruits, seeds, leaves, flowers and occasionally snails.
The Purple-crested Turaco
The Purple-crested Turaco (Tauraco porphyreolophus) is widespread from Uganda through Tanzania inhabiting evergreen forests and moist woodland. This bird sports a purple-colored body plumage with red flight feathers. The green head is adorned with a purple-colored crest. The throat and neck are green and brown. It has black eyes with red rings, orange beak, long blue tail, and black legs. On average, the Purple-crested Turaco measures 45 centimeters and weighs around 300 grams. It feeds mainly on fruits.
The Violet Turaco
The Violet Turaco (Musophaga violacea) is a large species of turaco, endemic to the forests of tropical West Africa. The species is usually “seen” among the tree foliage foraging for fruits, berries, buds, and leaves. It measures around 45-50 cm45 cm long, including a long tail and weighs up to 360 g. Adults have an overall blue-black plumage, yellow forehead, crimson crown, dark-brown eyes, and red bill.
The White-bellied Go-away-bird
The White-bellied Go-away-bird (Corythaixoides leucogaster) is a medium to large species of turaco native to Central and South Africa. It inhabits evergreen forests, well-wooded areas and dry acacia savannas. This attractive bird measures 51 cm (20 inches) long including the tail and weighs around 170-200 grams. The overall plumage is gray with characteristic white breast and white-patched, black tail. It has small head, short bill, and medium-sized neck. Males sport black bill while females have green one. A very noisy bird, it feeds mainly on fruits.
The Great Blue Turaco
The largest member of the Turaco family. the Great Blue Turaco (Corythaeola cristata), lives in sub-Saharan Africa. An arboreal species, it prefers rain forests and gallery forests. Generally, it measures 70–76 cm (28–30 in) long and weighs 800 –1,231 g (1.8 –2.71 lb.) It has an overall bright-blue body plumage mark with blue and yellow tail feathers. It has a sturdy body, short wings and long tail. This colorful and attractive turaco feeds mostly on fruit.
You might be interested in:
- Fascinating Birds: The Most Skilled Nest Builder
- 12 Exotic Birds Endemic to The Philippines
- Seven of The World’s Most Intriguing Animals
- The Mighty Ants
- 15 Surprising Animal Facts, You Probably Don’t Know
Check Out My Blogs: