In what may be the longest, and most poignant, letter to a relative from a soldier in the Civil War, this authoritative book recounts the bloody, three-day battle in the summer of 1863. Haskell's descriptions of the wounded, of skirmishes, attacks and counterattacks, estimates of losses, and burials ... read more
Customers who bought this book also bought:
Our Editors also recommend:
From Antietam to Gettysburg: A Civil War Coloring Book by Peter F. Copeland Forty-five precise black-and-white illustrations document great battles, generals of the War Between the States. Pickett's charge at Cemetery Ridge; Union Army retreat from Fredericksburg; portraits of Lee, Meade, Hood, other generals.
History of the Civil War, 1861-1865 by James Ford Rhodes 1917 Pulitzer Prize–winner is widely regarded as one of the most outstanding studies — and first unbiased history — of the Civil War. "...very attractive volume." — American Historical Review. Notes. 2 maps. Introduction.
A Short History of the Civil War: Ordeal by Fire by Fletcher Pratt Best one-volume history brings the events, figures, and battles of monumental conflict vividly to life. Absorbing details of military campaigns, battlefield strategies, and personalities revealed in an audacious style.
Photographic Views of Sherman's March by George N. Barnard Originally published in a now-rare collector's edition in 1866, these 68 historic photographs include haunting images of the battlefields and ruined mansions of one of history's most devastating military campaigns.
The Civil War: A Book of Quotations by Bob Blaisdell More than 700 quotes — arranged chronologically and divided into sections on specific topics and events — provide a running narrative by the many who lived through or died in the Civil War. Notes.
Great Speeches by Abraham Lincoln Masterly orations and letters. "House Divided" speech (1858), First Inaugural Address (1861), Gettysburg Address (1863), Letter to Mrs. Bixby (1864), Second Inaugural Address (1865), 11 others. Includes 2 selections from the Common Core State Standards Initiative.
In what may be the longest, and most poignant, letter to a relative from a soldier in the Civil War, this authoritative book recounts the bloody, three-day battle in the summer of 1863. Haskell's descriptions of the wounded, of skirmishes, attacks and counterattacks, estimates of losses, and burials are all vividly described. 2 maps.
Unabridged republication of the second edition of The Battle of Gettysburg, published by the Wisconsin History Commission, 1910.
This book was printed in the United States of America.
Dover books are made to last a lifetime. Our US book-manufacturing partners produce the highest quality books in the world and they create jobs for our fellow citizens. Manufacturing in the United States also ensures that our books are printed in an environmentally friendly fashion, on paper sourced from responsibly managed forests.