If you are thinking of changing over to a vegetarian diet but have been discouraged by skeptics who view a vegetarian diet as being devoid of vital nutrients then do not be disheartened. A vegetarian diet has all the required proteins, carbohydrates, fats and vitamins that are essential for a healthy body and mind. Here are some nutritional choices for vegetarians by choice.
But Where Are The Proteins And Vitamins?
Most skeptics worry about the lack of proteins and vitamins such as B12 in an all vegan diet. However, these can easily be found in day-to-day products. Protein is abundantly available in plant based foods including soy and tofu, dairy products, legumes, nuts, seeds and whole grains. Thus, all types of proteins can easily be obtained from most of the vegetarian products in your daily diet. Vitamins too are abundantly available in most fruits such as apples, grapes, oranges, etc. and vegetables such as carrots, green leafy vegetables and milk. Vitamin B12 is available in dairy products, breakfast cereals and vegetable patties fortified with B12. If you are lactose intolerant, then you might have to take a B12 supplement pill and also monitor your B12 levels on a regular basis. Apart from that, you can easily get your calcium from milk, cheese, green leafy vegetables, tofu, soy cheese and even calcium fortified orange juice. You can even get your quota of zinc from legumes, whole grain bread, nuts and tofu. Vegetarian foods also contain adequate amounts of fats and carbohydrates and there are many cultures in the world that have survived and flourished for generations solely on vegetarian food.
Points To Ponder When You Consume Vegetarian Food.
Even though vegetables, fruits and grains are not very high in calories or harmful fat or cholesterol, it the way in which you prepare these dishes that could jeopardize your health. If you fry them in batter or use a lot of oil, butter or cheese in preparing them, then you might only negate the nutritional benefits of a vegetarian diet. You will need to boil, roast or even eat some of the vegetables in raw form in order to get the best out of them. This does not mean that they will not be tasty at all. Just by adding a few herbs, spices or even something simple as sprinkling them with lemon juice, you can convert a few vegetables into a tasty salad. There are a lot of soup, salad and vegetable recipes to choose from and there are numerable recipe books available in bookstores and even on the Internet. The key is to study the vegetables and fruits that can provide you with a balanced nutrition and include them in your regular diet. A vegetarian diet will also help you to eat more and this will help you to control your hunger pangs to a great extent. Most vegetables and fruits are rich in fiber and low on fat and if cooked properly can deliver the right nutrition for your body.
Thus, by not drowning your vegetarian diet in batter, oil or cheese, you can easily get your recommended dosage of fats, carbohydrates, proteins and vitamins without any problem while still avoiding some of the bad effects of consuming meat or eggs on a regular basis. So, instead of being skeptical just go ahead and enjoy the benefits of a nutritional vegetarian diet.
Category: The Best Weight Loss Articles!