[UPDATE, 6/8: The past few bloody days on Peru's forest frontier prove once again that government efforts to develop resources in the Amazon will remain fraught with conflict if there's a sense of inequity or a lack of community inclusion. Mongabay.com provides some valuable context.]
For 15 years, Foster Brown, a senior scientist at the Woods Hole Research Center, has been living in and around Acre, the state where Chico Mendes was killed 20 years ago for leading a homegrown movement to preserve rain forests as living assets. I asked Dr. Brown, who is in the capital, Rio Branco, for an update on the long-imagined “Road to the Pacific” and other projects and trends that could imperil the region’s remaining rain forests. Here’s what he wrote back:
The heart of this region is where the Peruvian Department of Madre de Dios, the Brazilian State of Acre, and the Bolivian Department of Pando meet. This region is also known by the acronym MAP, based on the initials of the first letters of the respective political units. The MAP Region has some of the most biologically diverse rain forests in the world and a cultural diversity that includes indigenous tribes trying to avoid contact with industrial society. The region is about as large as the combined areas of New York State, Pennsylvania, New Jersey and Massachusetts, but with a combined population of less than a million persons. Several of the most important forces shaping development here are related to the recent surge in infrastructure investments.
Until recently, the navigable rivers and roads came to an end in the MAP Region. When I first visited Acre in the late 1980s, a common phrase described the region as “the end of the world.” This was in this end of the world where Chico Mendes led a movement for land reform that also sought to preserve forest resources. But he was also involved in the issue of highways; Mendes’ pointed questioning about the environmental and social impacts of the IDB-funded [Inter-American Development Bank] paving of the BR-364 highway to Rio Branco, Acre contributed to his international prestige.
Major infrastructure investments are now transforming the respective ends of the world for Brazil, Bolivia, and Peru into an expanding transportation and energy corridor. While there are definite benefits for regional development, the rate and magnitude of these investments may produce significant colateral damage to regional ecosystems and societies. The investments planned for the next five years in MAP and neighboring regions are on the order of 10-20 billion dollars and will involve the migration of tens of thousands of persons. Let me sketch out some of the most important investments.
Three major road networks are planned to link this area with ports in the Pacific. The most advanced network is the Interoceanic Highway connecting the Brazilian all-weather road system through paving highways in Acre and Madre de Dios to the Pacific ports of Matarani and Ilo. Initially budgeted at 800 million dollars, the costs now exceed one billion dollars.