- NAME: Alice Paul
- OCCUPATION: Women's Rights Activist
- BIRTH DATE: January 11, 1885
- DEATH DATE: July 09, 1977
- EDUCATION: Swarthmore College, University of Pennsylvania, University of Birmingham
- PLACE OF BIRTH: Moorestown, New Jersey
- PLACE OF DEATH: Moorestown, New Jersey
- Full Name: Alice Stokes Paul
- AKA: Alice Paul
Best Known For
Suffragette Alice Paul dedicated her life's work to women's rights and was a key figure in the push for the 19th Amendment.
Think you know about Biography?
Answer questions and see how you rank against other players.Play Now
Born on January 11, 1885, in Moorestown, New Jersey, Alice Paul grew up Quaker and attended Swarthmore College before living in England and pushing for women's voting rights. When she returned to America in 1910, she became a leader in the suffragist movement,
eventually forming the National Woman's Party with Lucy Burns and becoming a key figure in the voices that led to the passage of the 19th Amendment. In later years she advocated for the passage of an Equal Rights Amendment as well. She died in Moorestown on July 9, 1977.
Alice Paul was born on January 11, 1885, in Moorestown, New Jersey. Influenced by her Quaker family, she studied at Swarthmore College in 1905 and went on to do graduate work in New York City and England.
While in London from 1906 to 1909, Paul became politically active and unafraid to use dramatic tactics in support of a cause. She joined the women's suffrage movement in Britain and was arrested on several occasions, serving time in jail and going on a hunger strike.
When she returned to the United States in 1910, Paul became involved in the women’s suffrage movement there as well. Driven also to change other laws that affected women, she earned a Ph.D. from the University of Pennsylvania in 1912.
At first, Paul was a member of the National American Woman Suffrage Association and served as the chair of its congressional committee. Out of frustration with NAWSA's policies, however, Paul left to form the more militant Congressional Union for Woman Suffrage with Lucy Burns. The group was later renamed the National Woman's Party with the goal of implementing change on a federal level.
Known for using provocative visual media to make their point, NWP members known as the "Silent Sentinels" picketed the White House under the Woodrow Wilson administration in 1917, making them the first group to take such action. Paul was jailed in October and November of that year as a result of the protests.
After women won the right to vote with the 19th Amendment in 1920, Paul devoted herself to working on additional empowerment measures for women. In 1923, she introduced the first Equal Rights Amendment in Congress and in later decades worked on the civil rights bill and fair employment practices. Although she did not live to see the ERA added to the U.S. Constitution, she did get an equal rights affirmation included in the preamble to the United Nations charter.
Until she was debilitated by a stroke in 1974, Alice Paul continued her fight for women’s rights. She died on July 9, 1977, in the town of her birth.
© 2013 A+E Networks. All rights reserved.
profile name: Alice Paul profile occupation:
Sign in with Facebook to see how you and your friends are connected to famous icons.
Your Friends' Connections
Included In These Groups
Famous Capricorns 500 people in this group
Women and men have continued the call for full-fledged women’s rights in a number of venues, including voting access, fair treatment in the workplace and reproductive and sexual freedom. Find out more about this eclectic and electric group of global activists who include Shirin Ebadi, Coretta Scott King, Asra Nomani and Elizabeth Cady Stanton.
Visit Biography.com's Women's History group to explore more biographies, photos and videos of some the world's most fascinating women.
Famous Women's Rights Activists 79 people in this group
Famous People Named Alice 10 people in this group