Teaching modern languages offers challenges with big rewards. Choosing this path is not just about teaching vocabulary and pronunciation, it requires the commitment to developing real cultural awareness.
The main languages taught in schools are French, German and Spanish. Others include Italian, Russian, Mandarin, Japanese, Urdu and Bengali. There is a shortage of teachers available in these priority subjects and there is demand for high-calibre talent to take on the challenge.
The number of children taking a modern foreign language (MFL) at GCSE will be almost a third higher in 2013 than it was in 2011 and is forecast to continue to grow, so there is a real need for talented language teachers.
Also a recent government review of the national curriculum has recommended that all children from the age of nine should learn a foreign language.
If you specialise in teaching modern languages at secondary level, bursaries of up to £20,000 are available for courses starting in 2013. The amount of bursary you will be eligible for depends on the subject you want to teach and your degree class. For further information, please visit our bursary information page
Take advantage of our new Premier Plus service to receive one-to-one advice and exclusive benefits.
Sign up with us
Call the Teaching Line on 0800 389 2500 and receive tailored information and advice.
If you’re a candidate from the European Economic Area (EEA) you need to have a university degree or the English equivalent, and be a confident and competent English speaker. For more information about qualification comparisons and to help determine postgraduate bursary eligibility, you should consult your chosen training provider or refer to the equivalency table (PDF, 1MB). This is based on a grade comparison exercise carried out by UK NARIC of the majority of international awards that are considered comparable to British Bachelor (honours) degree standard.
We offer support for you on the journey to becoming a modern languages teacher through tailored advice and information. Sign up to discover what a career in teaching languages has to offer.
Do you have what it takes? Find out how the we can support you along your path
Our new enhanced service, Premier Plus, is available to those who wish to start training for a shortage subject such as modern languages, in the academic year 2012/13. You’ll be eligible for exclusive benefits including personalised advice from a named adviser.
Find out more about teaching German.
Find out more about a career in teaching French.
Find out more about becoming a Spanish teacher.
Read more about teaching MFL at primary level.
Explore the benefits and career progression of teaching shortage subjects.
Learn how we can support you on your path into teaching.
Find out what it takes to excel at teaching MFL.