Translate this page
BOWEL CONTROL AND
PROBLEMS WITH SOILING
PROBLEMS WITH SOILING
What is the bowel control?
Ability to pass stool at a time and place that is socially conducive is called as bowel control. Most children can control their bowels and are toilet trained by four years of age.
What is soiling?
Even after bowel control has been achieved, sometimes, bowel accidents can occur and a child can pass stools in the panty and that is called as soiling. It leads to frustration sometimes to the child, parents, teachers and other people important in the child's life. Many times social difficulties can aggravate this problem and can be severe.
What is the main reason for soiling?
This problem generally starts during toilet training with too vigorous or early attempts to toilet train before the child is ready for it. This leads to the child holding back at stools and constipation and then dribbling of the loose stools from around the heard stools leading to soiling. Sometimes physical disabilities that lead to the inability to keep clean and continuous dribbling of stool can occur. Emotional problems with parents are the main reasons. It may start with stressful changes in the child's life such as birth of sibling or divorce of parents, working parents, family transfers or other family problems. It is also very common in boys.
What is the encopresis?
Soiling problem in children who do not have any type of illness or disability is called encopresis. Children often have other problems like short attention span, hyperactivity and low frustration tolerance and poor coordination.
How to treat soiling?
First complete physical check up by family physician or pediatrician is required to rule out a physical disability. If there is no physical problem then next step is referral to a child psychologist who can check for emotional problems that could be contributing to the problem. Patience is required as long term treatment is required and progress is slow. Many times early diagnosis and early treatment can help and shorten treatment duration. If constipation is the cause, then stool softeners with laxatives are used for a short time till bowel habits normalize.
Iron Deficiency in Children
What is iron deficiency?
The main cause of iron deficiency in the first six months of life is prematurity and inadequate accumulation of iron in the newborn (if the mother is deficient in iron). After six months main cause of iron deficiency is dietary inadequacy and poor intake of iron rich foods. Worms can also lead to iron deficiency by causing blood loss in the stools.
Specialist Answers for Common Childhood Problems
The information given by www.pediatriconcall.com is provided by medical and paramedical & Health providers voluntarily for display & is meant only for informational purpose. The site does not guarantee the accuracy or authenticity of the information. Use of any information is solely at the user's own risk. The appearance of advertisement or product information in the various section in the website does not constitute an endorsement or approval by Pediatric Oncall of the quality or value of the said product or of claims made by its manufacturer.