South Florida Ecosystem History Project
The USGS South Florida Ecosystem History Project, part of the USGS South Florida Ecosytem Program, is designed to integrate studies from a number of researchers compiling data from terrestrial, marine, and freshwater ecosystems within south Florida. The Project is divided into 3 regions: Biscayne Bay & the Southeast coast, Florida Bay & the Southwest coast, and Terrestrial & Freshwater Ecosystems or Southern Florida. The purpose of these projects is to provide information about the ecosystem's recent history based upon analyses of paleontology, palynology, geochemisty, hydrology, and sedimentology of cores taken from south Florida region.
The USGS South Florida Ecosystem History Online Database contains data regarding site locations, field information, water chemistry and salinity, vegetation information, and biotic occurrence tables for foraminifers, molluscs, ostracodes, pollen, dinoflagellates, and diatoms.
USGS Open File Reports are publications which document the progress of current ongoing studies and include interpretation of the data that has been compiled. Open File Reports for all of the South Florida Ecosystem History Projects are available online as PDFs. You will need the free Adobe Acrobat Reader in order to view these files.
Salinity Maps compare abundances of benthic foraminifers in modern sediment samples to modern salinity conditions in Florida Bay and Biscayne Bay.
Our "Kid's Corner" featuring: a trivia game, animated characters, a simplified dictionary of terms used on this page, and a vast photo gallery. This part of the website is designed to assist young people in grasping the importance of working to preserve our environment and entertain them at the same time.
Our new ONLINE POSTERS section gives you access to the posters that were presented at recent scientific meetings. Most of the posters are presented exactly as they were at the original meeting using PDF files, which allows you to zoom in on text and even closely examine the figures, graphs, and photos. (You will need the free Adobe Acrobat Reader in order to view the PDF files.)
Collaborators and Partners
The USGS South Florida Ecosystem History Project is part of the USGS South Florida Ecosystem Program which works in part with a number of partners and collaborators who provide services, information, access to land, and grant support. Partners and collaborators for this project include: the Everglades National Park, Biscayne National Park, the South Florida Water Management District (SFWMD), the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), the Florida Geological Survey (FGS), Dade County Environmental Resource Management (DERM), the Keys Marine Laboratory (KML), the Florida Institute of Oceanography (FIO), Duke University, the Army Corp of Engineers, the Loxahatchee National Wildlife Refuge, and Big Cypress National Preserve.
Principle investigators of the USGS Ecosystem History Projects include: Lynn Brewster-Wingard, Debra Willard, Charles Holmes, Thomas Cronin, Bruce Wardlaw, Scott Ishman, and Jacqueline Huvane. For more information on researchers and other USGS Ecosystem Projects in south Florida visit http://sofia.usgs.gov.
U.S. Department of the Interior, U.S. Geological Survey, Center for Coastal Geology
This page is: http://sofia.er.usgs.gov /flaecohist/index.html
Comments and suggestions? Contact: Heather Henkel - Webmaster (email@example.com)
Last updated: January 15, 2013 @ 12:42 PM(TJE)