Century Dictionary and Cyclopedia
- n. A frame, often of silver, for holding cruets and casters. The frame, cruets, and casters together are commonly called casters, the casters, or a caster.
GNU Webster's 1913
- n. a frame for holding cruets; a caster; a stand for cruets together with the cruets containing various condiments.
- n. a stand for cruets containing various condiments
“There was no one in the eating-room, which had a separate entrance, and they sat down at a small table with a cruet-stand, a handbell, a bottle of Worcester sauce, and in a vase some failing pyrethrums which had never been fresh.”
“The table with all the plates was upset; sauce, meat, knives, the salt, and cruet-stand were strewn over the room;”
““It serves you right,” she was saying: “I always told you not to have that old-fashioned cruet-stand.””
““And remembered that there were emetics in the cruet-stand,” said Father Brown.”
““Oh, there are sermons in a cruet-stand, too,” said”
“Holmes propped it against the cruet-stand and read it while he ate.”
“It touched up the cruet-stand and the britannia metal in the little dining-room at the Green Man and an emaciated ray even found its way to the rows of bottles in the bar and to the anvil at Copse Forge.”
“Food, plates, knives and forks, glasses, and a cruet-stand were all she ever thought necessary; and even for a centre vase of flowers I had to ask, and often to insist, during the time she was single-handed.”
“He went into the pantry, my Lord," the steward continued, "when my back was turned, and while he was looking about him in one of the cupboards, the vessel took a lurch to port, and unshipping the cruet-stand, emptied the pepper-pot in his eye, my Lord.”
“Life, as she said to Wally, was too short to woo a cruet-stand!”
These user-created lists contain the word ‘cruet-stand’.
A list of pewter items and wares gleaned from the literature, or found listed for sale in antique catalogs - from spoons to stills and chamber pots to church cups. A synonym for the larger, heavier...
Looking for tweets for cruet-stand.