Three Different Choices
||edHelper's suggested reading level:
||grades 3 to 4
||Flesch-Kincaid grade level:
||allowance, mowed, beginning, saving, responsibility, pouted, fell, whatever, stayed, faster, lawn, several, saved, jobs, counter, excited
Print Three Different Choices
Quickly Print - PDF format
Quickly Print - HTML format
Feedback on Three Different Choices
Three Different Choices
By Joyce Furstenau
1 Jimmy started saving his allowance at the beginning of summer. He was saving for a new bike. He saw the perfect bike in the window of the cycle shop. It cost almost a hundred dollars. His parents said he could have it as long as he paid for it himself. His allowance was only five dollars a week. He didn't really want to wait five months to get the bike so he decided he needed to earn some extra money along the way. He mowed his neighbor's lawn and earned five dollars for that. He took care of another neighbor's dog while they were on vacation and earned ten dollars for that. With his allowance and his earnings, it would still take him a long time before he could buy the bike. Jimmy began to think of other things he could do to earn money. He walked all around the neighborhood asking for work. By the end of the summer, Jimmy got his bike.
2 Fred wanted a scooter. He started saving his allowance for a scooter. A new gas scooter cost three hundred dollars. His father told him he would pay half the cost of the scooter, but Fred would need to pay the other half. Fred was excited. He got six dollars a week for his allowance. He had already saved twelve dollars. His friend Mike came over with a new computer game. They played it together. It was fun.
3 "How much was it?" asked Fred.
4 "Twenty dollars," answered Mike. "But I know where you can get a used one for only twelve."
5 Fred wanted the new game. He took his scooter savings out of his drawer, and he and Mike went to the store to purchase the game. After he played the game for a while, he was tired of it. He wished he had not spent the money he had been saving towards the scooter on a game. Now he would have to start all over.
6 Because Fred kept spending all or part of his allowance, he gave up on getting a scooter.
7 Maria saw a pretty coat at the department store. She wanted a pretty coat for school. She asked her mother if she could have the coat. Her mother said she did not have the money to buy a fancy coat like the one Maria wanted. Maria's face fell. She pouted the rest of the morning. When she and her mother got home, Maria went to her room. She lay on her bed looking at magazines. Her mother asked her to help make dinner.
8 "Just a minute," Maria answered, but she did not help her mother. Maria went into the bathroom and took a shower. Her mother made dinner without Maria's help.
9 Maria was first to the table when it was time to eat. After her family said grace, Maria asked her mother if she could earn an allowance. Her mother looked surprised.
Paragraphs 10 to 18:
For the complete story with questions: click here for printable
Weekly Reading Books
More Activities, Lesson Plans, and Worksheets
Copyright © 2013 edHelper