When you think of sodium, salt probably comes to mind. Although the two terms, “sodium” and “salt” are often used interchangeably, they are different substances. The chemical name for salt, sodium chloride, reveals that sodium is in fact a component of salt. By weight, salt is composed of 40 percent sodium and 60 percent chloride. One teaspoon of salt weighs 5 grams and contains about 2,300 milligrams of sodium.
The United States provides one of the safest food supplies in the world. With the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), and the food, beverage and agricultural industries working together, our food supply is becoming even safer. However, despite all of these safety factors, microorganisms may still exist at levels that present risks to consumers.
Bisphenol A (BPA) is a chemical used in the manufacture of polycarbonate plastic or epoxy resins. These resins are used in some food packaging materials, such as the lining inside metal-based food and beverage cans, coatings on metal closures / lids for glass jars, reusable plastic containers for food and beverages and tableware.
Energy drinks have been increasing in popularity, especially among teens and children. Due to several articles in the media about negative health effects experienced by people who consumed too many energy drinks, some parents and school personnel have become concerned about their growing popularity specifically among teens and children.
Aspartame is a low-calorie sweetener used in foods and beverages in more than 100 countries around the world. It is about 200 times sweeter than sugar. The calories in foods can be substantially reduced, and in some products eliminated, by using aspartame in place of sugar.
Whether the menu calls for glazed ham, hot oatmeal or blueberry pancakes, the home cook has a repertoire of sweeteners to choose from. Sugar, brown sugar, honey, molasses, and corn syrup all have a place on the pantry shelf depending on the recipe and what roles the sweetener needs to play.
By: Brittany Mountjoy & Tony Flood Date: 5/22/13
By: Jason Pelzel, MPH, RD Date: 5/20/13
Although it has been a few weeks since the conclusio... more »
By: Sarah Romotsky, RD Date:5/17/13
This article is the third and final installment in our series on blood pressure management. The Jul more »
New Guidelines Recognize Context As Key to Public Understanding more »
When it comes to summer grilling, “cooking” is a critical and important step. Many instances of foo more »
Filmed in Washington, DC asking real people real questions from the 2013 IFIC Food and Health Survey.
How would you grade your diet & would you rather lose $1,000 or gain 20 pounds?