In David Ragsdale’s AP English class, students took on film projects about “Hamlet,” including creating their own original scripts. There are also in-depth studies of poetry, and students are expected to be well-versed in current events at local, state, national and world levels.
Using these as a backdrop, students are able to make sophisticated text connections to literature that relate to contemporary societal issues.
“AP Literature is an amalgamation of everything you could want in a class: stimulating reading, class discussion, self-analysis and the great search for a universal understanding in this world,” said student Dory MacMillan. “By taking this class, I have not only grown as a reader and writer, but also as a person soon embarking into the real world.”
It’s a college-level course, and there are 17 more like it in the Clarke County School District.
Students in these courses get a feel for the rigors of college while having the support of a high school environment. In addition to the depth in which they approach their subjects, ranging from AP Biology to AP Calculus to AP World History, students can also earn college credit based on scoring a 3 or higher on an AP Exam. The maximum score is 5. Those exams are college-level and scored by college and university faculty members, as well as AP teachers from around the country. Besides taking feeder courses within the discipline, AP classes in the Clarke County School District are based on open enrollment. Teacher recommendations are preferred, but not necessary.
Ragsdale said that the intensity and required critical thinking are what distinguish AP classes from regular classes. From daily class discussion to using technology such as Google Docs for peer editing and Galileo for research, the academic rigor of the course is certainly college-level.
Our program is recognized each year by the Georgia Department of Education. In fact, about a week ago, both Cedar Shoals and Clarke Central High Schools were named AP Honor Schools. Both schools were named AP STEM and AP STEM Achievement Schools, and Cedar Shoals was also named an AP Access and Support School. AP STEM School refers to the breadth of courses the schools offer, and the Achievement piece refers to at least 40 percent of the scores being 3 or higher. AP Access and Support means that at Cedar, at least 30 percent of the exams were taken by African-American or Hispanic students and at least 30 percent of those students earned a 3 or higher.
We also have a list of AP Scholars each year, with five last year being named National Scholars, meaning they earned a 4 or higher on eight or more AP Exams. Those five students have gone on to University of Georgia, Wellesley and the University of Chicago, and are majoring in biological sciences, English and Spanish.
In addition to AP courses, all students can also earn college credit at the Athens Community Career Academy, where courses are free and mostly taught by Athens Technical College faculty. Students can graduate with an associate’s degree or potentially ready to enter UGA as a sophomore. The courses in career pathways transfer directly to Athens Tech, and the general college courses transfer anywhere in the University System of Georgia or Technical College System of Georgia.
All students must be prepared for post-secondary experiences to succeed in today’s world. Our teachers ensure our students are well-prepared.
• Anisa Sullivan Jimenez is the director of public relations and communications for the Clarke County School District.