Interesting Questions, Facts and Information
- There are a total of 235 general entries. We are selecting 30 for display.
Interesting Questions, Facts, and Information
Top of South Island. Farewell Spit is a 30km stretch of sand that reaches north-east from the top of the South Is.
Southern Alps. This range almost runs the length of the island and has a great affect on the region's weather.
Auckland. At least one quarter of the total population of the country lives in or around Auckland.
|New Zealand's highest mountain has been known by two names over the years. Can you tell me either one of those names?||New Zealand Geography
Mount Cook . Although Mt Cook had a landslide which reduced its height in 1992, it is still the highest in NZ. It is also known as Aoraki, the name by which the Maori people know the mountain. The official name is now Aoraki Mount Cook, gazetted as a compromise.
Waikato. The Waikato River is also the longest in NZ.
All Blacks. Their uniforms are black in color. The Wallabies are from Australia and the Lions hail from Britain.
Queen Elizabeth II. Queen Elizabeth is head of state in New Zealand, which is a member of the Commonwealth.
Chinese Gooseberry. The term Kiwifruit did not come into use until the 1970's.
The Netherlands. Abel Tasman, the Dutch explorer gave New Zealand its name. Originally Australia was named New Holland.
12. New Zealand lies just west of the international dateline.
Wellington. Auckland is the largest city in New Zealand and the major entry point but Wellington is centrally located for both the North and South Islands.
Kiwi . The flightless bird is nocturnal and eats worms and other bugs. It has short brown feathers and sharp claws. It can only be found in New Zealand.
|The country's worst earthquake was in 1931. When the town was rebuilt after that earthquake, what style was used?||All About New Zealand
Napier/HawkesBay. It killed more than 250 people, devastating the area around the Napier region. This occurred in 1931.
Bill English. Bill English is a member of the National Party.
Gisborne. Gisborne is the easternmost place in New Zealand. It is full of beautiful beaches, and personally, I think it is the best place in New Zealand.
Silver Fern. The Silver Ferns is also the name of the New Zealand netball team. It is also the icon on a lot of New Zealand sports teams uniforms, e.g the All Blacks.
|What is the bird found only in New Zealand that is famous for its cheekiness and intelligence, and can be found in the South Island?||All About New Zealand
Kea. The Kea is the world's only alpine parrot. Found in the Southern Alps, they have been known to wreck heaps of things like the doors of your car and the aerial, or damage trampers' backpacks.
Aotearoa. It means 'Land of the long white cloud'.
The Queen gives the right for all Maoris to have free range to any land the British buy. Other things in the Treaty were, The Chiefs give to the Queen pre-emption, and Maori have rights/privileges as British subjects. There have been a few problems with the 'Treaty' but if you have a grievance then you can take your claim to 'The Waitangi Tribunal' who will help you to fix it.
Treaty of Waitangi. It was signed on 6th February, 1840. There were 512 signatures altogether - 482 on the Maori version and 30 on the English version.
Auckland. Russell was capital for a short period in 1840, while Auckland was capital from 1840 - 1845.
|It is the first urban area in the world to see the sun each morning. What is the longitude of Gisborne ?||A Mixture of New Zealand
178 degrees east. My atlas says 178.02, I have had information from fellow players saying anywhere from 178.01 through to 178.10.
|We know that Invercargill is the southern most of New Zealand's cities. However, who was it named after ?||A Mixture of New Zealand
William Cargill . William Cargill was one of the Scottish pioneers. He was heavily involved in the Otago and Southland area with settlement and administration.
|According to the Guinness Book of Records, the world's steepest street is located in Dunedin. What is its name ?||A Mixture of New Zealand
Baldwin Street . The gradient is 38 degrees.