Columbus Day contradictions
I find it very interesting about what we protest and true history. For example: the up and coming Columbus Day and parade. Where it is true that Columbus was born Italian, I find it odd that those who protest the holiday seem to forget that his trip, boats, and proclamations were from and for Spain, not Italy.
In a recent explanation about a protest against the holiday on channel 7 an interesting quote: “American Indian and Hispanic activists have said they will protest any event with Columbus in its name.” Aren’t all Hispanics from Spain originally? So the Hispanics are protesting against they’re being here. Fortunately in World War Two we went after the proper country waging a war of aggression in Europe, “Germany”, even though Adolf Hitler was born Austrian. Also unfortunately he didn’t really discover America, he did discover the Bahamas, Cuba, and the Dominican Republic
“Christopher Columbus departed on his first voyage from the port of Palos (near Huelva) in southern Spain, on August 3, 1492, in command of three ships: the Niña, the Pinta and the Santa Maria. His crew mostly came from surrounding towns such as Lepe and Moguer. Columbus arrived at his Bahamas landfall on October 12, then proceeded to Cuba on October 28, and arrived at Hispaniola on (in the modern Dominican Republic) December 5.
Left for Spain on January 16, he arrived at Lisbon on March 4, and finally made it back to his home port of Palos on March 15, 1493.” Columbus did finely get to North America before his death in 1506, but wasn’t the first to get there. Spain’s exploration of the Americas was mainly one for conquest, so Native Americans should be mad at Spain and the Spanish, not Italy and the Italians.
Where it is true that many of the explorers and navigators were Italian, they were almost all financed and run by the Spanish. So perhaps when protesting Columbus Day you should get your facts correct. Like the invasion of Spanish people on their conquest of the Americas in the past, today we seem to have an invasion of Spanish to conquer this part of America too.
Dale Summers, Denver
This letter was not edited.