View Entire Collection
By Clinical Topic
Diabetes – Summer 2012
Future of Nursing Initiative
Heart Failure - Fall 2011
Influenza - Winter 2011
Nursing Ethics - Fall 2011
Trauma - Fall 2010
Traumatic Brain Injury - Fall 2010
Fluids & Electrolytes
TUESDAY, June 2 (HealthDay News) -- Millions of children in the United States, particularly those in sparsely populated areas, lack prompt access to pediatric trauma centers (PTCs), according to research published in the June Archives of Pediatrics & Adolescent Medicine.
Michael L. Nance, M.D., of the Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, and colleagues consulted several sources to create a list of 170 verified PTCs in 40 states and the District of Columbia.
The researchers found that an estimated 71.5 percent of pediatric patients under the age of 15 years were located within a 60-minute trip of a PTC by ground or air transportation; when only ground transportation was considered, this number dropped to 42.6 percent. This left roughly 17.4 million children without access to a PTC within 60 minutes. Such centers were conspicuously absent in the southwestern and upper western states. Only 22.9 percent of children in the least population-dense areas had 60-minute access to a PTC, the authors note.
"The availability of pediatric intensive care unit beds has been correlated with a significant reduction in trauma-related mortality. The lack of pediatric-specific personnel and equipment at adult institutions caring for pediatric emergency patients has been documented. Despite these published findings, most pediatric trauma care (including children with severe injuries) is rendered at non-PTCs," the authors conclude.
Full Text (subscription or payment may be required)
Find in-depth content on major issues provided by leading companies in partnership with NursingCenter.com
BD Safety Beyond Needlestick Prevention Learning Center
Sponsored by BD Medical
Sign up for our free enewsletters to stay up-to-date in your area of practice - or take a look at an archive of prior issues
Join our CESaver program to earn up to 100 contact hours for only $34.95
Explore a world of online resources
Back to Top