All 3 entries tagged Wuthering Heights
View all 5 entries tagged Wuthering Heights on Warwick Blogs | View entries tagged Wuthering Heights at Technorati | There are no images tagged Wuthering Heights on this blog
October 22, 2012
This website details the places and locations in Wuthering Heights, mapping out the surrounding locale, creating floor-plans of the houses, and discussing possible locations that inspired the houses in the novel. It's a useful visualisation of the themes of space, borders and thresholds that we were talking about today.
(I haven't fully investigated the accuracy of the detail here, so if you want to use make further use of this material then remember that the usual disclaimers about using online resources apply - check the accuracy and reliability of all sources yourself, use your judgement in assessing and interpreting material, and cite correctly following the usual guidelines).
October 19, 2012
Something you might want to think about this week, especially if you've seen any film adaptations of Wuthering Heights, is why and how the novel has generated such a strong cultural afterlife: why does it remains so popular for film and tv adaptations, and what idea of Wuthering Heights do those adaptations present?
This is something I discussed in a piece for the Knowledge Centre on The Victorian Texts that TV Forgot, thinking particularly about the 2011 film of Wuthering Heights as a good example of how new adaptations of familiar texts can add value to wider understanding and interpretations of novels. There's also an interesting piece on the Knowledge Centre about Jane Eyre adaptations.
My original review of the Wuthering Heights film picks up on some of the themes of landscape and setting that we'll think about next week, and can be read here.
The trailer for the 2011 film of Wuthering Heights, directed by Andrea Arnold
For the seminar on Wuthering Heights, prepare notes on these themes:
Place and setting: how is the landscape depicted and what effect does this have? Think in particular about the relationship between the two houses, Wuthering Heights and Thrushcross Grange, and the borders, boundaries and thresholds that separate these spaces.
Heathcliff: who is Heathcliff? Various critical readings have tried to pin down Heathcliff's origins, and the 2011 film of Wuthering Heights invited much interest in having a black actor play Heathcliff. How do we read his origins, and why is it important?
Narration: what is the effect of the various narrative perspectives offered in the text? How do the narrative voices relate to one another? Whose story is this?