Frogs are incredible animals, and here are ten reasons why you should get one:

1. Frogs are relatively low-maintenance pets. Each species requires different care, so you should still research them heavily before you bring one into your living space, but they largely stay in their tanks and don't need you to walk or play with them like a dog or cat.
2. You can choose from hundreds of frog and toad species, each with unique traits. They have different songs, patterns, food and environment preferences, and levels of friendliness--yes, a frog can be friendly! Some are easier to care for than others as well.
3. Frogs delight you with their charming love songs. Look them up online, and see which one is your favorite. They have a range of different sounds: some croak, some bark, and some even make vibrating sounds.
4. You don't need a lot of space for a pet frog. If you live in an apartment, your landlord may permit a frog even if they don't let you have other types of pets. Just make sure that their tank is the right size for their species. They need plenty of room to climb and grow.
5. Frogs are affordable. You'll sink some money into your new pet, but they don't need vaccinations, large quantities of expensive food (usually), or other expenses associated with mammals.
6. If you don't have a pet store in your area, you can order frogs and toads online. This broadens your options because even pet stores carry a limited selection of species--if they carry frogs at all. You can even buy tropical varieties, such as red-eye tree frogs and poison dart frogs (captive varieties aren't poisonous.)
7. Frogs are important, but they're not a lifetime commitment. You should still do your research because some species can live for twenty years if you care for them correctly. However, your pet probably won't outlive you as some species might.
8. If you have kids, having a frog is a good way to teach them about responsibility and pet ownership without committing to a large mammal.
9. You can gently handle frogs and toads as long as you wash your hands first and wear rubber gloves.
10. Multiple frogs can live in the same tank if it's large enough--just do your research to make sure that you don't overcrowd them. Additionally, if you end up with male and female pairs, watch out for eggs! Frogs get frisky during mating season.

On a final note, make sure you buy frogs from a reputable pet store or breeder. Some kidnap them from other countries, causing many to die in transit, or breed them in unsafe conditions. Support people who treat frogs ethically. They're little lives, but they're just as important as any other creature.
