This standard specifies communications for low frequency (less than 500 kHz) narrowband power line devices via alternating current and direct current electric power lines. This standard supports indoor and outdoor communications over low voltage line (line between transformer and meter, less than 1000 V), through transformer low-voltage to medium-voltage (1000 V up to 72 kV) and through transformer medium-voltage to low-voltage power lines in both urban and in long distance (multi- kilometer) rural communications. The standard uses transmission frequencies less than 500 kHz. Data rates will be scalable to 500 kbps depending on the application requirements. This standard addresses grid to utility meter, electric vehicle to charging station, and within home area networking communications scenarios. Lighting and solar panel power line communications are also potential uses of this communications standard. This standard focuses on the balanced and efficient use of the power line communications channel by all classes of low frequency narrow band (LF NB) devices, defining detailed mechanisms for coexistence between different LF NB standards developing organizations (SDO) technologies, assuring that desired bandwidth may be delivered. This standard assures coexistence with broadband power line (BPL) devices by minimizing out-of-band emissions in frequencies greater than 500 kHz. The standard addresses the necessary security requirements that assure communication privacy and allow use for security sensitive services. This standard defines the physical layer and the medium access sub-layer of the data link layer, as defined by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) Basic Reference Model.
Get Involved In The Development Of This Standard
Contact the IEEE-SA Liaison Simply click here to voice your interest. Lisa M Perry Learn More About Standards ParticipationAnyone can participate, there are a variety of programs and services to
facilitate the involvement of industry and the public. More Become a Member and Ballot on this StandardMembership empowers you to participate & lead in the development of
standards. Tell Me More