IMPORTANCE OF DUA
Abu Saeed Khudri (Radhiyallaho anho) relates that
Alaihe Wasallam) said, "Everyday and night of Ramadan Allah sets free a
great number of souls from Jahannam. And for every Muslim during everyday and
night there is a time when his dua is certainly accepted. (Bazzaar).
COMMENTARY: Apart from this Hadith,
there are many others stating that the dua's is accepted at the time of if'taar.
Unfortunately at that time we are so engrossed in eating if'taar that we have no
time for dua nor do we recall the dua of if'taar. The famous dua at if'taar is:
"O Allah for you have I fasted, in You do I believe, and on You do I rely
and now I break this fast with food coming from you."
In this Hadith book this dua is mentioned
concisely. Abdullah bin Amr bin Al Aas (Radhiyallaho anho) used to read the
following dua: "O Allah, I beg you, through you infinite mercy which
surrounds all things, to forgive me."
In some books we read that
Alaihe Wasallam) used to say: "O You who are Great in bounties, forgive me."
Various dua's are mentioned in the ahaadith.
Remember that no special dua is fixed. This time (at if'taar) is one when dua is
accepted. Submit before Allah your needs.
Abu Hurairah (Radhiyallaho anho) reports Prophet Mohammad
Alaihe Wasallam) said, "There are three people whose dua's are not rejected,
the fasting person until he breaks the fast, the just ruler and the dua's of the
oppressed whose dua Allah lifts above the clouds and opens unto it the
doors of the heavens, and Allah says, I swear by My honor, verily I
shall assist you even though it may be after some time." (Ahmad &
COMMENTARY: In Durre Manthoor it is
reported from Aaishah (Radhiyallaho anho) that when Ramadan arrived, the color
Alaihe Wasallam) face used to change. He then used to increase salaah, became
even more humble in his dua's and had even more fear for Allah. According
to another report he hardly ever lay down in bed until Ramadan came to an end.
Further, in a Hadith it is stated that the Maalaa'ikah bearing the throne are
commanded in Ramadan to leave everything else and recite 'Aameen' to the dua of
those who fast. There are many Ahaadith stating that the dua's during
Ramadan in particular are accepted. When Allah has promised and His
Alaihe Wasallam) has informed us, there should be no doubt whatsoever
about the truth of these reports. Yet is is strange that in spite of this, we
still find such people who apparently do not get what they make dua for. They
ask and do not receive. This does not mean that their dua's have been rejected.
One should at this point understand the meaning of dua being answered.
Alaihe Wasallam) informed us that when a Muslim makes dua's for anything
from Allah, except for the severance of ties with relatives or for a
sinful thing then he definitely receives one out of the following three things:
Firstly he gets the exact thing for which he made dua. Secondly, if that is not
received, Allah either removes from his some great calamity in exchange
for that which he made dua is kept deposited for him in the Hereafter. Another
Hadith states that on the day of Qiyaamah Allah will call his servant,
and say to him. "O My servant, I used to command you to ask of me I had promised
to answer. Did you beg for Me ?" The servant will answer, "Yes I did". Then
Allah shall reply, "You did not put forth any request which had not been
accepted. You made dua that a certain calamity should be removed, which I did
for you in the worldly life. You made dua that a certain sorrow should be case
off you and the effect of that sorrow was even known to you. For that I have
fixed for you such and such a reward".
Alaihe Wasallam) says, that person shall again be reminded of each and
every dua, and he shall be shown how it had been fulfilled in the world or what
reward had been stored for him in the hereafter. When seeing that, he shall wish
that not a single dua of his should have been answered on earth. So that he
could receive the full rewards only in the Hereafter.
Dua is indeed very important and to neglect it at
any time causes us great loss. Even when the outward signs seem to indicate that
our dua is not answered, courage should not be lost. At the end of this book, in
the lengthy Hadith which we will be discussing, it is also apparent that
Allah in answering dua's considers first of all our own good and welfare.
Should Allah find that granting what we beseech of Him is beneficial, then
He grants it, otherwise not. Actually it is Allah's favor that we do not
always get what we ask for, since very often, because of our lack of
understanding, we beg for things which are not beneficial at a particular time.
Once again I must draw your attention to the fact
that men as well as women suffer from a disease of cursing their children in
their anger and sorrows. Be very careful. In the sight of Allah there are
certain times when whatever dua is made it is immediately answered. So here due
to our stupidity, the child is cursed and when the effect of that same dua comes
over the child and lands him into calamity, the parents go crying and wailing
from side to side not even realizing that this is the result of their own curse.
Alaihe Wasallam) commands us not to curse ourselves, our children,
possessions, or servants.
It is just possible that this is the curse that
is heard and answered at a time when all requests are granted, especially in
Ramadan which is filled with such special mustajjad (accepted) moments. Hence in
this month great care should be taken. Sayyidana Omar (Radhiyallaho anho)
Alaihe Wasallam) "The one who remembers Allah during Ramadan is
forgiven and the one who makes dua to Allah is not forsaken."
Ibn Masood (Radhiyallaho anho) reports that on
ever night of Ramadan a caller from the heavens calls out, "O you seeker of good
come, come near, O you seeker of evil, turn away (from evil) and open your
eyes." Thereafter that angel calls out, "Is there any seeker of forgiveness that
he may be forgiven ? Is there any one repenting so that his repentance shall be
accepted ? Is there anyone making dua that his dua may be granted ? Is there
anyone begging anything so that his plea may be fulfilled ?"
Lastly is should be borne in mind that there are
certain conditions on which dua's are accepted. Among these is halaal food.
Where haraam is consumed dua is not accepted.
Alaihe Wasallam) said, "Many a greatly troubled one is distress lifts up his
hands to the heavens making dua, crying, 'O Allah, O Allah'.
However the food he eats is haraam, what he drinks is haraam, his cloths
are of haraam and in such cases how can his dua be accepted ?"
A story is related about a group of people in
Kufa whose dua used to be always answered. Whenever a ruler was over them, they
used to make dua for a curse upon him which quickly came to destroy him. When
Hajjaaj became ruler there, he invited these people, among others, to a feast.
After having eaten, he said, "Now I am not afraid of the dua for curse upon me
from these people because haraam food has entered their stomachs." At this stage
let up ponder over how much haraam is being consumed in these times when people
are even trying to make permissible the earnings of interest money. We find our
peole go so far as to think that bribery and what is obtained from it is
permissible, while our traders very often, when dealing with people, deceive
Author: Shaykh Muhammad Zakariyya Kaandhlawi