- [Watch for
a much more thorough article appearing here soon!]
"When I was their age I could draw
like Raphael, but it took me a lifetime to learn to draw like
Pablo Picasso (1881-1973), Spanish artist, after studying an
exhibition of children's drawings.
Art Kids (England)
offers fun, educational and creative art content for children,
including colouring, sketching, workshops and games.
International Child Art Foundation (ICAF)
is an independent nonprofit organization. It says that it is
"the only national art and creativity organization for children
in the United States" and "one of the premier organizations
for the world's children. ICAF employs the arts as a dynamic
channel to nurture children's creativity, as a language-independent
medium to connect children around the world, and as a powerful
catalyst for peace building. ICAF involves children in the creative
process to: deepen their understanding of their own contribution;
promote and elevate the content they create; widen their cultural
opportunities; connect them with each other to promote peer-based
learning; and encourage them to collaborate and be creative as
a team. Based on arts learning and new research on human behavior,
ICAF's programs prepare youth for mutual understanding and cooperation,
so they can help lead their communities to live in open societies.
ICAF's innovative Peace Through Art Methodology draws upon the
innate creativity and imagination of young people to transform
hostility into friendship. ICAF is also rapidly growing as a
worldwide umbrella organization promoting children's creativity
and imagination through the arts, and linking children around
the globe via the arts. Its mission is to prepare children for
a creative and cooperative future.
The International Children's Digital Library
is a huge and colorful project that offers copies of thousands
of great children's illustrated books. The works range from early
ones with black and white woodcuts to current popular favorites,
but most are copyright-free. They also come from a hundred cultures
in twenty languages. You'll need a high-speed connection.