Virtual Chemistry Laboratory
Here's your chance to mix chemicals without wearing safety goggles. You won't spill any acid on the spectrometer in this lab. Choose solutions from the vast database and mix 'em together till the cloned cows come home. Marvel as the chemical solutions react in real time.
Virtual Tour of a Steam Turbine Cogeneration Power Plant
This is virtual tour of the Michigan State University power plant that uses four steam-powered turbines. The power cycles include closed feedwater preheaters and open feedwater preheaters. Photos include a turbine when taken apart for maintenance.
History of Science in Latin American and the Caribbean: A Virtual Archive
This site is " a comprehensive database of primary sources on the history of science in Latin America and the Caribbean. The site, launched in January 2010, provides a virtual archive of over 200 primary sources along with introductions based on the latest scholarly findings."According to the site, it "is organized into Topics that are organized approximately chronologically, but each one stands alone. The archive, or database of primary sources, is designed in a modular fashion, so viewers from
Edo Japan, A Virtual Tour
A complex and highly detailed virtual tour of 18th century Edo (now Tokyo) using traditional Japanese woodblock prints to explore not only the sights of the city but the nature and texture of life within it. It is as much a document on early modern urban life in a great city as it is a usefulsource on traditional Japanese history and culture.
"Virtual Jamestown" is a digital research and teaching project that explores the settlement and impact of Jamestown. Primary resources found at this site include first hand accounts and letters (with full-text search capabilities), maps and images, 18th century advertisements for runaway slaves and indentured servants, a database of over 10,000 indentured servant contracts, and public records such as census data and laws. Future plans include adding court records such as deeds, wills, and court
Virtual Concerts in the Park
Time was when orchestras and ensembles wanted to reach out to new audiences, they took their instruments out to the park and shopping malls where teens and young families tended to gather. In today’s world, increasingly, people are meeting online. Some intrepid, tech-savvy musicians and ensembles are out there in the virtual community, presenting virtual concerts in the new virtual park. Who are they? What are their experiences and what are the lessons we can learn?
Medieval Music & Arts Foundation Early Music FAQ
Online resources on medieval music history and theory.
Making Sense of the Arts: Taster Materials
This unit provides an overview of Open University Course Y160 Making Sense of the Arts. You will be introduced to the types of activities, tasks and assignments that you would be asked to undertake if you were to enroll on the course.
Utah Virtual Lab for teaching Science, Methods, and Statistics
The Utah online Virtual Lab is a JAVA program run dynamically off a database. Instructors author a statistical virtual reality simulating theories and data in a specific research focus area by defining independent, predictor, and dependent variables and the relations among them. Students work in an online virtual environment to discover the principles of this simulated reality: they go to a library, read theoretical overviews and scientific puzzles, and then go to a lab, design a study, collect
Rice Virtual Lab in Statistics
Resources to assist students in understanding of statistics. Topics covered include Analysis of Variance, Boxplot, Confidence interval, Contrast among means, Correlated t-test, Correlation, Histogram, Independent groups t-test, Regression, Repeated measures ANOVA, and t-test. The applets in the simulations/demonstrations are in the public domain and can therefore be used without restriction. Simulations and demonstrations and source code are available for download.To view a video of the award w
Imhotep Virtual Medical School Courseware
IVMS is the ultimate medical student Web 2.0 companion. This SDL-Face to Face hybrid courseware is a digitally tagged and content enhanced replication of the United States Medical Licensing Examination's Cognitive Learning Objectives (Steps 1, 2 or 3). Including authoritative reusable learning object (RLO) integration and scholarly Web Interactive PowerPoint-driven multimedia shows/PDFs. Comprehensive hypermedia BMS learning outcomes and detailed, content enriched learning objectives.
Arts Education K-6 Lesson Plans
This searchable database of 100+ K-6 arts lessons (dance, drama/theatre, music, and visual art) has been developed by Dr. Cris Guenter and student teachers at California State University, Chico. New lessons are added each semester.Other information at this site includes how the site is used in teacher education, a lesson plan template, how the database was constructed, how student teacher lesson plans are selected, a rubric for assessing the lesson plans, how to cite online sources, reflections,
UMUC-Verizon Virtual Resource Site for Teaching with Technology.
The UMUC-Verizon Virtual Resource Site for Teaching with Technology provides resources for use in the selection of appropriate media to accomplish specific learning objectives.The site also provides resources for faculty using technology in research assignments, small group projects, and discussions to encourage activity.
The Virtual Instructional Designer (VID)
The Virtual Instructional Designer (VID) is a Learning Anytime Anywhere Partnership (LAAP) grant-funded project to create a Web-based performance tool for post-secondary faculty designing Web-based distance courses. The purpose of the VID is to provide 24/7 desktop access for faculty to instructional design assistance on the process of developing online instruction or courses.
Virtual Cell Animations
Virtual Cell contains animations developed to introduce students to new concepts including; transcription, translation and the lac operon. By walking through the still images and movies, viewers can easily choose between either studying a specific step from one of the processes or taking a more immersive look at the process in it's entirety.
A compendium of thousands of pictures of plants and plant structures organized phylogenetically. This collection covers most aspects of botany.
Virtual Museum of Fossils
Spectacular photos of fossils arranged by time period, with maps showing continent locations. Maps also show ecosystems.
Virtual Earthquake is an interactive Web-based activity designed to introduce you to the concepts of how an earthquake epicenter is located and how the Richter magnitude of an earthquake is determined. This is the old version. A newer simulation called Earthquake is now available.
Virtual World Retail Sales Training Demo
This short video clip demonstrates how virtual worlds can be used in sales training. In this case the retail salesperson asks all the right questions and manages to upsell the customer.
Virtual World Irate Customer Retail Sales Training Demo
This is a virtual world video that illustrates how virtual worlds can be used in training, in this case a retail salesperson encounters an irate customer and does not handle it well.