U.S. Presidents: Everything You Need
Who was the first president to live in the White House? Learn about this and other presidential "firsts."
Read more >
History of the White House and Washington, D.C. from 1792 to today.
Who was the first U.S. president to be photographed?
Grades: 3–5, 6–8
A few fun facts about America's first President of the United States, from this height and weight to his favorite foods.
Grades: PreK–K, 1–2
In this lesson, students read about George Washington and discuss the monument built in his honor. Then they create their own monument to honor a...
Birthplace: Shadwell, Albemarle County, VirginiaReligion: Christian (no specific denomination)College Attended: College of William and Mary,...
Spend a day in the life of the multi-talented man, President Thomas Jefferson, with these informative biographical websites.
The President of the United States has seven roles in his job, from being the Commander-In-Chief to the Guardian of the Economy.
Brief biography of Gerald R. Ford, the 38th president of the United States of America.
Timeline of the life of former U.S. President Gerald R. Ford.
Transcript from the February 10, 1995 online interview with former President Gerald R. Ford.
Grades: PreK–K, 1–2, 3–5, 6–8, 9–12
Important events during the presidency of Jimmy Carter.
President Jimmy Carter agreed to answer seven questions selected from several hundred posted by Scholastic students.
A time line showing the events in Ronald Reagan's life
Read about the vital statistics and important events that happened during the time Ronald Reagan was President of the United States.
President George H.W. Bush answers questions from students.
Get the vital statistics and learn about important events that occurred during Bill Clinton's presidency.
Lesson Plans, Book Resources
Even United States Presidents started out as regular kids! So You Want to Be President? is chock-full of interesting tidbits about our Presidents;...
Activities and Games, Extension Activities, Book Resources
Extension activity for Arthur Meets the President by Marc Brown.
Biography of former United States President George Herbert Walker Bush.
Sign up today for free teaching ideas, lesson plans, online activities, tips for your classroom, and much more.
Choose your grade range:
See a sample >