WEBSITES FOR HISPANIC/LATINO HERITAGE MONTH
Lesson Plans & Classroom Activities
Access these sites through your computer’s Internet
connection. Open the underlined address (URL). Information can be printed
or downloaded to your computer. Be sure to follow links to other sites and find
your way back with the "back" button. Note that the terms "Hispanic" and
"Latino" are used as they appear on the website. No definition is intended for
either term. The list also contains some websites on teaching the Spanish
language. We have not attempted a comprehensive language list, however.
All of the sites listed were active as of October 12, 2004.
The evaluation is by the AVA Center staff according to the amount of information
given and its potential use in the classroom.
Disclaimer: The AVA Staff does not speak Spanish. We were
unable to check all sections of some sites.
AMERICAN EXPERIENCE – ZOOT SUIT RIOTS
A companion site to the PBS program about the "Zoot Suit Riots"
in the 1942.
"In August 1942 the murder of a young Mexican-American man ignited a
firestorm in the City of the Angels. In no time at all, ethnic and racial
tensions that had been building up over the years boiled over. Police fanned out
across the city in a dragnet that netted 600 Mexican Americans. Among those
accused of murder was a young "zoot-suiter" named Hank Leyvas -- the poster boy
for an entire generation of rebellious Mexican kids who refused to play by the
old rules. As he and sixteen other boys headed to trial, the mood of the city
turned violent. The deck was stacked against the defendants, and a verdict of
guilty would spark a series of brutal riots. The convictions were ultimately
overturned, but the city and its inhabitants would be forever changed."
Includes a Transcript of the program, primary sources, people and events, a
timeline and more. Excellent
Casa de Joanna: Language Learning Resources
Language resource links for the study of French and Spanish. The
Spanish links include: Getting Acquainted; Family & Self; Friends, Activities &
Sports; Clothes; Community; Food; Health; House & Home; Restaurants; School; TV
& Movies; and Vacation & Travel. Also, Newspapers, Culture, Web Guides and more.
CELEBRATE HISPANIC HERITAGE!
A Scholastic site on Hispanic Heritage. Sections: Hispanic
History in the Americas, Meet Famous Latinos, Latinos in History, My Heritage,
Piñata Concentration Game and a Teacher’s Guide and Research Starter. Excellent
CELEBRATE HISPANIC HERITAGE MONTH – NATIONAL PARK SERVICE
Highlights various National Park Service and Historic Register
sites that celebrate the achievements and history of Hispanic Americans.
Includes Featured Historic Places and Teaching with Historic Places which has
lesson plans geared to specific sites. The lesson plans are designed to bring
the historic sites and their significance into the classroom. Excellent
CINCO DE MAYO
Information on the history of the Cinco de Mayo celebration.
Includes a large section with activities for the classroom. Includes songs,
role-playing, language arts and more. Excellent
ÍESPAÑOLÉ! THE ONLINE RESOURCE FOR STUDENTS AND
TEACHERS OF SPANISH
A huge site, not only on the Spanish language, but also on the
culture, history, music, food and arts. Outstanding. Excellent
A page of Spanish activities and resources for elementary, middle
and high school students. A step above the usual list of links page. Excellent
HISPANIC HERITAGE CROSSWORD PUZZLE
A crossword puzzle from the NY Times on Hispanic Heritage.
HISPANIC HERITAGE MONTH
An outstanding site on Hispanics. Sections include: Hispanic Americans by
the Numbers, Spanish Loan Words, Countries of Origin, Spanish Accents, Hispanics
in Congress, Where Spanish is Spoken, Hispanic Holidays, Spanish Place Names,
Preference for Racial or Ethnic Terminology, Biographies, a Crossword and two
HISPANIC HERITAGE MONTH
Classroom activities for Hispanic Heritage Month. Activities for
K-5, Activities for 6-8, Activities for 9-12, and Great Links to Hispanic Sites
and Reading Adventure Activities. Excellent
Daily news of interest to Hispanics. Sections: Arts &
Entertainment, Politics & Opinion, Lifestyle, Business & Finance, Career Center,
Technology, Education, Research & Resources, and Sports. Excellent
HISPANIC ONLINE MAGAZINE
An online magazine covering various aspects of Hispanic life and
HOT INTERNET SITES İEN
A hotlist of links to sites for those who speak Spanish.
"resources for students who speak Spanish as their primary language and you
will also find links for students learning Spanish as a foreign language. The
resources are appropriate for Kindergarten through Community College levels."
Sections: The Internet Resources, Elementary, Secondary, and Teacher
KOKONE – MEXICAN SITE FOR KIDS
A colorful site for kids from Mexico. Note: This site is in Spanish with no
English version. We were not able to rate this site
Activities and websites on Latino/Hispanic heritage. Excellent
LATINO VIRTUAL GALLERY
A virtual gallery exploring Latino achievements in the arts,
culture and history. Exhibitions: Lowrider: An American Cultural Tradition;
Revealing Personal Identity: The Indigenous Vision of Manual Carillo; Inside
Out: Growing Old in the United States and Antonio: 25 Years of Creative
MEXICO FOR KIDS
A site from the Mexican government for kids to learn about Mexico
and its people. Sections: History, Government, Explore, Biodiversity, Games and
About Mexico. Includes a section called Paper Zoo in which students can make
animal models from paper. Excellent
MEXICO – 42EXPLORE
Information and activities about Mexico. Excellent
THE PEW HISPANIC CENTER
Sections: Demography, Economics, Education, Identity,
Immigration, Health, Military, Surveys and Transcripts. Excellent
"The Pew Hispanic Center's mission is to improve understanding of the diverse
Hispanic population in the United States and to chronicle Latinos' growing
impact on the nation. The Center strives to inform debate on critical issues
through dissemination of its research to policymakers, business leaders,
academic institutions and the media."
RECOMMENDED U.S. LATINO WEBSITES – DIVERSITY AND ETHNIC
"This list includes Chicano (Mexican American), Puerto Rican, and Cuban American
Web resources, as well as sites that pertain to Salvadorans, Dominicans,
Colombians, and Guatemalans residing in the US.
you are doing library research, please see my Latino Studies Library Research
Guide also.) Only Web sites that are reflective of US Latino realities were
considered; sites that are exclusively Latin American in focus are not included.
Recommended Web sites listed below were evaluated for breadth, perceived
authority, stability, usefulness, and accuracy. Web index sites, clearinghouses,
directories (all sites that gather or point to resources elsewhere), and
e-journals and electronic news (publications, newspapers, and news programs that
include actual content, as opposed to just tables of contents or subscription
information) are the focus. A new section reviews a number of new commercial US
Latino portals and commercial subject directories now being developed and
marketed to Latinos in the US. There's also a new section called OPD that lists
Latino web causalities."
SOME SPANISH LANGUAGE PLACES
A page of links to information in Spanish. Sections: Newspapers & Magazines;
Dictionaries, Translators & Reference; Government & Politics; Internet
Directories; Cultural Aspects; Professional Resources; and Interesting Home
Pages. Not surprisingly, we found a couple of broken links among the extensive
resources on this site. Excellent
ﾍSOY UNICA! ﾍSOY
"Welcome to the ¡Soy Unica! ¡Soy Latina! bilingual Web site. Inside, you can
learn more about your body and mind, where your family is from, and how to make
great choices for your future. You can also print out our activity books and
A fun site for teen girls, especially aimed at Latinas. Sections
include: Clubhouse, Family History, Your Body, Your Future, Know Yourself, and
ARTE LATINO – TREASURES FROM THE SMITHSONIAN AMERICAN ART
MUSEUM NEW URL!
An online collection of 73 works of art from the Smithsonian.
Each has information in both English and Spanish about the artist and the work.
CHICANO AND CHICANA SPACE – ART EDUCATION RESOURCE
A resource for art education. "This site is a resource for
teachers, their students, and others interested in Chicana and Chicano art and
culture. Chicana and Chicano Space presents over 25 Chicana/o and earlier
artworks and detailed information about each, as well as thematic instructional
units focused on these artworks. Some considerations in selecting the artworks
have been relevance to significant themes, gender balance, geographic breadth,
and historical range."
COLOQUIO REVISTA CULTURAL
This is an online magazine for Hispanics in the Washington area.
It includes the current issue and past issues as well as Famous Hispanics in the
World and History and more. Very Good
CROSSROADS: CHICANO IDENTITY AND BORDER CULTURE
Includes two classroom activities. Very Good
"Overview: The concept of identity is closely linked to questions of
history, culture, and representation, as well as such issues as ethnicity,
gender, class and region. Think about how you identify yourself. How
does race or ethnicity play a role? What other factors shape your
identity? What themes shape the culture of those you identify with?
Some Chicano scholars and artists have found the themes of "boundaries,"
"resistance" and "affirmation" to be vital in understanding and representing
Chicano history and culture. This activity asks students to use Web
resources to explore the concept of identity in relationship to these themes in
THE DIEGO RIVERA MURAL PROJECT
Details the mural of Mexican artist Diego Rivera in San
Francisco. Includes online views of the panels and discussions of Rivera’s work.
FACTS ON THE HISPANIC/LATINO POPULATION (U.S. CENSUS BUREAU)
Statistics from the U.S. Census Bureau on Hispanic and Latino
Americans. Includes: Census 2000, Social Characteristics, Economic
Characteristics, Profiles and more. Very Good
Famous Hispanics in the world and in history. Sections:
Antiquity, Musicians, Nobel Prizes, Painters, Scientists, Sports, U.S. Military,
Women and Writers. Includes brief profiles of each. Very Good
HISPANIC HERITAGE PLAZA
Short articles on topics of interest to Hispanics and
non-Hispanics. Sections: Contests, Timeline, Latino Legacy, We Are Latino, Music
& Arts, Cuisine, Family, Travel, and Our World. Very Good
HISPANIC NOBEL PRIZE WINNERS (NOTE: THIS IS MISSPELLED AS PRICES ON THE SITE)
A list of Hispanic Nobel Prize winners with brief biographical profiles.
LATIN WORLD SEARCH ENGINE
A search engine for "Iberoamerica and the Caribbean". Includes
Articles, Radio Stations, Opinion Pieces, Countries and more. Very Good
LATINA/O ART COMMUNITY
A site dedicated to Latino/Latina art. Includes virtual
exhibitions. Very Good
LATINO LEGENDS IN SPORTS ONLINE MAGAZINE
An online magazine on Latinos in sports. Includes: The Legends,
Stats, Multimedia Gallery, Sports News, Trivia, Links and more. Very Good
THE PEOPLE AND HISTORY OF MEXICO – TIMELINE
A timeline overview of Mexico’s people and history. Very Good
SPANISH LANGUAGE AND HISPANIC CULTURES LINKS
A page of links to Spanish language and Hispanic culture websites. Sections:
Spanish-Language Listservs, Spanish-Language Search Engines, Maps, Campus
Spanish Pages, Link Sites, Organizations Supporting Spanish Teaching &
Benchmarks, Spanish Grammars, On-line Courses & Lessons, Newspapers, Magazines,
and Radio/TV. Very Good
SPOTLIGHT ON CHILE
Information and photos of Chile. Very Good
THE VIRTUAL DIEGO RIVERA MUSEUM
An online museum dedicated to Mexican artist Diego Rivera. Very
VOICES FROM THE GAPS: WOMEN WRITERS OF COLOR – CHICANO/LATINA
Biographical profiles on the lives and works of Chicano/Latina
writers. Note: When you click on a name, you are taken to a site which will
forward you to the profile. We were able to be forwarded with no problem. Very
YAHOO EN ESPAÑOL PARA NIÑOS
This is the Yahooligans search engine for kids, only in Spanish
rather than English. Very Good
ALEGRIA: REGIONAL DANCES OF MEXICO
Information on the regional dances of Mexico. Click on the region
for information on the regional costume, music and dances of that region. Note:
Not all the sections were complete. Good
AMERICAN FAMILY: HEROES
A list of "Outstanding Individuals of Latino Heritage". Some
entries are just a sentence or two, several have links to further information.
BARAHONA CENTER FOR THE STUDY OF BOOKS IN SPANISH
Two main sections: Recommended Books in Spanish and Recommended
Books in English About Latinos. Also includes Special Lists. Good
BIOGRAPHY COLLECTIONS – LATIN AMERICANS, HISPANICS LATINOS
Links to biographical information. Good
CELEBRATE HISPANIC HERITAGE MONTH
A group of activities focusing on Hispanic Heritage Month.
Includes graphing, language, study skills, writing and more. Good
CELEBRATING HISPANIC HERITAGE
Resources for teaching about Hispanic history. Includes:
Activities, Biographies, Featured Titles, Links, Music, Quiz and Timeline. From
Gale Publishing Group. Good
CELEBRATING HISPANIC HERITAGE
Includes articles, ideas for classroom activities, dramatic
materials and historical resources. Good
"Celebrating Hispanic Heritage's mission is to support teachers, youth leaders
and community leaders in their efforts to promote friendly awareness of the
Hispanic historical and cultural presence - with a positive, accurate global
COMMON MISCONCEPTIONS ABOUT THE DAY OF THE DEAD CELEBRATIONS
Nine common misconceptions about the Mexican holiday The Day of
the Dead. Good
CUBA AND ITS MUSIC
An extensive list of MIDI files of Cuban music. You can download
them to listen. Good
ELECTRONIC FLASHCARDS FOR SPANISH
Online flashcards for teaching beginning Spanish. Note: We were
unable to view these in frames as intended. Your computer may have no problem.
A site about the Spanish artist Gaudi. Good
THE GRANDEUR OF VICEREGAL MEXICO
Online samples of the art of historic Mexico. "Many
cultures contributed to the unique styles and forms of colonial Mexican art. The
artistic traditions of the Aztecs and earlier indigenous cultures continued
after the conquest. Spanish art itself combines European styles with those of
the Islamic culture of the Moors. Spanish trade routes brought art from China
and the Philippines directly to Mexico, adding Asian influences to viceregal
A GUIDE TO LATIN MUSIC
Fairly detailed information about music from Hispanic countries
such as Brazil, Argentina & Uruguay, Peru, Chile and more. Use as a reference
point for further research or a source for artists. Click on the links for
information on purchasing CDs. Some have sound samples. Good
HISPANIC AMERICANS AND LATINOS IN HISTORY
A brief matching quiz. Match the names to what they did. Good
HISPANIC AMERICANS IN CONGRESS
Click on Table of Contents for a list of links to biographical
profiles. The Hispanic Reading Room link takes you to a short list of online
HISPANIC AMERICANS IN THE U.S. ARMY
Links to accounts of Hispanic Americans in various wars. Good
HISPANIC HERITAGE – SAN ANTONIO PUBLIC LIBRARY
A page of links to information on Hispanic history and culture.
Sections: Art, Associations, Biography, The Border, Celebrations, Civil Rights,
Cuisine, Current Events/Issues, Demographics, Faith, Genealogy, Literature,
Music and Publications. Good
HISPANIC HERITAGE MONTH – NBC SAN DIEGO
Information on Hispanic Heritage Month from San Diego. Includes
several articles and activities. Good
Articles and opinion pieces on issues of interest to Hispanic
HISPANICS IN AMERICA’S DEFENSE
Information on Hispanics who served with distinction in the
military and their actions. Good
A HOTLIST ON HISPANIC CULTURE
A list of links to help students find out about Hispanic Culture.
IMPACT OF MEXICAN CULTURE ON AMERICA – A THINKQUEST SITE
A student-created site on the influence of Mexican-Americans
on American culture. Sections: My Own Words, Fine Arts, Sports, Food, Language,
Politics, and Demographics. Good
LATIN AMERICAN FICTION WRITERS IN ENGLISH
A list of Latin American fiction authors with the works of
each listed. Good
LATINO BOOKS FOR CHILDREN
NEW URL! 2/06
A list of Latino children’s books. Good
MEXICO: SPLENDORS OF THIRTY CENTURIES – A TIMELINE
A timeline of 3000 years of Mexico history. Note: Scroll to the right. Good
MEXICO’S DAY OF THE DEAD
A colorful page of links to Dias de las Muertos websites.
OUR HISPANIC HERITAGE
Information on the Hispanic influence on American history and
culture. Includes a general history and photos. Also includes a Trivia Quiz and
a Links for Teachers. Good
SAMPLER OF LATINO CHILDREN’S BOOKS AUTHORS
A list of Latino authors of children’s books in this country.
Also statistics on Latino children. Good
An online magazine with articles exploring present and past
Hispanic history. Click on the year and then the month to see the issues. Good
SPANISH PAINTING IN THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY
An online exhibit from the National Gallery of Art.
the 1500s, Spain had been enriched by treasure from the Americas, and the next
century saw the Golden Age of Spanish painting. Most of the painters who made
this such an outstanding period are represented."
SPANISH SPECIAL KEYBOARD CHARACTERS
Instructions on how to make Spanish diacritical marks on a
Mac and a PC. Good
SPANISH VOCABULARY BUILDER NEW URL!
Click on a category and then click on a picture to hear the
word. Uses .wav files Good
SPANISH WORD OF THE DAY
Sign up for a daily email with new vocabulary words in
TAKE A VIRTUAL TRIP TO BRAZIL
A "virtual" trip to Brazil to view the people and culture. Good
U.S. LATINO HISTORY AND CULTURE LINKS
A list of links on Latino history and culture from the
Smithsonian Institution. Not very big but worth a look. Good
UNDERSTANDING THE HISPANIC CULTURE – FACT SHEET
A single page fact sheet on Hispanic culture. Good
VIRTUAL JOURNEY OF SPAIN
Take a virtual tour of Spain. Sections: Sport, Arts & Crafts,
Music & Dance, Daily Life, Food, Speaking Out, Guidebook and a Quiz. Good
WHAT IS MARIACHI MUSIC?
An explanation of mariachi music and the instruments it’s
played on . Good
LESSON PLANS & CLASSROOM ACTIVITIES
CONTEMPORARY LATINA WRITERS: JULIA ALVAREZ – LESSON PLAN
A lesson plan for grades 9-12 on Latina writers focusing on
Julia Alvarez. It uses Alvarez as an example but can be adapted for several
Latina writers. Excellent
GEOGRAPHY OF MEXICO AND CENTRAL AMERICA – LESSON PLAN
A lesson plan for grades 3-5 on the geography of Mexico and Central America.
GEOGRAPHY OF SOUTH AMERICA – LESSON PLAN
A lesson plan for grades 3-5 on the geography of South America. Excellent
GUANTANAMERA: A POEM AND A SONG – LESSON PLAN
A lesson plan for grades 9-12 on the song and poem "Guantanamera".
"In this lesson students will listen to "Guantanamera," a Cuban folk song
made famous by Pete Seeger with lyrics from a poem by Jose Marti. They will
discover that these two men shared more than a song."
HISPANIC WORLD UNIT
A unit for middle, junior and high school students on
Hispanic countries and peoples.
"In this unit, students will conduct primary
and secondary research to know the "hispanohablantes" in the world. These
explorations will serve as windows for these Spanish-speaking countries for
students to acquire information and impression from different perspectives.
Students are supposed to conduct the researches by using their Spanish ability
to comprehend the information on the Internet. Through team works, they will
target one country as research topic, collect information using Internet
resources as well as library resources, share their research with other groups,
and visit these web sites set up by other groups that relate to these Hispanic
I HEAR LATIN AMERICA SINGING: EXPLORING LATIN AMERICAN
HISTORY THROUGH SONG – LESSON PLAN
A lesson plan on Latin American history for grades 6-12.
"In this lesson, students learn about the historical and current social,
political, and cultural trends of Latin American countries. After researching a
specific country, groups write songs that reflect the music styles as well as
the history of the region."
THE LATIN AMERICAN MERCADO – WHO MADE THIS? – LESSON PLAN
A lesson plan for grades 6-8 on the global marketplace.
"The mercado or marketplace in Latin America is a social and business event
where both local gossip and goods exchange hands in a friendly, bargaining
atmosphere. Through their participation in a simulated cottage industry and
subsequent marketplace, students can begin to appreciate the effort and tedium
involved in such work. They gain cultural understanding of the marketplace and
its impact on traditional society. Hopefully, they can transfer newly acquired
economic skills and global understanding to their purchasing power."
LATIN AMERICAN PALS: AN INTRODUCTION TO LATIN AMERICA –
A lesson plan for 6th grade students on Latin
"Students as pairs will choose a Latin American country to become
friends with and knowledgeable about. During the first month of school, the
teacher will introduce students to this on-going unit, using Mexico as a model.
Then the students will research their country in a variety of methods (Internet
and Web connections and key pals, encyclopedias, books, interviews, CDs) and
then will have the opportunity to share for a maximum of 7 minutes every other
week during "Charla," a time set aside to talk about their country. This Latin
American Pals project will go on all year, culminating in a Hyperstudio stack on
each country or home page about our project and a Latin American travel fair
exhibiting their findings."
LOS ARTISTAS UNIDOS: EXPLORING QUESTIONS OF DIVERSITY IN THE
CASTING OF ACTORS FOR POPULAR TELEVISION SHOWS AND MOVIES – LESSON PLAN
A lesson plan for grades 6-12 on the role of Hispanics in
"In this lesson, students explore the diversity of
characters in popular television shows and movies, then investigate the
backgrounds and careers of famous Hispanic actors."
MAPPING OF SOUTH AMERICA – LESSON PLAN
A lesson plan for grades 6-8 on South American geography.
do the following: 1/ Examine different aspects of the South American continent,
including its geography, climate, industry, and political boundaries. 2/ Create
a map of South America illustrating a particular aspect of the continent."
MARCO POLO CELEBRATES HISPANIC HERITAGE MONTH – LESSON PLANS
A group of activities and lesson plans focusing on Hispanic
Heritage Month. Excellent
MEXICAN COOKING LESSON PLAN
A lesson plan for grades 6-8 in which students learn about
Mexico by studying the foods.
"For the vast majority of middle school
students living far from the Southern United States border, Mexico is reduced to
a few simple stereotypes: tacos, sombreros, and piñatas. From the cultural
perspective we intend to dismantle stereotypes that students hold concerning
Mexico and its cuisine. Mexico may be far away but quickly accessed by the
Internet. In addition, one can never overestimate the impact that good computer
skills will have over the lifetime of today's student. This lesson plan
incorporates computer skills with the teaching of Mexican culture providing
students with an interdisciplinary approach to learning."
MEXICAN HOLIDAYS – LESSON PLAN
A lesson plan for grades 6-8 on Mexican holidays such as the Day of the Dead
and Cinco de Mayo. Excellent
MEXICAN PEOPLE: ARE THEY AS THEY SEEM? – LESSON PLAN
A lesson plan for grades 6-8 designed to dispel stereotypes
"In order for students to understand properly the way a
language is spoken, they must first understand the way the people who speak the
language think and why. This unit will present a general overview of the
frustrating and, more often than not, violent history of the Republic of Mexico.
This presentation will enlighten students as to some of the background of
Mexican people, setting the stage for further investigation and understanding of
various quirks of the spoken and written language."
MIGRATION AND IMMIGRATION: HOW DOES MOVING AFFECT ME AND MY
COMMUNITY? – LESSON PLAN
A lesson plan for 10th grade students on migration
"This unit will encourage students to reflect upon the
changes occurring within their own community, Albuquerque's West Mesa, where
rapid development (example: Rio Rancho) and economic expansion (example: Intel)
have resulted in heavy migration and immigration to the area. Along with
newcomers and change come conflicts and questions concerning economics, identity
and politics. Students will gain a global perspective on the phenomenon by
investigating and comparing similar experiences of other communities in the
Americas. Since the majority of students at West Mesa are Latino, comparisons
with other Latin American nations should help to emphasize the commonalities
among peoples of the Americas and break down some of the stereotypes that result
in isolation, prejudice and sometimes violence in our community."
adapt to our area. Excellent
MOCK O.A.S. CONFERENCE – LESSON PLAN
lesson plan for grades 6-12 on the O.A.S.
asked to represent countries they have independently researched in a mock OAS
conference. A preliminary introduction to the history, function and current
status of the organization will be presented. As diplomats, they must come to
the conference with a resolution to present to their fellow ambassadors that
addresses a current issue/interest of his or her country. Resolutions are
debated, committees are formed, amendments are made, and votes are taken to
adopt or reject resolutions. (NOTE: Try to have someone agree to be Puerto Rico,
and ultimately represent the U.S. in the OAS conference)."
PLAZAS, ZOCALOS AND SQUARES – LESSON PLAN
A lesson plan for grades 9-12 Spanish classes.
has been made to ensure that students use multiple skills in the undertaking of
this unit. Students will read authentic materials in Spanish. They will write
descriptions of both historical and fictional events and characters in Spanish,
and they will orally present their findings to the class using new vocabulary
and expressions associated with the plaza mayores. In addition, an effort has
been made to require some electronic research in the project. Students will
select one of the following cities where there is a historically and
architecturally representative plaza mayor: Buenos Aires, Mexico City, Santiago,
Albuquerque, New Mexico, and Santa Fe, New Mexico. Other plazas or town squares
can be discussed depending on location of the students, special interests of
either students or teacher. Of particular interest to some classes in the
Eastern part of the U.S. might be the relationship of the village green to the
RETANET RESOURCES FOR TEACHING ABOUT THE AMERICAS – LESSON
A collection of lesson plans for teaching about Hispanic
countries, language and cultures. Note: Several of these lesson plans appear
separately on this list. Excellent
THE ROOTS OF AMERICAN CULTURE: EXPLORING THE NEW VISIBILITY
OF LATINO CULTURE IN THE U.S. – LESSON PLAN
A lesson plan for grades 6-12 on the influence of Latino
culture on the U.S.
"In this lesson, students first explore the notion of
culture and the influence of Latino culture on the U.S. Students then work in
small groups to identify ways that Latino and non-Latino U.S. cultures have
engaged in cultural 'cross-fertilization."
SOUTH AMERICAN CULTURES – LESSON PLAN
A lesson plan for grades 6-8 on South American cultures. Excellent
TOUR OF SOUTH AMERICA – LESSON PLAN
A lesson plan for grades 6-8 on South America in which students learn about
famous landmarks, ancient cities and geographical features of South America.
USING CARTOGRAMS TO LEARN ABOUT LATIN AMERICAN DEMOGRAPHICS –
A lesson plan for grades 6-12 using cartograms (specialized
maps) to study Latin America.
"In this lesson, students will make their own
cartograms, one illustrating the population of Western Hemisphere nations, and
the other showing Gross Domestic Product. In the final stage of the lesson,
students will compare and contrast two cartograms, one for population, and the
other for Gross Domestic Product."
WHAT BROUGHT YOU HERE? – LESSON PLAN
A lesson plan for grades 6-8 on immigration.
will study immigration from Latin American countries and the statistics that are
known, using the Internet and written material. A foundation will be built about
understanding immigration, then the students will pair up and interview local
immigrants or do Internet interviews to compile the data. The culminating
activity will be a public evening of reading, sharing with the interviewees
present or sending a hard copy of the final product. An alternative culminating
activity would be to produce a show on public access TV, using the information
gathered, either as a newscast or possibly role playing repeated situations that
were cited as reasons to leave a Latin American country for another country."
APPRECIATING OUR HISPANIC CULTURE – LESSON PLAN
A lesson plan for grades 3-12 on Hispanic culture.
Hispanics have been adding to America’s culture, they have also protected their
own separate culture. It is this culture that you are to research. As you
research and read, you are to create an ABC book of the Hispanic culture. ABC
books are of a wide variety. Sometimes they illustrate alliteration (Alex ate an
apple.), sometimes they teach categories (Animals- aardvark, bear, cat, dog,
etc.), sometimes they are humorous, and sometimes they can be tools for
Adaptable to the grade level. Very Good
DO YOU THINK DOMINICAN FOOD IS TACOS? – LESSON PLAN
A lesson plan for grades 6-8 on Hispanic culture. "This
project stems from a need perceived during the course of our year-long exchange
program between a beginning Spanish class in a suburban, middle-class school and
a bilingual/transitional class in which all the students are recent immigrants,
largely from the Dominican Republic, at a nearby inner-city middle school. We
match students as one-to-one key-pals, in addition to whole class projects. In
one letter a Dominican student wrote, "What would you like to eat if you came to
my house? Do you think Dominican food is tacos? Because many Americans think
Dominican food is tacos." In fact, the Spanish learners had no idea what
Dominican food was, nor had they any other inkling of the Hispanic cultures of
their key-pals. To help rectify this problem the teachers began a bilingual
cookbook project in which everyone contributed an annotated favorite recipe.
This lesson is an extension of that project. It seeks to provide Spanish
learners with an interactive, discovery-based way of learning about Latino
HISPANIC COUNTRY/ IMMIGRATION UNIT
A lesson plan for studying Spanish-speaking countries and the
immigration experience to the United States. This is a plan for high school
students working with 1st graders but can be adapted for other uses.
LATIN AMERICAN CULTURE: DIA DE LOS MUERTOS (DAY OF THE DEAD)
A lesson plan for grades 3-12 on the Latin American
celebration the Day of the Dead. Note: Includes the showing of a video but can
be done without. Very Good
Border Art: a Unit of Study of Artworks Responding to the
Border Between the United States and Mexico – LESSON PLAN
A lesson plan for grades 9-12 on Border Art. Good
A BROAD STUDY OF BRAZIL – LESSON PLAN
A lesson plan on Brazil for grade 6 in which students study
the history, geography and culture of Brazil. Good
ELEMENTARY ONLINE ACTIVITIES FOR YOUNG STUDENTS TO LEARN
Primary students can learn to count in Spanish and learn the
Spanish alphabet. Good
FAMOUS SPANISH PERSON – LESSON PLAN
A lesson plan for middle/junior high students.
"As a year end project, my
Spanish students are asked to report on a famous Spanish person, living or
deceased. The report is oral, and the fun portion of the report is actually a
dress up presentation. Children will dress as their character, while they are
presenting. We have had so much success with this project. I have seen Columbus,
Isabella, Picasso, and even a famous Hispanic roller blader (roller blades were
permitted for the project). It's a fun way to learn and to end the year."
PLANNING A MEXICAN FIESTA IN THE CLASSROOM – LESSON PLAN
A lesson plan on Mexico for grades K-4.
"This lesson is
designed to be a closing activity on a unit aboutMexico. The students and
their families celebrate Mexico's culture by planning and partaking in a fiesta,
held in the students' classroom."
CINCO DE MAYO WEBQUEST
A webquest for grades 3-5 on Cinco de Mayo, the Mexican
"This WebQuest concentrates on the holiday Cinco de Mayo and
encourages students to explore the rich cultural roots connected to today's
A collection of webquests on Hispanic history and culture.
Includes a Teacher’s section with information on how to use the quests.
Outstanding. Note: The link for the radio station is broken. Excellent
DISPELLING THE MYTH: CULTURE WEBQUEST
webquest for 4th-6th grade students
on the Native American and Hispanic cultures.
"Scenario: One day during
lunch, two students got into a fight. The fight started when one of the students
made fun of the other student's lunch. The lunch was a traditional Mexican meal.
When the students got back to the classroom, a class meeting was held to discuss
the incident. During the class discussion, the point was made that students need
to respect each other's culture and heritage. One student said, " How can we
respect a culture we don't really understand?" This question prompted the class
to decide to go on a cultural fact finding mission. One student thought it would
be fun to call themselves Cultural Investigators. To start off, the class
decided to study Hispanic and Native American culture because they are two
prominent cultures in Arizona."
EL DIÁ DE LOS MUERTOS – DAY OF THE DEAD WEBQUEST
A webquest for high school Spanish students on this holiday.
"Day of the Dead?? Sugar skulls?? Bread of the Dead?? Dancing skeletons??
Sounds scary, doesn't it? To a child it might. However the Mexican celebration,
El Día de los Muertos, is not a frightening holiday at all. You are a writer of
children's books. You are interested in El Día de los Muertos and want to write
a book explaining the holiday to six-year old children. Continue reading to find
out more about this intriguing Mexican celebration."
EL JUEGO QUE APRENDE – THE LEARNING GAME – WEBQUEST
A webquest for grades 9-12.
"Bess Sellers, the marketing
manager at Teach Me Toys.com recently informed the company's president that,
based on the 2000 census, 35.3 million Hispanics live in the United States.
According to Ms. Sellers, Hispanics make up 12.5 percent of the U.S. population
and 17 percent of the nation's public school enrollment. She believes that TMT
would increase its sales if it produced toys and games about Hispanic heritage.
LaToya Maker, the company president, agreed. She has invited several teams of
independent designers to create a game that would teach U.S. kids about Hispanic
countries, culture, and people. The team that creates the most educational --
and the most fun -- game will receive 10 percent of the profits from the game's
EL RESTAURANTE LATINO WEBQUEST
A webquest for middle-senior high students on Latino culture.
"One of the best ways to gain an introduction to another country and its
culture is to become familiar with its cuisine. As a native of a Hispanic
country, you want to accurately represent your homeland to North Americans. You
have decided to open your own restaurant with a partner. Since you and your
partner are new to the restaurant business, the two of you are going to have to
spend some time carefully researching the history and nature of the cuisine of
your homeland. You will have to create a menu and a name for your restaurant as
EN VIVO DE…. WEBQUEST
A webquest on Hispanics in the U.S.
"¡Qué explosión latina
en los Estados Unidos! While most of America was asleep, Latinos became the
nation’s largest minority group, 35.3 million according to the 2000 census
bureau. 12.5 % of the U.S. population, which means approximately one out of
every 8 people in the United States is Latino. We've come a long way ,chicos.
Look what we have done for history, music, sports, art, television, motion
pictures, etc. There’s no stopping us! The future’s here, and Latinos are
standing up and being recognized. So . . . the television station that you work
for, whose ratings are low wants to air a live broadcast, in hopes of boosting
their ratings. Your job as host depends on obtaining famous Hispanic people from
the past and/or present to join you in an effort to help the American people
discover and understand more about the lives and works of these important role
models. ¡ Buena Suerte!"
This is a role-playing activity. Excellent
EVITA PERON: MISTRESS TO MADONNA – WEBQUEST
A webquest for grades 11-12 on Evita Peron.
"For years I
have taught a unit in my Spanish AP class on Argentina’s "Guerra Sucia" using
the movie "La Historia Oficial" as the basis. After the release of the
video, Evita, starring Madonna, I wanted to expand this unit to include
the government of Juan Perón and the Peronista movement. Since Eva Duarte
Perón is such a controversial person I wanted students to research several
sources and make their own decision about her contributions to Argentina. They
will use the reasoning process called "investigation" as defined by Marzano and
Pickering in the Dimensions of Learning Teacher’s Manual, second edition."
HISPANIC HERITAGE WEBQUEST
A webquest for middle school students in which students must
create a scrapbook using the information provided and the resource suggestions.
LATINO CULTURES AND THEIR TEXTUAL REPRESENTATIONS: FACT OR
FICTION? – WEBQUEST
A webquest for high school students on Latino cultures and
literature. Note: Scroll down for
the beginning of the
information and links on this site will allow you, and the members of your
group, to develop a presentation based on Latino culture and one of the authors
we are reading this semester. It is each group’s task to investigate their
writer’s cultural background in relation to the particular text we are reading
in class. For example if you are working with Julia Alvarez’s How the Garcia
Girls Lost Their Accents, in order to investigate the question of how the
predicaments found in the novel correlate to the real world lives of
contemporary Latinos, you might investigate the Trujillo dictatorship. What can
you find out about Trujillo from other sources? Can you factually validate any
of the incidents in the novel? Why did Dominicans flee their nation? What is the
political climate currently in the Dominican Republic? Finally, does this
information enable you to make new insights into the novel? If so, what are
LATINO LITERATURE WEBQUEST
A webquest for high school students on Latino literature.
Note: Scroll down the page to get to the
"Your goal, as a group, is
to develop a forty minute presentation on the US-Mexican War (1846 to 1848), the
political history of Cuba and Puerto Rico, or U.S. Latino Ethnic Groups. Your
group needs to prepare a basic history of what happened when, where and why. You
should also consider how historical events affect current day Latinos in the US.
Finally, you are highly encouraged to find the similarities and differences
between these particular communities, historical events, and your own
OUR HISPANIC WORLD – WEBQUEST
A webquest for grades 4-8 on the culture of the Hispanic
World. "Congratulations! You and your team members have secured job positions
with Hispanic World Tour Company as Tour Guides, Language Translators, Famous
People, and Book Critics. All Hispanic World Tour Employees will be expected
to: Become familiar with Hispanic countries by completing the sampler country
questions • Research the lives of famous Hispanic people • Create a poster of
your favorite Hispanic country • Read Children’s Hispanic literature books •
Create a journal of commonly used Spanish words • Work cooperatively as a group
on a class presentation"
PANORAMA CULTURAL – WEBQUEST
A webquest on Hispanic culture. "Would you like to learn a
traditional Hispanic folk tale or legend? Are you interested in environmental
issues, economics or politics? Would you rather find out what Hispanic people
are like? Their routines, their values, their societies? Or do you prefer to
learn more about the arts? This site has been created to help you prepare your
oral presentation for class."
ÍQUIERO VIAJAR A ESPAÑA! (I WANT TO TRAVEL TO SPAIN)–
A webquest for high school students on Spain.
has been hired by a student travel agency. The agency specializes in trips for
high school groups to Spanish-speaking countries. The agency has just added a
new program in Spain. They need you to research the four main cities that the
program visits: Barcelona, Madrid, San Sebastian, and Valencia. Each group
member will become an expert on one of the four cities. Each person will then
create a virtual tour of the city in the form of a PowerPoint presentation to
educate the other group members about their specific area in Spain. After the
whole group has learned about each of the four cities, you will come together to
create a travel brochure to persuade others to visit Spain."
STOLEN SPANISH ART WEBQUEST
A webquest for grades 9-12 on Spanish art.
broken into the national art museums of several Spanish-speaking countries. They
have stolen some of the works of art that cover specific events in their history
or are important to their culture. You are a member of a task force assigned
with re-creating the museum wings that were looted. You will prepare a list of
works that will go in the museums. Can you determine what are some of the most
important items in a country’s history and culture?" Note: The
Teacher’s Page link is broken. Excellent
WHERE WOULD YOU MOVE? A WEBQUEST OF SPANISH SPEAKING
A webquest on Spanish speaking countries for junior/senior
"You are part of a family who has been challenged with an
international move. The father of this family has been
transferred. He has the choice of three cities in different Spanish speaking
countries. The family could move to: La Serena, Chile; San Miguel de Allende,
Mexico; or Ronda, Spain. Because everyone in his family will be affected
by the move, he has decided to present the choices to them and together they
will research the possibilities. All members of the family are bilingual,
so language will not be a barrier."
BUEN VIAJE A ESPAÑA – AN INTERNET WEBQUEST ON SPANISH
A webquest on Spain for high school students. "You will be
visiting various hotels, restaurants, and tourist attractions in Madrid. Gather
enough information so that you can write a travel brochure using HyperStudio for
your readers. After reading your brochure will they be ready to go to Madrid?"
BUENOS DIAS AMIGOS! - WEBQUEST
A webquest for 4th grade students about Hispanic
"You have just been given permission to use the telephone to call a
friend who recently moved into your community. Your friend asks you many
questions about Raleigh, the Outer Banks, Disney World, and Washington, DC. She
asks you so many questions because she just moved to Raleigh from Mexico. You
realize that your friend wants to learn all she can about the United States and
you’ve developed such a close friendship that you want to learn more about her
Hispanic heritage. You decide to look for some Internet sites about Hispanic
heritage and another world opens up to you! Let the journey begin."
CESAR CHAVEZ: QUEST FOR SOCIAL JUSTICE – WEBQUEST
A webquest for 6th grade students on social
activist Cesar Chavez. "The task of this webquest is to create a play based
on the skits and plays that El Teatro Campesino performed out on the fields
during the UFW organizing strikes. You will perform a skit or play that informs
and educates the audience to the struggles and realities faced by César Chávez
during the formation of the United Farm Workers union."
found some broken links on this site. Very Good
CÉSAR CHÁVEZ’S LIFE – WEBQUEST
A webquest for 4th grade students on the life of
activist César Chávez.
"The idea is to allow the students to become
familiar with the life and struggles of César Chávez. At the same time, we want
to introduce the concept of social justice, so they will be able to apply
and transfer this concept and information into their own lives."
found a couple of broken links on this page. Very Good
COCINA LATINA WEBQUEST
A webquest for elementary students on Latin cuisine.
and your partner are interested in bringing authentic Latin American cuisine to
your city. You are both very good cooks and know something about the restaurant
business. The problem is this: How can you find out what Latin American people
eat? What dishes are peculiar to what countries and regions? What holidays
feature special dishes? Before you open your restaurant, you will need to
collect enough recipes from all over Latin America and compile a cookbook."
CULTURE CONQUEST WEBQUEST
A webquest for middle or high school students on the cultural
differences between Mexico and the U.S.
"Moving a family from any city to
another is far more involved than merely a change in location. Now, consider the
uncertainty surrounding a move when it is not just from one city to another, but
rather from a beloved homeland to a new country with an entirely different
language and culture! Such is the plight of the Conquistador family as they move
from the their native Mexico to Memphis, Tennessee, U.S.A. In this webquest,
each of you will assume a unique role in order to assist the Conquistador family
as they unravel the mysteries of their new environment. After exploring issues
such laws, and choosing a home and school, your team will reunite armed with the
information necessary to help the Conquistador family conquer culture shock and
settle happily into their new community!"
EVA DUARTE DE PERON – WORTHY TO CELEBRATE? – WEBQUEST
A webquest for high school students on Eva Peron.
date is July 25, 2002, the fiftieth anniversary of the death of Eva Duarte de
Peron, former first lady of Argentina. In commemoration of the influence she had
on the nation, there is a proposal to make the date a national holiday. This
question has aroused many controversial sentiments across the country as Ms.
Peron's life receives mixed reviews. Trying to be fair to all groups, the
deciding board of government officials has formed a committee to consider the
petition. The committee will consist of people affected by Ms. Peron in
different ways. Each committee member will express why or why not Ms. Peron
should receive this honor."
Note: We found broken links on this site. You
may want to add your own. Very Good
FLAGS OF THE HISPANIC COUNTRIES WEBQUEST
A webquest for 8th grade students on Hispanic
countries. "The purpose of this web quest of Flags of Hispanic
Countries is to become familiar with the flags of the twenty countries
that comprise the Hispanic World. Their histories are just as different as
the stories behind their beginnings, customs, and traditions. The students of
the eighth grade Spanish class at Dedham High School became tour guides, and
invited everyone to visit their country. The student chose a name of
a Spanish-speaking country, and followed the required rubric in order to receive
their total number of points. A presentation was made in front of
the class. Each member of the class had to take notes on the presentations for
each country. An exam of multiple choice questions was given after all of the
presentations had been completed."
FRIDA KAHLO AND I – WEBQUEST
A webquest for 4th grade students on artist Frida
"Frida Kahlo is one of the most amazing women artists that has ever
existed in Latino America. She was born in Oaxaca, Mexico. As a
child Frida Kahlo suffered from health problems that made it very
difficult for her to walk. Later on she suffered a horrible car accident,
and the doctors though she was going to die; and if she survived, she would not
be able to walk. She overcame all these hardships and expressed her anger,
frustrations, happiness, sadness through her paintings. Due to her
accident Frida Kahlo wasn't able to have children, so in her paintings she
paints different animals which many times represent the children she couldn't
have. By working on the following project; you will have the opportunity
to learn more about her life, her paintings, and how she overcame all the
difficulties she had to dealt with. When working on your project always
keep in mind what would you do if you were in her situation? What would
you do if you could not walk? How would you overcome the
difficulties she had to overcome?"
HISPANIC ART QUEST
A webquest on Hispanic art featuring artists such as
Velasquez, Goya, Miro, Dali, Diego Rivera, and Frida Kahlo. Students go through
all of the included presentations and slide shows about the different artists
and prepare a PowerPoint presentation on their favorite artwork. Very Good
I LIFT MY LAMP- A WEBQUEST EXPLORING THE HISPANIC POPULATION
OF THE UNITED STATES
A webquest for middle/junior high students on the Hispanic
population of the U.S. Includes a Teacher Page. Very Good
INTRODUCTION LATINO WEBQUEST
A webquest for junior/senior high students on Latin American
"Latin America consists of many different countries, ethnic
groups and regional specificities. In this website you will explore the
similarities and differences of these diverse peoples. Through the Latino
WebQuest you will be able to answer the essential question "What is the cultural
history of Latin America?" You will be working in a group studying one of the
following eras: • Indigenous Cultures • The Colonial Era • Independence •
Revolution and Resistance • The Contemporary Era."
Note: We found a couple
of broken links on this site. Very Good
SPAIN: THE CRADLE OF HISPANIC CIVILIZATION – WEBQUEST
A webquest for 10th grade students on Spain.
"In 1492, the Old
World and the New commenced a relationship that changed the course of world
history forever. At the forefront of that revolution was the newly born nation
of Spain. This Webquest will explore the history, culture, and economy of Spain
and the impact this vibrant nation had and still has on the history of the
SPAIN’S PAIN – AN INTERNET WEBQUEST ON THE SPANISH CIVIL WAR
A webquest on the Spanish Civil War for high school students.
"Imagine that you are a passenger in a newly developed time machine that has
been programmed to return to the year 1939. Your destination is Spain and
your reason for traveling back in time is to investigate life as a result of
the Spanish Civil War. The time machine has given you an amazing
opportunity to explore Spanish culture by seeing for yourself how drastically
life changed for the Spanish people after the civil war. After Francisco
Franco's fascist regime radically overthrew the Spanish government, life in
Spain became very different, especially in terms of cultural developments and
Note: We found some broken links on this site. Very Good
TRAVEL TO LATIN AMERICA – WEBQUEST
A webquest for middle school students on Latin America.
"Design a one-week trip and a travel brochure that will make young people want
to go to this country. You must create a name and a slogan for your agency that
will reflect your purpose for this project. You will present your trip and
brochure to the class. Any "props" necessary to enhance your presentation are
encouraged. (examples: music, clothing, or any other item that would be
represent your country’s culture.)"
CINCO DE MAYO WEBQUEST
A webquest for elementary students on the holiday Cinco de
Mayo. "Using the internet, Spanish I students will work in pairs exploring
"Cinco de Mayo". Each pair of students will prepare a journal using Notepad
summarizing data gathered about the origin of Cinco de Mayo and its celebration.
Answer the following questions. 1. When and were did Cinco de Mayo originate? 2.
Describe the problem that created the conflict. 3. In the conflict who
were the two opposing armies? Who were their leaders? 4. From where
and when in modern times did the idea come for popularizing the Cinco de
Mayo celebration? 5. Who celebrates Cinco de Mayo? How is it
DAY OF THE DEAD WEBQUEST
A webquest on the Hispanic tradition of the Day of the Dead.
"Students will explore a series of websites with the objective of gathering
information on a Hispanic tradition known as Dia de los Muertos (Day of the
Dead.) The assignment is to answer the questions at the bottom of the page
and/or to write a short paper on the tradition."
FAMOUS HISPANIC AMERICANS WEBQUEST
A webquest for middle school students in which they choose an
Hispanic American and write a brief biographical profile of that person. Good
HISPANIC COUNTRIES WEBQUEST
A webquest on the language and culture of Hispanic countries.
"You are anxious to visit a Spanish-speaking country to practice your skills
and immerse yourself into the culture. However, you do not have the money nor
the permission to go to such a country. Both of these, you must get from your
parents. But, your parents are a little afraid of going to a foreign country. It
is your quest to convince them to go."
Note: We found a couple of broken
links on this site. Good
TEJANO MUSIC WEBQUEST
A webquest on Tejano music. Written for San Antonio but
UN DIA EN MADRID – WEBQUEST
A webquest on Madrid, Spain.
"What if one day you went to
Madrid? This WebQuest project answers that question! You'll plan an itinerary
for one full day in Madrid using the Web and other sources. In Paso a Paso:
Madrid, the students saw all of the big sights. Where would you go? What
would you do? Who would you meet? The choice is yours! You have an unlimited
budget to expand your horizons."
Note: We found several broken links on this
Disclaimer: We cannot check every link within each site.
Prepared by the Cumberland County AVA Center staff. Please
call #856-451-0817 or email:
with questions or suggestions for
future web site lists. This list is also posted on our website at
The site list is also posted on three other web sites::
You are welcome to post our lists on
If you do, you must credit Carol Lyn Hutton, Cumberland County AVA Center,
Bridgeton, NJ, post the list in its entirety and link back to our site.
[ Catalog Search ] [ Website Lists ] [ Video on Demand ] [ Directions ] [ Contact Us ]
top of page