Activities in Africa are living history lessons
Since it is such a vast continent, tourists can find many historical . As the second largest and the second most populated continent, Africa’s 54 countries each have their own unique and interesting histories. For example, fossils that were found in South Africa suggest that it may have been one of the first places where human evolution began. With such an early start, this country has a very long and rich history that tourists can explore at various locations throughout the African land.
At the Dumazulu Traditional Village and Lodge on the east side of the country, guests will have the chance to visit the largest Zulu village in the southern hemisphere. Currently, it is home to more than 50 Zulu residents and can therefore offer real-life insight into the culture of an ancient group of people. Although the Zulu are still the largest ethnic group in South Africa, they have faced many hardships in the history of the country. In 1878, they were defeated at the Battle of Ulundi by British forces. After battling each other for years, the Zulu people became absorbed into the British colony of Natal in the 1880s. In 1970, under apartheid, the Zulu resident of South Africa faced more obstacles, as they became citizens of KwaZulu, losing all the rights of their South African citizenship.
Another interesting African nation is Egypt. One of the most popular tourist spots in this country is the Great Pyramid of Giza. Although it may look like a large triangular building, visitors should know that is has a deep history. Many researchers believe that this pyramid was build as a tomb for the ancient Egyptian pharaoh Khufu around 2560 BC. It is estimated that it took between 14 and 20 years to complete. While it is often disputed how exactly workers were able to construct this enormous building, a majority of researchers think that it was built by moving 2.3 million limestone blocks from a nearby quarry and simply lifting them into place. It is estimated that over 8,000 tons of granite, 5.5 million tons of limestone and 500,000 tons of mortar were used to build the Great Pyramid of Giza. All of this hard work paid off, as the pyramid was the tallest man-made structure in the world for more than 3,800 years, ensuring that Khufu was buried in a tomb fit for a king, or a pharaoh.