Volcanoes is part of an online series of modules entitled Exploring the Environment. Emphasizing an integrated approach to environmental Earth Science education through problem based-learning, this module asks students to look at four different situations involving volcanoes, research the situations, and make decisions about them. Information about the three volcanic areas under exploration (Mt. Hood, Kilauea, and Yellowstone) is given through maps, movies, and videos. Additional information covers plate tectonics, locations of volcanoes, volcano monitoring and hazards, how to deal with volcano threats, lavas, eruption types, and risk analysis. Once students have gone through the information, they make real-life decisions about building near volcanoes, and the possibility of eruptions in the near future. There are teacher resources, a reference for problem-based learning, and links for more information.
Intended for grade levels:
Type of resource:
NIH image software
Cost / Copyright:
Copyright 1997-2001, Wheeling Jesuit University/ NASA Classroom of the Future. All rights reserved. Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or direct commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. However, copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the Center for Educational Technologies/ NASA Classroom of the Future must be honored as follows: abstracting with credit is permitted, but anyone copying information must abide by the terms and constraints of the copyright protecting all components. Mirroring all or any part of this site requires our permission and the permission of the copyright holder. Caution is advised in copying and distributing U.S. public domain works in countries other than the U.S., where different laws may apply.
DLESE Catalog ID: DLESE-000-000-001-847
Resource contact / Creator / Publisher:
Contact: Dr Robert Myers
Wheeling Jesuit University, NASA Classroom of the Future