One of the predictions of General Relativity (Einstein's theory of gravity) is the existence of gravitational waves. In theory, anytime a massive object accelerates (that is any motion that is not constant straight line motion and not simple rotation) it should generate gravitational waves. So in theory the universe should be filled with gravitational waves.
However despite years of trying, no one has succeeded in detecting them.
But in the past few days rumors have been circulating that LIGO, a project to detect gravitational waves, has finally succeeded.
Einstein thought gravitational waves would be impossible to detect, and in fact they have been difficult to detect. The tiny signals must be separated from other signals (such as earthquakes and passing trucks). Each time a potential signal is detected, a statistic analysis is performed. This in essence asks "What is the likelihood this a real signal, not something that only looks real." This is expressed in terms of "sigma". The higher the sigma, the more likely the signal is real.
According to the rumor, LIGO has in fact detected signals that exceed "five sigma." Normally results like this are not released until solid confirmation has been made, but one of the physicists spilled the beans.
This may prove to be false; but it seems to be real. We should know for sure on February 11th when an official report from LIGO is scheduled to be published.
Those of you living in or near Ann Arbor, might be interested in two upcoming lectures, which by a happy coincidence are on this very topic. Both are by Keith Riles, professor of physics at the University of Michigan.
Saturday, February 13 10:30am: "Gravitational Waves - Einstein's Audacious Prediction."
Saturday, February 20 10:30am: "The Hunt for Gravitational Waves - Was Einstein Right?"
Both events are held in rooms 170 & 182 Weiser Hall (formerly the Dennison Building), University of Michigan Central Campus, 500 Church Street, Ann Arbor, Michigan, 48109
See https://www.lsa.umich.edu/physics/events/saturdaymorningphysics/schedule for more information about these lectures.
- ▼ 2016 (5)
- ► 2014 (28)
- ► 2013 (24)