Declaration Of Independence
History of the Declaration of Independence Autor:Anonym, Note:0.0, Eingabedatum:0000-00-00, B-Land:Unklar, Typ:Unklar, Fach:Englisch, Jahrgang:Unklar Art der Arbeit: unbekannt History of the Declaration of Independence "Church bells rang out over Philadelphia on July 4, 1776....signalling that the Declaration of Independence was approved and officially adopted by the Continental Congress." ... as the "Pennsylvania Packet" wrote on July 8, 1776.
The thirteen colonies that became the USA were originally colonies of Great Britain. During the time the American Revolution took place, the citizens of these colonies were beginning to get tired of the British rule. When the colonists claimed for representation and when the British denied this, Rebellion and discontent grew rampant. Another important reason why the colonies started rebelling against "mother England" was the taxation issue: The colonies debated England's legal power to tax them and, furthermore, did not wish to be taxed without the demanded representation. Because of this, for most of the people the American Revolution was essentially an economic one. For this reasons the Revolutionary War erupted on April 19, 1775. The constitutional issue(Streitfrage) of whether or not the King had the right to tax the thirteen colonies "became an entering wedge(Keil) in the great dispute that was finally to wrest(jdm. etw. entreiÃen) the American colonies from England" . The phrase "taxation without representation" became the turning point which convinced the people to fight against their mother country. Inspired by the desire to live freely in a self-governing society the reaction against taxation was often violent and the most powerful groups in the population rose against it.
Another strong argument for independence revolved around(sich drehen um) the issue of not becoming like the rotten Mother England. Americans believed that "the longer they remained within the British Empire, the greater was the "danger of contamination' ." Outline of the most important events: Â· In October of 1765,