Date: 12/31/01 3:19:26 PM Pacific Standard Time
What the sunrise may look like on 5/15/03 with Venus and Mercury rising along the ecliptic just ahead of the sun. Planet X will be just to the left of the rising sun with it's debris tail being blown away from the sun at 33 degrees to the ecliptic by the solar wind. In the bible during Moses time, it was said they followed a pillar of fire in the east. Could this be what they were observing?
Date: 12/31/01 3:06:12 PM Pacific Standard Time
I've plotted the current position and approximate path of Planet X over the next 15 months, as reported by ZetaTalk, as accurately as I can using StarFinder II.
By 03/03/03 you should be able to locate it with a high-quality amature scope, but for the moment it is too dark and too distant to see it without IR equipment.
After 03/03/03, as it approaches the inner solar system, it's suppose to drop rather quickly below the ecliptic, passing behind and below the sun, before it makes it's final passage approx. 5/15/03. (Saturn's position is accurate as of 12/31/01)
Nibiru's position on 01/28/02 = RA 4:27:18 Dec 12:08:51
After 03/03/03, as it approaches the inner solar system, it's suppose to accelerate rather quickly below the ecliptic, passing behind and below the sun, before it comes back up from beneath the sun at a 33 degree angle to make it's final passage approx. 5/15/03. It will bisect the ecliptic between the orbits of Mercury and Venus passing just above and ahead of the earth in it's orbit and passing almost directly over top of Mars. Keep in mind the orbital diagrams below have exaggerated the size of the planets relative to the size of the orbits so that you can differentiate them, which makes it appear as if this will be even more of a hair-parter than it already is. The planets are shown in their positions as they will be on May 15, 2003. My plots are approximate and are probably off by a smidge.
PLANET X January 5, 2002 Comparisons Palomar (50 yr old) vs Today
A FAINT AND LONELY
BROWN DWARF IN THE SOLAR VICINITY Discovery of KELU-1 Promises New Insights
into Strange Objects Until now, very few Brown
Dwarfs have been securely identified as such. Two are members of double-star
systems, and a few more are located deep within the Pleiades star cluster.
Now, however, Maria Teresa Ruiz of the Astronomy Department at Universidad
de Chile (Santiago de Chile), using telescopes at the ESO La Silla observatory,
has just discovered one that is all alone and apparently quite near to
The Mouse That Roared Chandra Captures Flare From Brown Dwarf
CONJECTURE: Are the chemtrail criss-cross patterns heavily laced with Aluminum Oxide (AlO)? Note that a Brown Dwarf at certain potential temperatures have strong Titanium Oxide (TiO) or Vanadium Oxide (VO) for which AlO is an inexpensive substitute. Is the Govt. trying to find out the effects of TiO analogues raining down? (On the other hand, in KELU-1 an absorption line of the short-lived element lithium (oboy!) was identified, as well as a hydrogen line in emission).
Interesting..... similar, and a bit closer to being on target, but KELU-1is not Planet-X/Niberu/Nemesis. Niberu is currently located between the constellations Orion and Taurus, (@ RA 4.45 Dec 12.13) while KELU-1 is located somewhere in the constellation Hydra, which is is off by a long-shot. In fact I doubt KELU-1 could even constitute Niberu's other foci (our sun's dead twin) as it is too far off of Nibiru's inbound vector. I believe we will eventually find the sun's dead twin (Nibiru's other foci) lingering somewhere between us and the proximity of the belt stars of the constellation Taurus.
Check out the following link to see the first (unconfirmed) public sighting of Nibiru: http://www.zetatalk.com/usenet/use90375.htm
Keep the watch,