I'm amazed that I haven't had the chance to introduce Nobel Intent readers to Wolbachia yet (more information on it is available here). It's such an amazing bacteria that I'm not entirely sure where to start in describing it. It primarily infects insects, and it's estimated that anywhere from 20-70 percent of all insects carry it. But as the site linked above notes, "the limits of the host range of Wolbachia are not fully appreciated at this time." They can also infect other arthropods, but have been found in unrelated animals such as nematodes, which are a type of roundworm. In this capacity, they parasitize human parasites, such as the nematodes that cause river blindness and elephantiasis; some evidence even suggests that Wolbachia is needed for these worms to trigger disease.
But it's the havoc they play with the reproductive systems of insects that make Wolbachia famous (at least within parasitology circles). Among their talents include allowing female insects to reproduce parthenogenically (i.e., without males), altering the ability of sperm to fertilize eggs, killing all infected males, and causing all males to develop as females. While I was working on my thesis, the lab found that a line carrying a female sterile mutation in the main sex determination gene of Drosophila suddenly started producing offspring. After years of searching for a mutation that conferred this fertility, they eventually discovered that a Wolbachia infection had overridden the sex determination system in the ovaries, and restored fertility.
But the Wolbachia story has just gotten stranger still. A publication in the open-access journal PLoS Pathogens reveals that Wolbachia itself has its activities regulated by a viral parasite, namely a bacteriophage. The ability of Wolbachia to influence if a sperm can fertilize an egg is apparently at least partly determined by the population density of the bacteria in the male gonad. That population density, in turn, is influenced by the rate of infection of Wolbachia by the bacteriophage. If this is a general property of the phage, then it may be possible that the viral parasite of the bacterial parasite of the nematode parasite affects the course of a human disease.