The San Francisco Bay Area national parks and their partners provide access to a variety of curricula, activities, and materials for educators and students to encourage the growth and development of a new generation of science-savvy citizens who are capable not only of understanding the complexities associated with public land management, but also of making informed decisions about the future of that land and its resources.
On-line Educational Materials and Curricula
Geology of National Parks Educational Modules are available for Point Reyes and other parks around the country.
Golden Gate National Recreation Area's website houses a variety of on-line games to teach students about topics like geology, endangered species and habitat restoration in a fun and interactive way. The park also offers curricula on park habitats and special places like Muir Woods and Alcatraz.
Golden Gate’s park partners also host a variety of programs and materials on topics from biology and habitat restoration to psychology and the performing arts.
Learn more about the famous conservationist John Muir and the special places he helped save.
Point Reyes National Seashore has curriculum materials on a number of topics including defining habitats, monitoring creek health, the San Andreas Fault, tule elk, pacific gray whales, northern elephant seals, and identifying resident birds.
At LearnNPS you'll find curriculum, fun and games, a guide to park Junior Ranger programs and a host of other fun and educational media created by the National Park Service and our partners.
The Views of the National Parks Teacher's Lounge has lesson plans on Wilderness, Coastal Geology, Caves and Karst, and more.
The NPS National Office is a great resource for materials and links to educate students of all ages about natural and cultural resources and the national park system and research opportunities on park lands.
NOAA Gulf of the Farallones Educational Programs include slideshows, posters, handouts, curricula, and interactive programs for teachers to use in the classroom as well as field trips and camp activities.
The Cordell Bank National Marine Sanctuary Education Programs and Multimedia website hosts a wide range of marine-related games, programs, and materials.
PRBO Conservation Science offers numerous programs where adults and kids can learn about birds and their habitats.
SchoolTube provides student produced and moderator approved videos that are appropriate for kids grades K-12.
Field Trips and Educational Programs
Click on a park site below to find out how to plan either a self-guided or ranger led field trip.
Point Reyes National Seashore
Golden Gate National Recreation Area
Pinnacles National Park
John Muir National Historic Site
The Crissy Field Center organizes a variety of self guided or center-run field trips and educational programs to get your students out in the park and learning about the natural world right at their doorstep.
The Global Learning and Observations to Benefit the Environment (GLOBE) program is a worldwide, hands-on science and education program that allows students, teachers and scientists to collaborate on inquiry-based investigations of the environment. Teachers receive training, videos and curriculum materials, and a support network of scientists and other teachers worldwide. Educators who wish to lead students in GLOBE need to attend special workshops in order to fully participate in the program.
NatureBridge (formerly the Headlands Institute) provides teachers with materials, lesson plans, and projects to engage students in the natural environment of the Marin Headlands.
Located in the Marin Headlands, the Marine Mammal Center offers a number of programs for kids of all ages, school groups, and families to learn more about marine mammal care, research, and science.
The Point Reyes National Seashore Association offers experiential education opportunities through the Clem Miller Environmental Education Center and teacher training for those interesting in hosting a class there.
The YMCA Point Bonita's award winning outdoor environmental education programs#mce_temp_url# connect youth and families to nature, science, and community through hands-on learning, residential and one day outdoor education, and school-based programs.