American Heritage® Dictionary of the English Language, Fourth Edition
- n. An abnormal fear of dirt or contamination.
Century Dictionary and Cyclopedia
- n. A morbid fear of contamination, as of soiling one's hands by touching anything.
- n. An abnormal fear of dirt.
- n. a morbid fear of dirt or contamination
- Ancient Greek μύσος (mýsos, "uncleanness"). (Wiktionary)
- Greek musos, uncleanness + -phobia. (American Heritage® Dictionary of the English Language, Fourth Edition)
“Your mysophobia is in overdrive - if you 'hover' at home I would think that would just be inviting more germs rather than sitting and giving yourself a little bit of a seal.”
“The syndrome, called mysophobia, caused her to be left out when …”
“E.G. Marshall plays Upson Pratt, a rich and ruthless businessman who lives his life sealed in his apartment, where he balances his time between perpetuating his corporate greed and battling his crippling mysophobia – a pathological fear of dirt, germs and contamination.”
“I actually think it is Emma Pillsbury, the school's guidance counselor who suffers from an extreme case of mysophobia, a pathological fear of dirt and germs.”
“But Glee took a factory-made formula (ragtag outsiders band together through the miracles of music and infectious enthusiasm) and added self-awareness, wit, ribaldry and mysophobia (fear of germs).”
“Or, you could just represent my mysophobia-erotica novel.”
“I had to look up mysophobia but it turned out to be germane.”
“Sufferers of mysophobia and other types of germ phobias can rest easier using our phone condoms.”
“The victim of mysophobia will wash the hands after touching any object, and will, so far as possible, avoid touching objects which he thinks may possibly convey infection.”
“For many people, kissing a dog or cat may be less of a safety issue and more of a mysophobia issue, or fear of germs.”
These user-created lists contain the word ‘mysophobia’.
"Luciferous Logolepsy is a collection of over 9,000 obscure English words. Though the definition of an 'English' word might seem to be straightforward, it is not. There exist so many adopted, deriv...
"Sick" is probably not the right word, but this is where I put diseases, problems and abnormalities until I find a better way to sort them.
All the words from the Grandiloquent Dictionary.
946 of these 2700 words do not yield any results in six different dictionaries, hence many of them might be misspellings.
Hopefully, I'll be using this site for more than one year. It will be fun then to look back and see what new words I found worthy of notice in any given year.
All words spotted in 2008...
Looking for tweets for mysophobia.