The Stock Exchange: An explanation
The NYSE and how it works is what this nine minute video is about. This is a talking head video and requires the teacher to have explained what the exchange does in detail and how to read the stock pages to gain full value.
How Money Grows
A simple explanation of how money saved in a bank grows, thanks to compound interest.
Student created video explaining opportunity cost. Students do a skit explaining opportunity cost.(Amateur video)
Days and Months in Greek
In this video you will learn the days days of the week and the months of the year in Greek.
The Freeze Dance Song | Children Dance Songs by Cullen's Abc's
When you hear the drumbeat you can dance-when it stops you have to freeze. (1:02)
The instructor demonstrates how to classifying quadrilaterals based on the given information using specific attributes.
Lois Ehlert Interview
Lois Ehlert's unique children's books, such as Color Zoo, reflect her creative and curious mind. In this exclusive video interview, Lois Ehlert discusses her early love for art and how she continually strives to create highly original children's books. style, a vibrant mix of watercolor and collage, she brings stories to life.
Song: He knows my name
A religious song about "our maker". There are religious images and landscapes shown in a video and the lyrics are shown as the song goes.
Jesus Loves Me (VBS Version)
The song "Jesus Loves Me" is sung by Go Fish Guys. This is a great song for young kids of all ages. (03:58)
In 2008, the USGS Multi-Hazards Demonstration Project (MHDP) brought together over 300 experts to create ShakeOut the most comprehensive earthquake scenario and massive storm possibilities. Basically, this is a wake-up call that shows students what might happen. However, it does not tell students how to prepare.
Students report digitally about the state of Alaska. They present many facts and pictures of the state of Alaska.
The Land of Sedona
This video takes a look at the geology, scenery, and history of Sedona, Arizona. Sedona is becoming known as some of the most magnificient land on earth with wonderful rock formations that have been cut over thousands of years. The video is good quality and provides information for students studying this area of the United States. (6:00)
4th graders reveal the facts about the state of California and present pictures of California.
Beautiful beaches, active volcanoes, and a rich, diverse culture make Hawaii a visitors' paradise. This video discusses how 1.2 million people call Hawaii home and many more visit the islands, surfboarding was invented here, Pearl Harbor, volcanoes, wildlife, and traditions. Video is good quality and appropriate for all students.
The Great Society
Texan Lyndon Baines Johnson (LBJ) took the oath of office on the plane carrying John F. Kennedy's body from Dallas to Washington, D.C. on November 22, 1963. Johnson's presidency began in turmoil with Kennedy's assassination and continued throughout most of the decade in the same manner. (Video is narrated with slides and speeches.)
Visit the Grand Ole Opry in Nashville, Tennessee
The Grand Ole Opry is a place where new, country artists dream to perform and where the legends of country music will always have a home. It is the longest-running, life radio show. Travel with Bennett-Watt and discover the Grand Ole Opry in Nashville Tennessee. Run time 02:14.
First Look: President Bush (CBS News)
President Bush held a news conference in the Rose Garden on Thursday. Jim Axelrod offers a roundup of the conference. (CBSNews.com)
User Photos in Street View on Google Maps
Now you can browse user-contributed photos that have been precisely-matched to Street View images. Gorgeous photos from Panoramio allow you to see some of the world's most famous landmarks.
Learn German Fruits
Learn terms and expressions for German fruits by watching this video. You will hear the word in German and see the German word on the screen and then the word in English will appear on the screen. This is great for beginning language learners.
Learn Latin - Verbs
A good way to be introduced to some basic latin verbs. It contains correct latin pronunciation with pictures and words in both latin and english.