The Four Step Brothers, who were billed as “eight feet of rhythm,” appeared annually for ten years at Radio City Music Hall and were the Halle’s first black act. The group was formed around 1925, when Maceo Anderson and two other dancers persuaded agents at the Cotton Club to allow them to perform there with Duke Ellington. They remained with the club for four years and in the 1930s added the first dancer. By then the dancers were Rufus “Flash” McDonald, Prince Spencer, Al Williams and Anderson. The group also performed at the Roxy and with Frank Sinatra at the Paramount. They later toured on the Keith-Orpheum circuit, as well as on black circuits, and many times were the first blacks to perform in theaters. Their act included singing, acrobatics, comedy, and vernacular dance as well as traditional tap. Each dancer tried to another’s dance steps. Their trademark was an escalation of speed and complexity. Until they disbanded in the 1960s, the group played at the top nightclubs, and theaters around the world and danced for the queen of England and for Japanese leader Hirohito. They also starred in numerous films, including Here Comes the Girls and Johnny Comes Marching Home, and on television shows such as The Ed Sullivan Show and in Bob Hope specials. On July 14,1988, the dance quartet was honored with a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame, under a new category called live theater. They had become one of the most celebrated and enduring tap acts in the nation, and their act was one of the most imitated in show business. They also helped break the color barrier in entertainment. The last surviving member of the group, tap dancer and exuberant clown Maceo Anderson, died July 4, 2001.Source: Black Firsts: Groundbreaking Events in African American History
marfmellow: The project is saying that street harassment is not okay. That feeling entitled to treat and speak to women any type of way, is not okay. That demanding a woman’s attention is not okay. That intruding on a woman’s space and thoughts is not okay. That women should be able to walk to the train, to the grocery store, to school - without having to cross the street to avoid the men that she sees already eyeing her as she approaches. That making women feel objectified, sexualized simply because they are women, is not okay. That grabbing a woman’s wrist to force her to speak to you is not okay. That requesting for a woman to “smile for you” is not okay - because women are not outside on the street for the purpose of entertaining and pleasing men. That it’s quite possible women are wonderful, happy, intelligent human beings that simply want to move through out the world comfortably and safely while wearing their face however the hell they want to. A lot of people will not agree with this project. A lot of people, men AND women, will not understand it. And that’s okay. This project is not asking for there to be zero interaction between men and women in public spaces - it’s asking for the interaction to be respectful and safe. This project is not to persuade women to feel offended. Rather, this project is for those who do feel offended by unwelcome aggressive treatment from men. It’s my hope that some women will walk pass these wheat pastes and feel empowered. That men will at least take notice and consider what the posters are saying. And that the conversation about street harassment will continue to be enlivened and hopefully produce some sort of solution.
Understand that African American History is more than a one month celebration. Understand that there’s more to our history than just Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., Malcolm X and Rosa Parks. Understand that there’s more to us than just our freedom of slavery. Understand that the flaws of our generation today does not define us. Understand that we changed the world with more than just a Civil Rights Act . Understand we changed the world with our inventions, music, movies, art, books, fashion, other events and culture in general. Understand that we are not your perception of us. We are not the N word, or any other racial slur. Understand that we were Kings and Queens first, not just slaves; slavery was not the beginning.
We embrace our culture with no shame & worry .
Understand that we are BLACK CULTURE .
knickied: knickied: Photographer: Latoya Snell Model: Knickie Duchatellier uneditied Oh goodie! I see me on my dash. That’s always a good feeling
Worry about your character, not your reputation. Your character is who you are. Your reputation is who people think you are
Yoruba Door, Nigeria
From the Hamill Gallery: “Yoruba doors, often made by well-known carvers for prestigious homes and palaces, usually have strong figurative carving in deep relief. This one has less refined carving than most and was probably made to be sold.” via: hamillgallery.com Photographs © Tim Hamill
BLACK AND BROWN PEOPLE IN LONDON (partic visibly muslim people South London/Woolwich area)
Please stay safe. If you live in Woolwich, please avoid going out if you can. The English Defence League are calling their members in all parts of the country to take to the streets and they are throwing missiles at police around the Woolwich area.
Stay safe everyone. xx
ugly-black: in Mali, photographed by Maggie Steber for Beyond The Horizon published by National Geographic Society, 1992 pose.