Organic apples make the perfect health food
Organic apples are one of the most perfect health foods you can eat. They contain a very filling and satisfying type of fiber, which helps with weight control. They also have several powerful nutrients that truly will "keep the doctor away" when consumed on a regular basis.
The fiber that is found abundantly in apples is called pectin. This type of fiber is beneficial to your overall health in several ways. Pectin has demonstrated an ability to help lower cholesterol levels. It has also demonstrated a blood sugar stabilizing effect. It has been linked to a lower likelihood of insulin resistance and pre-diabetes.
This also has the effect of reducing the appetite and making one feel fuller longer. Organic apples are an excellent snack for this reason. They register at about 50-80 calories depending on their size, so they have minimum impact on your daily caloric intake.
Apples are rich in a potent antioxidant and flavonoid called quercetin. Flavonoids are the nutrient pigment that colors many fruits and vegetables. Quercetin is also a potent anti-inflammatory and natural antihistamine. It is therefore considered an excellent nutrient for cancer and heart disease prevention as well a potent anti-allergy nutrient.
Studies have shown that children who consume apples frequently have lower rates of asthma. This furthers the theory that quercetin is a powerful natural histamine blocker. Consuming apples on a regular basis may also help improve allergy symptoms in adults.
Apples also contain a potent antioxidant group of nutrients called polyphenols. Polyphenols are mostly known for their presence in red wine and green tea, and apples are a little known source of this powerful nutrient. The polyphenols that are found in apples are different from other sources of this nutrient in that they are water soluble.
This increases their bioavailability making them an excellent source of this beneficial compound. Diets high in polyphenols are associated with lower cancer rates, better heart health and enhanced immune function.
Always be sure to buy the most unblemished apples you can find in addition to only buying organic. When an apple is bruised, it means that its polyphenol content has oxidized. This means the protective properties of these powerful antioxidants are no longer as potent.
Many of the strongest and most beneficial polyphenols are contained in the skin of the apple. So when eating an apple, eat the entire fruit and don't peel the skin if you want maximum nutritional benefit.
The exceptional polyphenol content combined with the pectin also helps lower blood fat levels. This benefit has only been observed when whole apples are regularly consumed. At least one whole apple per day must be eaten to gain this effect.
Add Your Comments
Please ensure that you don't use abusive words in your comments. While you have a right to express your views, you have absolutely no right to abuse persons or events. Express your criticism in a gentle way.
Featured Movie News
Good news is 38 years old Sholay movie that was a super…
Sometimes a talk or a suggestion makes one think in those lines. …
Sherlyn Chopra's mother is asking her to get married soon! That is…
Haasan said that she like writing due to the fact that, it…
There is gossip that Rajamouli, the very acclaimed director is going to…
SRK, was known to have got discharged on Wednesday evening after undergoing…