If indoor plants or plants brought in for the winter seem to be doing poorly, softened water may be the culprit.
There isn't any research that tells us which plants can be injured. Plants have a widely varying tolerance for softened water. In many cases, water from a mechanical softener has a harmful effect on plant growth.
Hard water contains large amounts of calcium and magnesium, which are plant nutrients. However, these minerals reduce the lathering effectiveness of soap when clothing or other items are washed. The minerals in hard water often combine with soap to form the ring you see in bathtubs or wash bowls.
Sodium is used by plants only in very small amounts. Over long periods of time, sodium becomes toxic to plants. Excessive sodium will damage the soil quality around the plant's roots system by breaking down the soil structure, thus reducing drainage. But there is hope. You can save your plants by using several care methods.
* Leaching. By using rainwater or unsoftened water to water your plants, high levels of sodium can be leached out of the soil.
* Elevation. By placing your plant on gravel or a similar material, a reservoir is formed to collect water passing through the soil. Never allow plants to stand in softened water.
* Repotting. Fresh potting soil will provide a new environment for the roots, free of excess salts.
Other water additives used by municipal water systems, chlorine and fluorine, also can harm some plants. They are trace elements that are needed in very small amounts to keep plants healthy. In excess, like sodium, they can be toxic.
Chlorine generally presents less of a headache for houseplants. Chlorine can be eliminated from water by heating, aerating or by filling watering containers and letting them stand overnight before watering the plants.
Fluorine can adversely affect plants at concentrations as low as .1 part per million. In some municipal water supplies, 10 times that amount is added to prevent tooth decay. A top indicator of fluoride content is the spider plant, or Chlorophytum, which will show spotted leaves or burned tips The best choice here is a separate water source.
But also, you can deter the effects of fluorine by adding two teaspoons of limestone per six-inch pot of soil. The addition of lime raises the pH of the soil and combines with fluoride in a chemically insoluble form that plants cannot take up through the roots.
Many of us get an onslaught of insect invaders each fall -- Asian lady beetles. But despite the temptation, you shouldn't kill these beneficial bugs.
In the last few years, multi-colored Asian lady beetles have caused a bit of a problem. Although they can be a nuisance, they do far more good than harm.
A native of eastern Asia, the beetle was introduced into the United States by the U.S. Department of Agriculture as a biological control agent. The tree-dwelling insect can live up to three years and is a voracious predator of aphids, scale insects and other pests. Adults of the species were first observed in Pennsylvania in 1993.
Asian lady beetles become a nuisance when they invade homes in search of shelter and warmth. Screen them out, seal cracks and openings with caulk and use every available method to exclude them. But, please do not kill them. They do no harm but a great deal of good.
How trees are handled before, during and after planting affects their health and appearance. Protect trees while transporting. Cover or wrap trees in tarps or plastic sheeting, especially in open truck beds. Uncovered trees can dry out rapidly, or lose leaves and/or limbs.
Handle the tree with care. Lift the tree by the root ball, never by its trunk. Avoid using ropes or chains to load, move or place trees.
Only prune as needed before planting. Light, cosmetic pruning is acceptable for removing damaged limbs. Don't prune away leaves unless absolutely necessary.
Greg Solt is a Penn State Cooperative Extension Agent in Northampton County. Lawn and Garden assistance is available from Penn State Master Gardeners, Northampton County Cooperative Extension, Greystone Building, Gracedale Complex, Nazareth, PA 18064-9212; 610/746-1970.