New World Thinking Day 2012 materials now available
29 September 2011
Each year on 22 February, Girl Guides and Girl Scouts all over the world celebrate World Thinking Day. It’s a day when Girl Guides and Girl Scouts think of each other and give thanks and appreciation for the international friendship they find in our Movement.
The theme for World Thinking Day 2012 is “we can save our planet”, based on UN Millennium Development Goal 7: environmental sustainability. On the new World Thinking Day website you’ll find activity ideas, information about the theme, and lots of resources including the new activity pack.
You can also view photos and stories from previous celebrations, and find out how the World Thinking Day fund benefits girls and young women around the world. There are five new focus countries for 2012, Guyana, Ivory Coast, Japan, Russia and Tunisia. You can find out all about them on the World Thinking Day website.
The new website has lots of great interactive activities. You can add a message, upload and view images of Girl Guide or Girl Scout uniforms, and add your activity to the online map.
Make your actions count!
We are collecting your actions on our online action counter to show the world how Girl Guides and Girl Scouts are helping to save our planet. We aim to collect 201,200 actions by 31 August 2012, and we need your help!
The World Thinking Day action counter gives your members a chance to make their mark by recording how many actions they have taken towards saving the planet. Every pound (£) donated or activity completed counts as one action and our target is 201,200 actions.
Log your activities and for every 100 actions we receive, we’ll add one World Thinking Day icon to the map. As more actions are counted, the more icons will appear on the map. Help us cover the whole world with Girl Guide and Girl Scout actions. See what a huge impact Girl Guides and Girl Scouts around the world can have when they work together to save our planet!
Go ahead and add your actions today and help us reach 201,200 actions by 31 August 2012!