Birmingham Field Office
Mississippi's estimated five billion tons coal reserves consist entirely of lignite. Economically significant lignite in Mississippi is found in the Eocene, Wilcox, and Claiborne groups which arc across the State from just east of Memphis, Tennessee, into Alabama. Typically, those beds that can be economically mined range from two to nine feet thick. Mississippi lignite resources equal about 13 percent of the total U.S. lignite reserves of 40 billion tons. Lignite is primarily used to generate electricity. Exploratory drilling of the lignite fields began in the mid-1970s. The State issued its first and only mining permit in August 1998.
Michael Bograd of the Mississippi Department of Environmental Quality has responsibility for SMCRA activities related to active coal mining in the State of Mississippi.
Michael Bograd of the Mississippi Department of Environmental Quality has responsibility for SMCRA activities related to abandoned coal mines in the state of Mississippi.
Mississippi grant reports and related documents are contained in the official grant file maintained at the:
Mid-Continent Regional Office
501 Belle Street, suite 216
Alton, IL 62002
They can be reviewed during normal business hours. Alternatively, these documents can be requested through the Birmingham Field Office and a copy of the grant file will be made available. The copy may be requested in paper or electronic format.
OUTREACH FOR DEVELOPMENT OF THE OVERSIGHT PERFORMANCE AGREEMENT
We are soliciting comments, recommendations or suggestions for topics from citizens, environmental groups, and industry to include in our 2014 Annual or Bi-Annual Performance Agreement. Performance Agreements between OSM and the State and Tribal programs establish how oversight is conducted during each evaluation year(s). The topics should relate to the implementation of the approved Regulatory and Abandoned Mine Land Programs. Please submit your topics or requests for our consideration from March 1-30, 2013 by email or in writing to the contact at the bottom of the page. Thank you for your participation in this important process. .
Oversight DocumentsTo view oversight documents see ODOCS, OSM's REG-8 Oversight Database:
|OSM defines "oversight", as the "process of evaluating and assisting states [and tribes] in the administration, implementation, and maintenance of approved programs. In collaboration with each state/tribe, OSM develops a Performance Agreement/Evaluation Plans tailored to the unique conditions of each state/tribe program. Performance Agreements/Evaluation Plans between OSM and the states establish how oversight is conducted during each evaluation year.|
For more information on OSM's oversight process see Oversight of Surface Coal Mining.
For more information please contact:
Birmingham Field Office Director