Diabetes Cookbook For Canadians For Dummies
For the more than two million Canadians who have diabetes, eating a balanced, nutritious diet is an essential part of maintaining good health. If you have diabetes, there are some great Web sites that you can consult for recipes, meal planning suggestions, and nutritional information. You can also follow some helpful tips when preparing food at home or eating out at a restaurant, so that no matter where you are, you can maintain a healthy diet and keep your diabetes in check.
Recipe and Nutrition Web Sites for Canadians with Diabetes
A number of excellent Web sites provide healthy eating tips and recipes for Canadians with diabetes. Visit the reference links below to find nutritional information and recommendations from The Canadian Diabetes Association, Health Canada, and other reliable sources, and check out the recipe links for lots of healthy diabetes meal planning ideas.
References for Canadians with diabetes
Here are some resources for finding information about diabetes and nutrition:
Recipes for Canadians with diabetes
The following links take you to Web sites that offer food and diet ideas for healthy living with diabetes:
Healthy Eating at Home: Tips for Canadians with Diabetes
One of the best ways to manage diabetes is by being conscious of your diet — which is a lot easier to do if you’re eating your own food at home. Here are some handy tips for keeping your healthy diet on track and in line with the Canadian recommendations when eating and preparing meals at home.
Eat breakfast every day.
Limit your use of margarine or butter.
Use light mayonnaise instead of margarine or butter on your bread. Just one teaspoon of margarine or butter has 35 calories and a teaspoon of light mayonnaise has 15 calories.
If you’re going to be adding peanut butter to your toast, don’t also use margarine or butter. Stick to the peanut butter alone.
Use salsa or light sour cream on top of a baked potato instead of butter or margarine.
Bake, broil, roast, microwave, or stir fry more often; avoid deep frying.
Remember that with easier access to food in the home (compared to a restaurant), you need to keep an eye on how much food you’re eating.
Tips for Eating Out in Restaurants for Canadians with Diabetes
Having diabetes can make eating out at a restaurant quite challenging. It can be hard to find foods that are diabetes-friendly, but increasingly Canadian restaurants are offering healthier food options. Here are some strategies you can follow to make eating out a healthful, not harmful, experience:
Choose foods in the appropriate amounts from the different food groups.
Resist the temptation to be super-sized.
Ask the wait staff how big the portions are. If the portions are large, try one of the following:
Share the serving with your dinner-mate
Eat half and take the other half home for your next day’s lunch
Order the lunch sized portion for your dinner
Order a kid’s sized serving.
Avoid all you can eat buffets.
When ordering a salad, ask for low-calorie dressings like oil and vinegar on the side so you can choose how much to put on.
Ask to see the nutritional information and look at the content of the various food choices you’re considering. Also, often restaurant menus have symbols to let you know what are healthier food choices.
Make sure the wait staff are paying attention when you order a diet soft drink.
Order baked, steamed, or broiled foods, tomato-based dishes, grilled chicken, or fish (non-battered).
For sandwiches, choose chicken, turkey, pastrami, or Black Forest ham. Ask for extra lettuce, tomatoes, or other vegetables to be added. If mayonnaise is being used, ask for light mayo and have them apply it to only one piece of bread. Choose a whole grain bun, pita, or wrap.
For dessert, order a piece of fruit or a fruit salad.