logging in or signing up CONFLICT MGMT. vikram.pal95 Download Post to : URL : Related Presentations : Share Add to Flag Embed Email Send to Blogs and Networks Add to Channel Uploaded from authorPOINT lite Insert YouTube videos in PowerPont slides with aS Desktop Copy embed code: Embed: Flash iPad Dynamic Copy Does not support media & animations Automatically changes to Flash or non-Flash embed WordPress Embed Customize Embed URL: Copy Thumbnail: Copy The presentation is successfully added In Your Favorites. Views: 901 Category: Education License: All Rights Reserved Like it (0) Dislike it (0) Added: September 15, 2009 This Presentation is Public Favorites: 1 Presentation Description No description available. Comments Posting comment... By: jainekta08 (26 month(s) ago) great one Saving..... Post Reply Close Saving..... Edit Comment Close By: deepsand (32 month(s) ago) very helpful Saving..... Post Reply Close Saving..... Edit Comment Close Premium member Presentation Transcript GOOD MORNING : Presentation Given by Amit bansal Roll no.804 GOOD MORNING INTRODUCTION : INTRODUCTION The term conflict may mean different things to different persons.It may be regarded as the disagreement or hostility between individuals or groups in the organisations Definition of conflict mgmt. : Definition of conflict mgmt. “conflict has been defined as the condition of objective incompatibility between values and goals; as the behaviour of deliberately interfering with another’s goal achievement;and as emotionally in terms of hostility.descriptive theorists have explained conflict behaviour in terms of objective conflict of interest,personal styles,reactions to threats,and cognitive distortions.” Nature of conflict mgmt. : Nature of conflict mgmt. Conflict arises because of incompatibility of two or more aspects of an element Conflict occurs when an individual is not able to choose among the available courses of action. Conflict is a dynamic process as it indicates a series of events. Conflict must be perceived and expressed by the parties to it.if no one is aware of a conflict, it is generally agreed that conflict does not exist even though there may be incompatibility in some respect. Positive and negative aspects of conflict : Positive and negative aspects of conflict In general, people perceive conflict having negative connotations.the basic reason behind this is that they see the conflicts between two groups of the organisations. There are three approaches for looking at consequences of conflicts: Traditional view Human relations view Interactionist view Traditional view : Traditional view Traditionally,conflicts in the organisation have been taken negatively. they have a belief that conflicts produce disequilibrium in the organisation Note:-Fayol has suggested that if there is a conflict between individual and organisational interest must prevail over the individual interest.he has included this in his fourteen principles of management. Human Relations view : Human Relations view Human relations view treats that conflict is a natural phenomenon of any group or organisation.conflicts arise because of individual differences in terms of values,goals,and perceptions. Interactionist view : Interactionist view This view is based on the belief that conflict is not only a positive force in a group but is also necessary for a group to perform effectively. “ In the light of these divergent views about the consequences of conflicts,we may arrive at some conclusions if we analyse the positive and negative aspects of conflicts. Positive aspects of conflict : Positive aspects of conflict Conflicts provide challenging work environment as these develop high degree of competitioin. Conflicts may be used as a device to overcome many frustrations and tensions. Conflicts provide opportunities to individuals and groups to think again and take a more concrete view of the situation. Negative aspects of conflict : Negative aspects of conflict Negative aspect of conflict is based on dysfunctional consequences in the organisation.Dysfunctional consequences of conflict may be specified in two terms. Conflict as a cost Conflict as a source of disequilibrium Functional and dysfunctional aspects of conflict : Functional and dysfunctional aspects of conflict After going through the Functional and dysfunctional aspects of conflict, we can derive that high degree of conflict is dysfunctional.and low degree of conflict is also not a functional because it does not enthuse people for better performance. It is the optimum level of conflict which is functional as shown in next slide Relatioinship between level of conflict and its functionality : Relatioinship between level of conflict and its functionality This is the optimum level of conflict which is functional Level of conflict : Level of conflict Individual level conflict Group level conflict Organisation level conflict Individual level conflict : Individual level conflict In an organisation, conflict may occur at the individual level in the form of intraindividual & interpersonal conflict Group level conflict : Group level conflict In an organisation, conflict may occur at the group level in the form of intragroup & intergroup conflict Organisation level conflict : Organisation level conflict In an organisation, conflict may occur at the organisation level in the form of intraorganisational & interorganisational conflict Conflict Resolution : Conflict Resolution As such, whenever conflicts arise, these have to be resolved by some specific actions. Some major actions in conflict resolution take place in the following ways: Problem solving Avoidance Smoothing Compromise Confrontation Conclusion : Conclusion “ optimum level conflict is necessary for organisational effectiveness. It is a challenge before the managers to maintain this optimum level..” Thank you : Thank you You do not have the permission to view this presentation. In order to view it, please contact the author of the presentation.