Fifteen years ago, Virginia's obesity rate was 14.2 percent. Today, it's 25.9 percent, according to the annual “F as in Fat: How Obesity Threatens America's Future 2011.” The report is from Trust for America's Health and the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. (Read more here: Virginia's obesity rate grows to 25.9% to rank 30th in nation.)
Ten years ago, no state had an obesity rate above 24 percent, and now 43 states have surpassed the highest obesity rate recorded in 2000.
Here are some reasons, according to the report:
Prices for low-nutrient, energy-dense foods and beverages, such as soda and fast food, have declined sharply, while the cost for more nutritious foods, such as fruits, vegetables, lean meats and low-fat dairy products, have gone up.
Americans are eating more low-nutrient, energy-dense foods and taking in more calories. Adults consumed about 300 more calories daily in 2008 than they did in 1985. Children between the ages of two and 18 eat almost three snacks a day, which accounts for as much as a quarter of their daily calories.
Eating unhealthy food. Average consumption of added sugars increased 14 percent from 1970 to 2008. Many Americans are not meeting USDA dietary guidelines. To meet these standards, most Americans should substantially lower the intake of added fats, refined grains, sodium, as well as added sugars and sweeteners, and increase the consumption of fruits, vegetables, whole grains and low-fat milk and milk products.
No time: Increased number of people working far from home, as well as increased time spent driving
and commuting, reduces time available for physical activity. Increased number of people working longer hours leads to more meals from restaurants, which tend to have more calories.
Decreased in-home cooking and an increased number of meals eaten at or bought from restaurants. Since the 1960s, the amount Americans spend on foods eaten outside the home has nearly doubled.
Portions are oversized.
"Value sizing," the marketing of large quantities of food, often at the expense of quality.
Schools are offering foods of low nutritional value in a la carte lines and reducing time for physical education and recess.
Children are eating less fruit and consuming more beverages, such as fruit drinks, sport
drinks and fruit juice.
Fewer students or employees can walk or bike to school, work or recreation.
Increased advertising and marketing of unhealthy foods, particularly to kids.
Fewer jobs require physical labor or activity.
Digital devices and TVs discourage physical activity.
Eating due to stress, anxiety or depression.
Read the full report here: F as in Fat: How Obesity Threatens America's Future 2011