Happy Valentine’s Day, I hope you all enjoyed it! This week at the library we celebrated Valentine’s Day by making fun crafts with both Preschool and Elementary School-aged children. The first project I did was with the preschoolers, we made Valentine owls made from a paper plate and various hearts.
The items you will need for this craft are:
- One or two pieces of large, red construction paper.
- One paper plate
- A small piece of pink and yellow construction paper
- Wiggle eyes and/or other various embellishments.
First, using the red construction paper, cut out a heart large enough to cover the paper plate. Cut that heart in half and you have your wings! Glue the wings onto the paper plate as seen in the photo. Next, also using the red construction paper, cut out a heart big enough for the head. Using the pink construction paper cut out a heart slightly smaller than the red head for the face. Glue the pink face onto the red head and attach the completed head to the paper plate. Using the yellow construction paper cut out 3 small, equally sized hearts for the feet and beak. Finally, attach the feet and beak and decorate your owl with the wiggle eyes and various embellishments.
On a snowy day like today there’s nothing better to do than take out all of the art supplies and get crafting! This is a craft I made a few weeks ago to kick off the winter story time season. This paper plate snowman is a super easy craft and it requires materials that one can usually find lying around the house.
For this craft you will need:
1. One large white paper plate
2. One small white paper plate
3. Two different colors of construction paper, plus a little orange for the carrot nose
4. Wiggle eyes
6. Hole punch
7. Black marker
8. Various embellishments, such as buttons, glitter or sequins.
First, cut out a hat using one shade of construction paper, and then use the other shade of construction paper for the hat ribbon. Glue the hat to the small paper plate and decorate the snowman’s face using the marker, carrot nose and wiggle eyes. Next, punch a hole in the bottom of the small paper plate and also on the top of the large paper plate. Using the ribbon, tie the two plates together, creating the snowman’s bow tie. Decorate the snowman using the buttons and various embellishments. Finally, make a cup of cocoa and admire your creation!
My name is Jessica Keogh and I am the Craft Coordinator at the public library in my town. I love my job, I organize and execute various crafts for children ages 2-14 and I sometimes run up to four crafts a day. Over the course of the next few weeks I am going to share a few of my craft ideas and stories with you so you can join in on the fun!
At 2:45 during the school week, the library gets flooded with kids from the middle school across the street. In order to keep the peace I schedule various crafts to entertain them. I usually base the craft on holidays or seasons, the craft this week was Valentine’s Day themed so we made Valentine’s cards to give to friends. The kids used all sorts of supplies including: card stock, sequins, rubber stamps, ribbon, and the ever-pleasing glitter glue. After the kids made their cards I surprised them with a special craft treat!
Everyone was allowed to make two of these cute tootsie pop butterflies! They were super simple, the pattern for the wings can be found at Skip To My Lou. I just printed the patterns onto various shades of pink card stock, cut them out and decorated. I think my favorite part about this craft (besides how easy the prep was!) was the adorable wiggle eyes with eyelashes…so cute!