Information identified as archived on the Web is for reference, research or recordkeeping purposes. It has not been altered or updated after the date of archiving. Web pages that are archived on the Web are not subject to the Government of Canada Web Standards. As per the Communications Policy of the Government of Canada, you can request alternate formats on the "Contact Us" page.
Year: 2000 – Province: British Columbia
Certificate of Excellence Recipients
School: West Vancouver Secondary School
1750 Mathers Avenue
West Vancouver, British Columbia V7V 2G7
Principal: David McMaster
School Telephone: 604-981-1100
School Fax: 604-981-1101
School Website: www.sd45.bc.ca/wvss
Grades/Subjects Taught: Social studies, history
- Prepare all students to be motivated, confident and excited about taking their next step into the world.
- Be clear, fair and consistent when communicating with students. Set high standards, and give students time.
- Do everything necessary to bring history to life for students.
Initiated and developed a PowerPoint curriculum for history courses, complete with images, sound files, maps, movie clips and text. Not only do these presentations enrich the classroom environment, but they also allow students to access material from home or any school computer.
Motivates and trains students to write clearly and effectively. Offers to edit every essay brought to him for the first three weeks of the assignment period. Students trained this way improve grades, and enter and win national essay competitions.
Shares an effective note-taking and study technique with students: students write as many questions as they can elicit from class or textbooks, and then answer them.
West Vancouver students scored three per cent above the provincial average on the provincial history exam, and the school had the highest proportion of students in B.C. writing this exam. Attendance is near 100 per cent in Mr. Lindahl's classes, and students taking his course generally improve marks in other courses as well.
"He inspires students. He makes learning fun, interesting and relevant. Most of all he helps them make sense of their world." Fellow teacher
"Students will break down his door to gain entrance to one of his History 12 courses." Principal