Sunday, March 2 1862
COLUMBUS CONFEDERATE CAPITULATION COMPLETE
Leonidas K. Polk, ordained bishop in the Episcopal Church and major
general of the Confederate army, completed a most unpleasant
assignment today when he completed the evacuation of Columbus,
Kentucky. This marked the end of the “Kentucky Line” of defense,
which Polk himself helped to create when he originally took his
forces into the state without authorization. The state had been so
evenly divided between loyalists to South and North, with probably
just as many who wished a plague on both their houses, that the last
vote of the regularly elected legislature had been a resolution of
neutrality and ban on troops from either side entering the state.
Polk’s new defensive line was established at Island No. 10 in the
Mississippi River, and Fort Pillow just north of Memphis, Tennessee.
Monday, March 2 1863
MOBILE MALADIES MARK MALAISE
Admiral David Farragut, USN, in New Orleans had a chat with some
visitors from Mobile, Alabama, who, he wrote “...all concur that
provisions are very high [expensive], and very scarce even at those
high figures. Flour, $100 per barrel, bacon and meat of every kind,
$1 a pound, meal, $20 a sack.” What is not known is how he came to
be chatting with visitors from Mobile, which was deep in Confederate
territory, or how they came to be in Union-held New Orleans.
Wednesday, March 2 1864
CAVALRY COMMAND CRUELLY CRUSHED
The failed raid by US Cavalry forces to free Union prisoners (the
Federal explanation) or kidnap Jefferson Davis (the Confederate
belief) was becoming more of a debacle by the day. The 500 men under
Col. Ulric Dahlgren were heading north and east for their own lines.
They made it as far as Mantapike Hill before they were ambushed by
Fitzhugh Lee’s horsemen. Dahlgren was killed in the ensuing battle,
and more than 100 of his men were captured.
Thursday, March 2 1865
VALLEY VICTORY VALIDATES VALIANT VETERANS
The Battle of Waynesboro, Va., is little noted in history books. It
marked the last stand of Jubal Early’s once-mighty army in the
Shenandoah Valley. Federals, led by one George Armstrong Custer,
rolled up Early’s right, eventually turning it into a rout. Early,
his officers, and a remnant of the men escaped to Richmond. Custer
captured 200 wagons, about a thousand men, and, most mortifying of
all, seventeen battle flags of proud Confederate regiments.
Choose a different date