NRICH - maths education resources developing confident, creative problem-solvers
Our NRICH website publishes free mathematics enrichment and education resources for ages 3 to 19 and teachers.
NRICH specialises in rich mathematical tasks which take a low-threshold high-ceiling approach. The resources are designed to build students' confidence, mathematical reasoning, thinking skills and ability to take the initiative. The aim of NRICH is to enrich the mathematical experience of all students and develop confident, creative, resourceful problem-solvers.
Tailored pathways on the NRICH website support students working independently and teachers looking for classroom resources. All the resources include detailed teacher support material. Curriculum mapping guides help teachers to promote rich mathematical thinking in the classroom.
AskNRICH is a free online discussion and e-mentoring service, staffed by University of Cambridge student volunteers. It is a lively e-community which helps users of all ages to work out solutions to their mathematical questions.
Plus - popular understanding of mathematics web magazine
Plus is a free online mathematics magazine aimed at the interested and intelligent general reader, including older students (16+). It features articles and news stories about the widest possible range of the applications of mathematics within the sciences, arts, and society. News items uncover the hidden maths behind media headlines, while podcasts provide accessible insights into cutting-edge mathematical research.
Plus also includes packages of thematically linked articles exploring particular areas in maths. Dedicated sections explore the applications of maths in medicine and engineering through lively and accessible articles and podcasts.
In July 2001 the site won the prestigious international Webby award for the best Science site on the Internet, joining winners in other categories including CNN, the BBC and National Geographic.
Maths and Sport: Countdown to the Games
To celebrate London 2012, we developed free online resources exploring maths and science through the Olympic and Paralympic Games for our Maths and Sport project. All the free resources developed for Maths and Sport are available online at http://sport.maths.org.
'Maths and Sport: Countdown to the Games' was a partner project in the London 2012 Get Set + education programme and was awarded the Inspire Mark, the badge of the London 2012 Inspire programme. The London 2012 Inspire Programme recognised exceptional and innovative projects that were directly inspired by the 2012 Olympic and Paralympic Games.
Our Motivate programme created links between university researchers and schools for over a decade, initially via live video-conferences. The video-conferencing programme ended in the 2010/2011 academic year, but the Motivate website continues to provide free online multi-media resource packs for schools, including video clips featuring university lecturers, in which curriculum learning is enriched by a real-life and/or cross-curricular context. Several multi-media resource packs for KS3 and 4 explore mathematics in the context of healthcare, medicine and the biomedical sciences; and we produced a multi-media resource pack on Babylonian Maths aimed at the KS2/3 transition, with a particular focus on making maths relevant and interesting to girls.