1 Wet summer
1-2 Extreme cold snaps
1 Dry winter
1 Record dry spring
5-10 Hot, dry, and windy spring days
Use first ingredient to produce plenty of summertime plant growth. Produce excess mortality of plants with second ingredient. Withdraw moisture from perennials with third ingredient. Apply fourth ingredient to inhibit spring growth of plants and ensure that the dead plant material stays dry. Finally, just stand back and wait for the standard springtime weather to come around. That way, any fire will spread so quickly that, until the winds die down at night, it’ll be unstoppable.
Whoever was in charge of preparing this year’s wildfire season followed the above recipe very closely. The last I saw, nearly 400,000 acres in Texas had burned so far this year.
As bad as that is, it could be much, much worse. The dry weather across almost all of central Texas means that the wildfire danger is not just confined to western Texas this time. Instead, if the winds pick up, many parts of central and eastern Texas are in danger too.
This is one of those dangers that residents of central and eastern Texas don’t think about very often, mainly because they’ve never seen a bad wildfire. But the possibility gives firefighters and emergency managers nightmares. From San Antonio past Austin, the shrubby, hilly terrain is densely populated, with little or no buffer between the homes and the flammable countryside. If a fire gets going when the winds are blowing more than 30 mph, a major disaster is possible.
The race is on. Will we finally get one or more good, strong squall lines that dump a few inches of rain across the area and moisten things up, bringing the chances of a major event to near zero? Or will a strong low pressure system form along the Red River, with strong, dry winds from the west or southwest sweeping across the state?
The topography of Texas helps a bit. Air spreads out as it flows through the relatively low gap in the mountains across southern Arizona and New Mexico and reaches the flatter parts of Texas. So winds in west Texas tend to be much stronger than those in east Texas. The lower altitude of east Texas also contributes to this, as does the tendency for the west Texas air to be much warmer than the east Texas air. All of this makes major wildfires much less likely in central and east Texas than in west Texas.
But “less likely” doesn’t mean “impossible”. Like most natural disasters, a major fire is inevitable. Maybe not this year, maybe not this decade, but someday. And until it rains, this is one of those rare years when it just might happen.