The huge pumps through the mountains deliver water from the Owens Valley---which used to be prime agricultural land and is now semi-arid. The Colorado River is siphoned from just above the Imperial Valley into the lower LA basin. They're talking about getting more flow from the Northern CA watersheds, but that's dependent on snowpack from the Sierra which is decreasing yearly.
i know i'm probably gonna be attacked for saying this, but i think the growth of the old population is just as dangerous, if not more dangerous, than that of the young. as science keeps finding new ways to prolong the grave, we get to the point where 70 is still "middle age" and living to 90 or 100 is no longer a particularly noteworthy feat. lots of people are still working and contributing at advanced ages due to arthritis medicine and better heart-health regimens, but you also have an exponentially growing segment of the populace that's a wealth of old-timey stories to tell the new generation, but offers little or no practical contribution to the world, they take in resources but have ceased to put anything back into the system. i honestly think we have to figure out a way to either accommodate or deal with this portion of the world's population, or else they will soon become a burden that will break the backs of the newer generations of the human species.
Lots of places purify sea water.
Too bad the oceans are acidifying and coral reefs could die out within 50 years.
Omg so many problems. Posted via Mobile Device
Don't forget the high amounts of mercury and other toxic pollutants that continue to be dumped into the ocean.
Have you guys heard about the floating trash island off the Pacific?
The Great Pacific Garbage Patch is characterized by exceptionally high concentrations of pelagic plastics, chemical sludge, and other debris that have been trapped by the currents of the North Pacific Gyre.
The Great Pacific Garbage Patch has one of the highest levels known of plastic particulate suspended in the upper water column. As a result, it is one of several oceanic regions where researchers have studied the effects and impact of plastic photodegradation in the neustonic layer of water. Unlike debris, which biodegrades, the photodegraded plastic disintegrates into ever smaller pieces while remaining a polymer. This process continues down to the molecular level. As the plastic flotsam photodegrades into smaller and smaller pieces, it concentrates in the upper water column. As it disintegrates, the plastic ultimately becomes small enough to be ingested by aquatic organisms that reside near the ocean's surface. Thus, plastic waste enters the food chain through its concentration in the neuston. Some plastics decompose within a year of entering the water, leaching potentially toxic chemicals.
Some of these long-lasting plastics end up in the stomachs of marine birds and animals, and their young, including sea turtles and the Black-footed Albatross. Midway Atoll receives substantial amounts of marine debris from the Great Pacific Garbage Patch. Of the 1.5 million Laysan Albatrosses that inhabit Midway, nearly all are found to have plastic in their digestive system. Approximately one-third of the chicks die mostly due to being fed plastic from their parents.
Besides the particles' danger to wildlife, on the microscopic level the floating debris can absorb organic pollutants from seawater, including PCBs, DDT, and PAHs. Aside from toxic effects, when ingested, some of these are mistaken by the endocrine system as estradiol, causing hormone disruption in the affected animal. These toxin-containing plastic pieces are also eaten by jellyfish, which are then eaten by larger fish. Many of these fish are then consumed by humans, resulting in their ingestion of toxic chemicals. Marine plastics also facilitate the spread of invasive species that attach to floating plastic in one region and drift long distances to colonize other ecosystems.
On the macroscopic level, the physical size of the plastic kills birds and turtles as the animals' digestion can not break down the plastic inside their stomachs. A second effect of the macroscopic plastic is to make it much more difficult for animals to see and detect their normal sources of food. Research has shown that this plastic marine debris affects at least 267 species worldwide and a few of the 267 species reside in the North Pacific Gyre.
The problem with those patches is not the fish per se if you ask me. (OFC they are but you catch my drift). The big problem is the ocean itself and all the life in there. Earth once upon a time for some reason stopped the underwater currents and had turned its oceans it a toxic sludge killing everything in them. And then 80% of the life on the surface followed due to lack of oxygen. Contrary to common belief the sea supplies the most oxygen to the planet not the forests.
While i dont believe we can currently produce so much waste as to kill everything in there, we can easily disturb the balance and who knows into what this will result?