One of the projects, Intrepid Tales, shows how a group of learners at the Brooklyn Public Library Adult Education Center created a book about their field trip to see the World War II aircraft carrier Intrepid. Students scanned pictures of their trip and wrote captions for each of the pictures. They wrote about their field trip adding information about the Intrepid that they obtained from the Internet.
Another project, the Restaurant Problem, showed a very practical approach to GED preparation. Lyndy Girtens GED Preparation class at Rend Lake College Skills Centre learned about all facets of the restaurant industry as they prepared for the GED Tests. Students were presented with different restaurant problems such as a complaint about services, an employee's refusal to work weekends, and a discrepancy in the payroll. They were then asked to study the problem and present a solution. The solution may have involved typing a letter to respond to a complaint, preparing accurate payroll sheets or changing a work schedule. Students were encouraged to use technology to prepare their responses. The extent to which the technology was used was up to each student. At the end of this project students visited a local restaurant and made recommendations for improvements. They also took part in a contest to design a new menu for the restaurant.
These projects along with the others that make up this CD Library present innovative examples of how to successfully integrate technology into an advanced adult literacy class. A copy of the CD can be obtained free of charge by calling the North Central Regional Technology in Educational Consortium at 1-800-356-2735.
The Computer Component contains a detailed, plain language guide to Microsoft Word 97. The guide covers a wide variety of tasks in Word, from the very basic to the advanced. Although the descriptions are sometimes cluttered with multiple ways of doing the same thing, they are generally easy to follow with lots of great visuals.
Because the Computer Component contains several short practice exercises, it could be used independently. The computer integration ideas found in the Educational Component lesson plans are cross-referenced with sections of the Computer Component making it easy to pull from only those sections needed for a particular lesson.
You can purchase both components of the Bridging the Gap Between Literacy & Technology curriculum guide from Samariton House Training Centre at a cost of $70.00. Separately the Educational Component costs $40.00 and the Computer Component costs $30.00.
There are also plans for the guide to be available online in June 2001 at the National Adult Literacy Databases website, (www.nald.ca). Samaritan House can be contacted at:
Samaritan House Training Centre
|Back||Table of Contents||Next Page|