Posted on Wednesday, June 29, 2011 by librarianonwheels
Teacher: Here’s a problem, Max. If you have $5 in your front pocket, $10 in your back pocket, and $25 in your wallet, what would you have?
Max: Somebody else’s pants!
Teacher: Suzy, can you spell “wrong” for me?
Teacher: That’s wrong!
Suzy: That’s what you wanted, wasn’t it?
A man called an airline office in San Dieg and asked, “How long does it take to fly to Chicago?”
“Just a minute,” said a voice on the other end.
“Wow! That’s not very long. Thanks!” said the man, and he hung up.
Mother: Eat your greens, honey. It’ll put color in your cheeks.
Daughter: But, Mom, I don’t want green cheeks!
Did you hear about the man who ate yeast and shoe polish each night before bed? Every moning he would rise and shine!
Teacher: Why are you eating your spelling test?
Maria: You told us it was a piece of cake.
From: You Must Be Joking! Lots of Cool Jokes, Plus 17 1/2 Tips for Remembering, Telling, and Making up Your Own Jokes Compiled and Illustrated by Paul Brewer, available in many branches in the Children’s Non-Fiction area under the call number: J818.5402 Brewer
Filed under: Riddles&Jokes | Leave a Comment »
Posted on Wednesday, June 29, 2011 by crochetlibrarian
Saving the Baghdad Zoo: A True Story of Hope and Heroes by Kelly Milner Halls and Major William Sumner. This is the amazing story of the resurrection of the zoo and its animal population. The zoo was once the home to more than 600 magnificent animals. But, after the war in Iraq began in 2003, the city faced widespread destruction.
When U.S. Captain William Sumner was asked to check out the state of the zoo he found that it, too, was devastated. Hundreds of animals were missing and those that still remained were in desperate need of care.
The book tells the story of tremendous compassion , courage and love generated by a team of people who came from our armed forces, Iraq and the world over to help Captain Sumner help the animals. Meet abandoned lions who roamed the empty palace with no food or drink, the camel Lumpy who survived (along with his rescuers) the transport through sniper fire and the poor pelican that did not have access to clean water, food or shade, and was tethered to a 3 foot length of rope.
This is a story of renewal and rebirth and of how people with many back rounds came together, putting their lives on the line, to save a very desperate group of animals. In so doing did they not only give the animal a bright future, but provided the families of Iraq a place of peace and hope.
While you probably can’t make it to the Baghdad Zoo this summer, there are plenty of zoos in California you can visit. Check out this video from the San Diego Zoo about one of their special pandas.
And if you want to know more about pandas, check out some of these fun books.
Filed under: Books, Videos | Tagged: pandas, zoo | Leave a Comment »
Posted on Tuesday, June 28, 2011 by Centerville Library
Posted on Monday, June 27, 2011 by bvh_library
Word searches are a great way to entertain yourself and others and they have some very important and beneficial educational aspects also. They can enhance such things as your visual acuity, concentration and spelling.
You can use the websites listed below to create your own word searches or puzzles
using personalized words such as family names, locations and events; or be
creative and each week you can create a word search for your child that contains
their spelling words from school.
This is a great way to have fun and learn at the same time!
ENJOY YOURSELF THIS SUMMER
and don’t forget to come see us at the
ALAMEDA COUNTY LIBRARIES . . .
Filed under: Miscellaneous | 1 Comment »
Posted on Friday, June 24, 2011 by pryan51
Nothing says Summer better than a cool tie dye t-shirt – especially if you make it yourself!
“There are many traditional variations of tie-dye around the world, each unique but basically Tie-dye is a way of creating patterns of color by folding, tying, stitching, crumpling or otherwise preparing the fabric to inhibit the flow of the dye into the folds of the fabric. The pattern of the folds and where the colors are squirted determines the final design. With experience, the end result can be predicted and controlled to some extent, but surprise is part of what makes tie-dye an exciting and interesting art form that even a first timer can have great results with. A fun & easy craft for children, camps and groups.” [http://www.dharmatrading.com/info/soda_soak.html]
“The earliest surviving examples of pre-Colombian tie-dye in Peru date from 500 to 800 A.D. Their designs include small circles and lines, with bright colors including red, yellow, blue, and green.” [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tie-dye] “Traditional methods of tie-dye were formed in India, Japan and Africa as early as the sixth century. The oldest known tie-dye tradition that is still practiced is an Indian method called Bandhani which involves tying small points of thread and dip-dying, resulting in designs featuring small dots. Another form of tie-dye is Shabori, a method that is very similar to modern tie-dye. The Japanese used primarily indigo to dye their garments, which were usually made of silk or hemp.” [http://iml.jou.ufl.edu/projects/Spring09/blake_e/history.html]
The best fabrics to use for tie-dye are natural fabrics like cotton. Blended cottons can be used, but the more synthetic the fabric contains, the less the dyes will color the fabric. Dye kits can be purchased at craft or fabric stores, or ordered online. Items of clothing – t-shirts, dresses, pants, pajamas – can be purchased and tie-dyed, or you can use fabric, which then can be made into curtains, wall hangings, quilts, clothing, or other things. Be sure to wash the fabric first to remove any finishes that will keep the dyes from soaking into it.
The Alameda County Library has books and DVDs on tie-dye – check it out — and be sure to get your parents’ permission!
Filed under: Books, Miscellaneous | Tagged: clothing, crafts, reading, tie dye | 1 Comment »
Posted on Thursday, June 23, 2011 by librarianonwheels
Why is corn such a friendly vegetable? Because it’s always willing to lend an ear.
What do ghosts eat for dessert? Ice scream!
Why don’t eggs tell jokes? They’d crack each other up.
Why did the boy stare at the can of orange juice? It said concentrate.
Where do smart hot dogs end up? On the honor roll.
What kind of shoes can you make from bananas? Slippers.
What do you get when you cross a cow with a duck? Milk and quackers
From the book: Chuckle squad : jokes about classrooms, sports, food, teachers, and other school subjects by Michael Dahl, available at many branches in the Children’s nonfiction section under the call number:
Filed under: Riddles&Jokes | Leave a Comment »
Posted on Wednesday, June 22, 2011 by crochetlibrarian
My Farm Friends by Wendell Minor is a wonderfully illustrated rhyming picture book that takes its reader on a visit to the farm. You can cock- a -doodle doo like a rooster or snort just like a pig as you and your little one encounter the baby animals. And, don’t let it stop there. There are some great places to visit farm animals close to a home. Tilden Park’s Little Farm offers a wonderful opportunity to meet animals up close and personally as does Ardenwood’s animal farm.
Here’s a sample of what you might see at Ardenwood.
And don’t forget to check out some books on farm animals.
Filed under: Books, Videos | Tagged: animals, farm | Leave a Comment »
Posted on Tuesday, June 21, 2011 by Centerville Library
Posted on Monday, June 20, 2011 by yogalibrarian
Monday Puzzles and Games: It’s Your Move!
Looking for an online game to play? Try http://www.gamesgames.com/games/kids-games.html. The kids’ section includes five different categories: educational, coloring, math, fast typing and music. For example, under “educational,” there is a game to test your knowledge of history, a memory game, geography games, shape train games, and a dino dig.
Are you a chess player? Go to http://www.gamesgames.com/games/chess/chess.html and you will find 7 different chess games to try!
And that is just two areas to explore on http://www.gamesgames.com!
It’s all free and lots of fun!!
Filed under: Miscellaneous | Tagged: alameda county library, creativity, fun stuff, games, summer reading game | Leave a Comment »
Posted on Sunday, June 19, 2011 by Librarian X
As the summer goes along, the bulletin board over the picture book area at the Fremont Main Library will become covered with stars! The star icon will be given out at the Fremont Main Library as part of the first prize for the Summer Reading Game, One World, Many Stories, so each star represents a first- prize winner. The Children’s game goes from June 13-August 13. For more details about the Summer Reading Game or summer programs for children at Fremont Main, check with the children’s desk (510-745-1421), or take a peek at the online calendar (under “Branches”-Fremont Main) at http://www.aclibrary.org.
Filed under: Miscellaneous | Leave a Comment »