Sometimes the patient will volunteer the information that he is NOT jealous. How should we work with this statement? Sometimes it can be true and sometimes it means just the contrary. Generally speaking how do we work with negative mind statements, specially if the are spontaneously mentioned by the patient and not really related to any question? Should we just take Theme: jealousy?
Sorry for questions from a student and kind regards
Excellent question. As Joy states we must look at the totality. Was there emphasis on this remark when stated? What is the emotional impact. Does jealousy turn out to be an on-going theme in this person's life?
Irene, please do not feel you must apologize. We all need questions. It helps the conversation move forward. Besides, if one asks a question, this indicates many others have a similar question but have not asked.
First of all by the way he looks around at things in other people's houses; by a certain type of admiration; body language, which betrays the desire to have it himself; throught the way he expresses himself verbally - "why should he have a new car and not me? That guy is not qualified for that position, they should give it to me. Just because he has a bigger car/house/yaught/bike/garden. He may be richer but i am more intelligent/talented have more beautiful spouse." etc. Jealousy is often synonymous to envy.
The question: "What do you think of your neighbours/family/co-workers/boss?" is a good way to determine jealousy and its degree.
"Would you want to be better off?" is another in which often comparisons are made with the lives of those they envy.
Jealousy is an emotion which a person will rarely confess to during case taking and will not accept it if a point blank question is put forward. This rubric should be used as a confirmatory if other symptoms are pointing to remedies which have high degree of jealousy in them. Feedback from spouse or relative is more reliable to come to conclusion on existence of this emotion and its role as an exciting factor. In fact it is a rubric to be used more as an 'ailment from...'
Everyone has jealousy to some degree and we deal with it differently.
A jealous person is also usually extremely possessive and vain.
Now, my question What is the difference between Jealousy and Envious?
I think jealousy is more about dissatisfication where envy is more about hatred to others. Someone jealous can wish having what others possess without hating them..feeling unsatisfied or unhappy,, but an envious person is mainly pushed by feelings of hatred and disgust to others who or better than him and usually wish harm to them. I think pulsatilla is an example of remedies who can be jealous but not necessarily envious.
I think it is the other way around. Jealousy may be because the girlfriend talks to someone else, whereas envy denotes the desire to have what others have.
Jealousy leads sometimes to crime passionel, murder because one cannot stand that someone else talks, has friendship or sex with the person they profess to love. Jealousy is the desire for exclusive "possession".
Envy is a form of jealousy that wants what others have.
when your zeal has become incapacitated or and inadequate and in that stage if you compare yourself with others and when it becomes so lousy you get (lousy zeal)a burning inside or a bad feeling about others adequacy with a small portion of our inadequacy then birth of this feeling and expression of this is nomenclatured as JEALOUSY.This feeling is universal and has crossed all the barriers of religion,sex,caste and creed and the only thing you need is comparing- less about himself,except about his/her diseased condition, and more about others.so if a patient is comparing himself with others and complaining as said above it might be taken as Jealousy.
I must say a good discussion is going on. Now let me share what I understand about this rubric & how it differs from Envy as inquired by Dr. Valerian.
ENVY: Meaning: Desire for an advantage which is possessed by another.
Interpretation: The object of envious feeling is grudging or grief at the sight of other's success. But not in the sense of hatred towards them. It is in the sense that if others can possess something why can't he? It is in a spirit of competitiveness, or a race of gain, to excel other without entertaining the idea of harming or destroying other's possessions.
Version: "When I see people enjoying around me, it comes to my mind that will there be a day in my life also when I shall have a smile on my face and will be able to eat, drink & be marry as they are doing."
Jealousy Meaning: Uneasiness at the success or position of others or suspiciousness or rivalry or faithlessness in love or business affairs.
Interpretation: Jealousy is just opposite to envy. It is double edged. Neither he can tolerate others possessing something which he doesn't possess nor he can tolerate others having the same thing which he possesses. He will remain busy in suspecting others of robbing him of his possessions. He may take to offences in protecting his possessions.
Version: "When I see people laughing it comes to my mind that I should snatch from them their joy. If I cannot enjoy why should they."
I hope by now the difference between jealousy & envy is clear. Now let's try to differentiate the medicine under this rubric.