Pietro II Orseolo was the Doge of Venice from 991 to 1009. He began the period of eastern expansion of Venice that lasted for the better part of 500 years. He secured his influence in the Dalmatian Romanized settlements from the Croatians and Paganians, freed Venetia from a 50-year old taxation to Pagania and started Venetia's expansions by conquering Lastovo and Korčula and acquiring Dubrovnik.
The Doge (Venetian language, also Doxe, derived from Latin Dux military leader, duke; cf. English Duke, Italian Duce) was the chief magistrate and leader of the Most Serene Republic of Venice for over a thousand years. Doges of Venice were elected for life by the city-state's aristocracy. Commonly the person selected as Doge was the shrewdest elder in the city.
Enrico Dandolo (1107? – 21 June 1205) — anglicised as Henry Dandolo and latinized as Henricus Dandulus — was the 41st Doge of Venice from 1195 until his death. Remembered for his blindness, piety, longevity, and shrewdness, he is infamous for his role in the Fourth Crusade which he, at age ninety, directed against the Byzantine Empire, sacking Constantinople. In the nineteenth-century, the Regia Marina (Italian Navy) launched an ironclad battleship named Enrico Dandolo.
Sebastiano Ziani was a famous leader of Venice, and was Doge from 1172 to 1178. Ziani was one of the greatest planners of Venice. During his short term as Doge, Ziani divided the city-state into many districts. He realised that the government headquarters were too close to the shipyard. As such, they were affected by the noise from the shipyard. Ziani resolved this problem by donating a piece of land to the city-state and relocating the shipyard in it.
Marino Faliero (1285 - 17 April 1355) was the fifty-fifth Doge of Venice, appointed on 11 September 1354. He was sometimes referred to simply as Marin Falier (Venetian rather than standard Italian). He attempted a coup d'etat in 1355, at the time being Doge himself, but with the intention of declaring himself Prince. This failed action is mostly attributed to a combination of a strong hatred for nobility and his senility (he was in his seventies at the time).
Paoluccio or Paolo Lucio Anafesto (Latin Anafestus Paulucius or Paulicius) was the reputed first doge of Venice. A noble of Eraclea, then the primary city of the region, he was elected in 697 as an official over the entire lagoon that surrounded Venice, both to put an end to the conflicts between the various tribunes who until then had governed the various parts, and to coordinate the defence against the Lombards and the Slavs who were encroaching on the settlements.
Pietro Ziani (died 13 March 1230) was the forty-second Doge of Venice from 15 August 1205 to 1229, succeededing Enrico Dandolo. He was the son of Doge Sebastian Ziani of the very rich noble family. In his youth a sailor, he commanded a flotilla escorting the emperor Frederick Barbarossa in 1177, took also part in the Fourth Crusade and sacking of Constinople.
Pietro I Candiano, (c. 842 – 18 September 887) was briefly the sixteenth Doge of Venice in 887. He followed Orso I Participazio and Giovanni II Participazio as Doge of Venice, elected to the throne at the side of the elderly, and beloved, Giovanni circa April 887. He launched a military attempt against the Dalmatian Croat principality of Pagania, which was hostile to Venetia after 886.
Pietro II Candiano (c. 872 – 939) was the nineteenth Doge of Venice between 932 and 939. He followed his father, Pietro I Candiano (887), Pietro Tribuno (888-912), and Orso II Participazio (912-932) to become Doge of Venice in 932. He began the Venetian policy of expansion on the mainland after 932. Candiano II began a bitter economic blockading war against Istria early in his rule.
Tantalus was the ruler of a city called either under his name, as "Tantalis", "the city of Tantalus", or as "Sipylus", in reference to Mount Sipylus at the foot of which his city was located and whose ruins were reported to be still visible in the beginning of the Common Era, although few traces remain today. In Greek mythology he was the father of Pelops, Niobe and Broteas, and a son of Zeus and the nymph Plouto.
A dependent-marking language is one where the grammatical marks showing relations between different constituents of a phrase tend to be placed on the dependents or modifiers, rather than the heads of the phrase in question. In a noun phrase, the head is the main noun and the dependents are the article, the adjectives, the possessives, etc. In a verb phrase the head is the verb and the dependents are its arguments (subject, object, etc.).
My Favorite Headache is a solo album by Geddy Lee of the Canadian rock band Rush, released in 2000. Both the title track and "Grace to Grace" were moderate hits on Mainstream Rock Radio, and the album itself peaked at #52 on the Billboard 200.
Betz may refer to: GE Betz, a water treatment company Betz, Oise, a commune in France People with the surname Betz: Albert Betz, a physicist Carl Betz, an actor Hans-Dieter Betz, a German experimental physicist Pauline Betz, a tennis player Peter Betz, a businessman Vladimir Betz, Russian scientist