This book is divided into five sections dealing with various fundamental issues in current research: attention, information processing and eye movement control; the role of phonology in reading; syntax and discourse processing and computational models and simulations. Control and measurement of eye movements form a prominent theme in the book. A full understanding of the where and when of eye movement control is a prerequisite of any complete theory of reading, since it is precisely at this point that perceptual and cognitive processes interact.
Amongst the 'hot topics' included are the relation between parafoveal and foveal visual processing of linguistic information, the role of phonology in fluent reading and the emergence of statistical 'tuning' approaches to sentence parsing.
Also discussed in the book are three attempts to develop quantitative models of reading which represent a significant departure in theory-building and a quantum step in the maturation of reading research.
Much of the work reported in the book was first presented at the 5th European Workshop on Language Comprehension organised in April 1998 which was held at the CNRS Luminy Campus, near Marseilles. All contributions summarise the state-of-the-art in the relevant areas of reading research.
For experimental and cognitive psychologists, neurologists, neurophysiologists and linguists.
Reading as a Perceptual Process, 1st Edition
Historical perspective. Preface. List of contributors. Visual Word Processing.
Traces of print along the visual pathway (T.A. Nazir). When words with higher-frequency neighbours become words with no higher frequency neighbour (or how to undress the neighbourhood frequency effect) (D. Zagar, S. Mathey). Words likely to activate many lexical candidates are granted an advantage: evidence from within-word eye movements (J. Pynte). Processing of Finnish compound words in reading (J. Hyönä, A. Pollatsek). Perceiving spatial aspects of print (M.H. Fischer). Saccadic inhibition and gaze contingent research paradigms (E.M. Reingold, D.M. Stampe). Commentary on Section 1. From print to meaning via words? (J. Grainger). Attention, Information Processing and Eye Movement Control.
Relations between spatial and temporal aspects of eye movement control (R. Radach, D. Heller). Attention allocation in reading: sequential or parallel? (A. Kennedy). Allocation of visuo-spatial attention and saccade programming during reading (A.W. Inhoff et al.).
Attentional demands on the processing of neighbouring words (G. Underwood et al.
). Eye guidance and the saliency of word beginnings in reading text (W. Vonk et al.
). Regressive saccades and word perception in adult reading (F. Vitu, G.W. McConkie). Planning two-saccade sequences in reading (C. Beauvillain et al.
). Commentary on Section 2. Attention, information processing and eye movement control (H. Deubel, K. O'Regan). Phonology in Reading.
The assembly of phonology in Italian and English: consonants and vowels (L. Colombo). Phonological coding in word perception and reading (A. Pollatsek et al.
). Phonology is used to access word meaning during silent reading: evidence from lexical ambiguity resolution (R.K. Morris, J.R. Folk). Do readers use phonological codes to activate word meanings? Evidence from eye movements (M. Daneman, E.M. Reingold). Commentary on Section 3. Dual routes from print to speech and dual routes from print to meaning: some theoretical issues (M. Coltheart). Syntax and Discourse Processing.
Modifier attachment in Dutch: testing aspects of construal theory (D.C. Mitchell et al.
). Modifier attachment in German: relative clauses and eye prepositional phrases (L. Konieczny, B. Hemforth). Decoupling syntactic parsing from visual inspection: the case of relative clause attachment in French (J. Pynte, S. Colonna). 'Romancing' syntactic ambiguity: why the French and Italians don't see eye to eye (C. Frenck-Mestre, J. Pynte). Commas and spaces: effects of punctuation on eye movements and sentence parsing (R.L. Hill, W.S. Murray). Effects of the focus particle only
and intrinsic contrast on comprehension of reduced relative clauses (C. Clifton Jr., J. Bock). Unrestricted race: a new model of syntactic ambiguity resolution (R.P.G. van Gompel et al
.). Commentary on Section 4. Sentence processing: issues and measures (W.S. Murray). Models and Simulations.
Saccade planning in reading with central scotomas: comparison of human and ideal performance (T.S. Klitz et al.
). Eye fixation durations in reading: models of frequency distributions (G.W. McConkie, B.P. Dyre). Eye movement control in reading: updating the E-Z reader model to account for initial fixation locations and refixations (K. Rayner et al.
). Commentary on Section 5. Five questions about cognitive models and some answers from three models of reading (A.M. Jacobs). Subject index.