TASMANIA is taking a pre-emptive strike against a devastating pest that could reach our shores via New Zealand potato imports.
The potato industry, Horticulture Australia Limited and the Tasmanian Institute of Agriculture (TIA) have set up a surveillance project using sticky traps to detect tomato-potato psyllid, a pest that carries the zebra chip bacterium and could land here if imports of fresh potatoes are allowed.
UTAS TIA associate professor Calum Wilson said the pest, which had already wreaked havoc in New Zealand, would be the biggest issue to face the $110 million industry.
"It will be a game-changer. It will knock our industry around, and possibly many companies won't survive," Dr Wilson said.
"The argument from DAFF Biosecurity is the fresh potato imports would be under quarantine. But if the tomato-potato psyllid slips through, the problems it would cause the industry would be significant," Dr Wilson said.
"The industry wanted to find out what was out there and understand the native psyllid better, so the surveillance system was set up.
"Part of the three-year program is to develop expertise in identifying psyllids so field officers and entomologists can identify and act quickly."
Dr Wilson said another danger posed by New Zealand imports was the serious potato cyst nematode, which stunted plants.
"New Zealand has both strains of it, while Tasmania is free of it," Dr Wilson said.
UTAS entomologist Leonie White has been monitoring for airborne psyllids at the Forthside Research and Verification Farm, at Forth in the state's North-West.
She said the surveillance program would focus on the state's major potato growing areas in the North-West and on the East Coast. The program also monitors the other major potato growing states of Victoria and South Australia.
Growers gathered in Ballarat, a major Victorian potato area, yesterday to support AusVeg's campaign to stop New Zealand potatoes being sent to Australia for processing.
Liberal primary industries spokesman Jeremy Rockliff said if the disease arrived, it would hurt the state economy.
He said for every dollar created by the producer, another five were created in the community.
"Not only loss of jobs and the hurt to economy, but loss of Tasmania's brand identity. If the disease comes, our clean, green image diminishes," Mr Rockliff said.
He urged Tasmanians to contact federal and state representatives to voice their concerns.
Senator Richard Colbeck is calling for a Senate inquiry into the imports.