Bullying, mental health focus of Women's Day breakfast.
Dr. Angela Saunders, left, psychologist and director of clinical services at the Reach Out Centre for Kids (ROCK) receives a standing ovation after speaking about bullying and mental illness during the 17th Annual International Women's Day Breakfast presented by Paddy Torsney, right, at the Holiday Inn last Friday.
Nikki Wesley/Burlington Post
Bullying and mental health issues in young people took centre stage last week at the 17th Annual International Women’s Day Breakfast presented by Paddy Torsney, a community advocate and Burlington’s former Member of Parliament.
A crowd of 220 people, which included 45 female high school students from Burlington and Oakville, listened as guest speaker Dr. Angela Saunders, a psychologist and director of clinical services at the Reach Out Centre for Kids (ROCK), spoke passionately about the challenges young people face.
Saunders said first and foremost, the stigma around mental health needs to be broken down.
How you feel mentally is as important as how you feel physically, she said.
“We talk about these two things as though they are distinct and separate — physical health and mental health — what we are talking about is our health,” Saunders said. “How we get through the world, how we learn to deal with whatever we have to deal with…The one thing people have in common is we have to get on top of it.”
Saunders said mental health issues should not be trivialized, especially among young people.
“We want to ensure we don’t minimize things people go through by saying, ‘That’s just life, suck it up and deal with it,’” she said.
Saunders said bullying is another thing that should not be trivialized.
“It (bullying) is just a normal part of growing up, right? No, that is not a normal part of growing up,” Saunders said. “Being hurt is not a normal part of growing up.”
Saunders spoke about the importance of everyone, from parents and teachers to students and their peers, working together towards a society where bullying is not acceptable.
“Bullying does not build character — it shatters it,” Saunders said. “When you have a bad experience, you are humiliated, you are alone, you are afraid. The fact is not everyone survives their teenage years.”
Bullying is a cause of depression in young people and something that needs to be taken seriously.
“Fact: people die from depression,” Saunders said. “…Suicide does not make things better. It ends things. It doesn’t get better. It’s done. You can’t undo that. However, getting help, we can write a far happier end to that story.”
She said there is no shame in getting help for mental health issues and that it should be done as soon as possible.
“You don’t have to wait until you are so mentally ill you can barely get yourself out of bed to get help,” she said. “It’s OK. It’s just mental health we’re talking about. Everybody has it. It’s normal.”
Saunders said the best thing young people can do to stop the latest trend in bullying — cyberbullying — is not to read or respond to offensive tweets or posts.
“The first thing you can do is not participate in it — don’t read it and not agree with it, just don’t read it, don’t look at it…” she said. “It’s a hard thing to do, but what you can do — the young women in the audience — what you have the power to do is change your peer groups. If every one of you got two people not to read this stuff, not to participate in this stuff, it starts to lose power.”
She said young people looking to help a classmate or friend who has been cyberbullied can do so by simply checking in on them.
“The other thing you can do for the person being bullied is go be their friend, say to them, ‘Hey, I get it. That hurt. How are you? Are you OK?’”
Saunders said since parents can’t always protect their children from the challenges growing up can bring, they can help by being on their children’s side.
“Just validating how unreasonable it is matters,” she said. “They don’t need to see you get wound up, yelling and screaming. They need to know you get them.”
For information about services provided to the community by the Burlington-based Reach Out Centre for Kids (ROCK), visit www.rockonline.ca.