Download this fact sheet as a PDF.
As the genocide in Darfur enters its sixth year, one of the most frequent demands of Darfuri survivors is that the individuals responsible for rape, murder and destruction of villages and livelihoods be held accountable. Ending the culture of impunity for perpetrators of these most serious crimes is an essential condition for the region's long-term recovery, and the International Criminal Court (ICC) is an important tool in the pursuit of justice and accountability.
Omar Al Bashir
On July 14, 2008, the ICC prosecutor Luis Moreno-Ocampo presented evidence of 10 counts of genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes against General Omar al-Bashir, the Sudanese president.
After reviewing the evidence, a panel of ICC judges issued a warrant for al-Bashir's arrest on March 4, 2009 on seven counts of crimes against humanity and war crimes.
On April 27, 2007, the ICC issued a warrant for the arrest of Ahmad Harun for twenty counts of crimes against humanity and twenty-two counts of war crimes.
From 2003 to 2005, Harun served as Minister of State for the Interior of the Government of Sudan, where he was responsible for the Darfur Security Desk. Following the warrant for Harun's arrest, the Government of Sudan refused to arrest or turn over Harun, then appointed him Minister of State for Humanitarian Affairs.
Ali Mohamed Ali ("Ali Kushayb")
Also on April 27, 2007, the ICC issued a warrant for the arrest of Ali Kushayb for twenty-two counts of crimes against humanity and twenty-eight counts of war crimes.
Since 2003, Kushayb served as a senior leader of the infamous Janjaweed militias. Kushayb has not been turned over to the Court.
In November 2008, the prosecutor submitted to the ICC judges evidence against rebel leaders allegedly involved in the brutal attack on African Union peacekeeping forces based in Haskanita (South Darfur) in September 2007. The judges are examining the evidence in this case and may issue arrest warrants in 2009.