What are the main differences between the sun and other stars?
The most important difference between our Sun and other stars is that the Sun is closer to Earth than any other star. Other possible differences between stars are mass, size, temperature, and age.
The Sun is a relatively small star as compared with the giants in the Universe.Only about one out of one hundred stars are more than eight times as massive as our Sun. The largest star, Mu Cephei is so large you could fit over one billion of our Suns inside of it!
Most stars (about nine out of ten) are less massive than the Sun. The smallest are only about three times as big as Earth. About one out of ten stars are similar in mass to our Sun.
The temperature of a star can be determined through its color. Stars which are cooler than our Sun are red and orange. Stars hotter than the yellow of our Sun are white, or blue-white. Our Sun is a middle aged-star, about five billion years old. As stars age they change in size, temperature, and can even lose mass. Stars are classified on the Hertzsprung-Russel (HR) diagram (shown in the picture), on which our Sun is classified as a main sequence star. Stars go through many life stages, and move around on the diagram as they age.
Submitted by Sarah Jo (age 14, Sydney, Australia)
Windows original artwork
Shop Windows to the Universe Science Store!
Learn about Earth and space science, and have fun while doing it! The games
section of our online store
includes a climate change card game
and the Traveling Nitrogen game
You might also be interested in:
It depends on what kind of motion you are talking about. When seen from the north pole of the celestial sphere all planets orbit around the Sun in a counter-clockwise or direct path. Most planets also...more
Almost everyone has a question or two about living in space. What do astronauts do in space? How do they do everyday things like eat, sleep and go to the bathroom? Well, this is our attempt to answer...more
There is a really neat internet program called Solar System Live that shows the position of all of the planets and the Sun for any given day. If you go to that page, you'll see an image similar to the...more
The picture of the American Flag (the one put there by the Apollo astronauts) is waving (or straight out) in the wind. How could that be possible if there is no atmosphere on the Moon? Was it some sort...more
I was wondering if there is a new planet? Are there planets (a tenth planet?) after Pluto belonging to our solar system? What are the names of the new planets discovered in the solar system? Are there...more
If that is so, the energy released during the Big Bang must have created many such black holes. Therefore most of the Energy of the Big bang must have disappeared in that form. Then how did the Universe...more