SOURCE: Jupiter Education Services, LLC
Red Comet, an Accredited, Self-Paced, Online High School Launches a Popular Mathematics Core Course on ‘Geometry’ that is aligned to Idaho State Standards
Prosser, Wa (PRWEB) February 20, 2013
Red Comet’s online high school Mathematics core course in Geometry provides an in-depth experience for first-time geometry students. The course provides students with the foundation to comprehend issues and ideas related to the various constructions, figures and patterns used in geometry. Students study the properties of lines, triangles, quadrilaterals, polygons, circles and three-dimensional solids. Topics include perimeter, area, surface area and volume of various figures. The course explores various theorems and their applications, congruence and similarity of figures, trigonometric ratios and generating & testing conjectures. The course dwells on important theorems like the Pythagorean Theorem and its use in solving a broad range of practical everyday problems.
The Geometry course for Idaho emphasizes some key concepts in square roots, finding the values for square roots, the metric system and other systems of measurement, volume and surface area of solids, changes in perimeter, area and volume, factoring polynomials including using greatest common factor amongst other topics. Students learn the historical significance and the contributions of various cultures and nations in the development of geometric concepts. The course also explores the lives of several prominent mathematicians who contributed to the vast body of knowledge that is categorized as geometry.
Red Comet offers a complete online program that is both rigorous and engaging. Red Comet is approved by the Office of Superintendent of Public Instruction (OSPI) in Washington State as a “Multi-District Online Course Provider” and as a “Multi-District Online School Program Provider”. Red Comet’s online program excels not only in the breadth of its offering but also has received the best ratings for student satisfaction in Washington State. Red Comet’s online learning is engaging and presents even the most challenging topics in a way that students can understand. Students taking Red Comet's online high school classes are challenged using a variety of learning techniques which makes learning interesting while keeping them motivated to complete their courses within the allotted schedule.
Students throughout the country use Red Comet’s high school classes that include all core subjects – Language Arts, Science, Mathematics and Social Studies, as well as numerous high school electives. A variety of students use Red Comet’s online learning program – students in need of credit recovery, students attending public high schools who cannot attend all of their high school classes, students attending private schools who are looking for electives or Advanced Placement classes, home school high school students who need help in specific subject areas, athletes, students with part-time jobs etc.
Dr. Jay Srinivasan
For the original version on PRWeb visit: http://www.prweb.com/releases/prweb2013/2/prweb10448876.htm