Examples of imaginative in a Sentence
She wrote an imaginative story about life on the planet Venus.
The restaurant's menu is quite imaginative.
Recent Examples of imaginative from the Web
June 18: 1-3 p.m., Mellencougar; 3:30-5:30 p.m., Rock City Seven (imaginative covers).
Under her leadership the channel has re-established itself as a creative powerhouse; innovative, imaginative and risk taking.
The newest player is Paris Baguette Cafe, specializing in delicious, gorgeous baked goods and toasted sandwiches, some imaginative, some not so much.
Synopsis: George Beard and Harold Hutchins are two overly imaginative pranksters who spend hours in a treehouse creating comic books.
Fun-dining: Buxton Hall: Chef Elliott Moss found a following with his imaginative food at the Admiral in West Asheville.
Outdoor Shakespeare companies find imaginative staging in environments from a historic cemetery in Southeast Portland to the Round in Beaverton.
The lives of a blind Resistance fighter in France and a brilliant orphan recruited by the Nazis intersect in this imaginative novel, which won the Pulitzer Prize for fiction in 2015.
These models simply do not comprehend key elements of people – the imaginative and creative.
These example sentences are selected automatically from various online news sources to reflect current usage of the word 'imaginative'. Views expressed in the examples do not represent the opinion of Merriam-Webster or its editors. Send us feedback.
First Known Use of imaginative
IMAGINATIVE Defined for English Language Learners
Definition of imaginative for English Language Learners
: having or showing an ability to think of new and interesting ideas : having or showing imagination
: of or relating to imagination
IMAGINATIVE Defined for Kids
Definition of imaginative for Students
1 : relating to or showing imagination an imaginative story
2 : having a lively imagination an imaginative artist
Seen and Heard
What made you want to look up imaginative? Please tell us where you read or heard it (including the quote, if possible).