Q: What are the new vaccines recommended for school-aged children?
A: There are a number of vaccines that are offered to school-aged children as part of the provincial routine immunization schedule. This schedule is updated frequently as new vaccines become available and are deemed safe and effective.
For school aged children, a routine booster is recommended at entry into kindergarten. This includes a vaccine against diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis (whooping cough) and polio. These illnesses can all be devastating and the fact that I, as a pediatrician practising in Canada for 16 years have never seen either polio or diphtheria is a testament to the effectiveness of these immunizations.
Unfortunately, despite excellent vaccine programs, both diphtheria and polio remain endemic in some areas of the world.
The next set of routine immunizations offered is in Grade 6. These include hepatitis B and Meningococcal C if they weren't already given in infancy.
The HPV (human papilloma virus) vaccine (trade name Gardasil) is also offered to girls. It will help to prevent one of the most common types of STDs. The HPV infection causes warts, 70 per cent of cervical cancers, and 90 per cent of anal squamous cancers. One of the reasons why the HPV vaccine is offered in Grade 6 (and not later) is because it is most effective when given prior to the onset of sexual activity and, statistically, about 24 per cent of girls are already sexually active by the time they are 15 years old. The HPV vaccine doesn't have any preventative effect on existing HPV infection.
Grade 9 is the next year that routine immunizations are offered. This includes the tetanus, diphtheria and pertussis booster (Tdap) as well as the HPV vaccine for girls who missed the immunization in Grade 6.
The pertussis component of the Tdap vaccine protects against whooping cough, a disease that continues to cause deaths in young infants who are too young to be immunized.
One of the best ways to protect those infants is by immunizing the population, thereby limiting the likelihood that infants will be exposed to the disease.
A relative newcomer to the vaccine market is the Menactra vaccine, which protects against four different types of Neiserria meningitides.
This organism can cause meningitis, pneumonia and bacteremia (meaning bacteria in the blood system.) Up to 15 per cent of individuals infected with N meningitides will die, even with appropriate treatment.
Up to 20 per cent who survive will have severe sequelae, such as the loss of a limb or a neurologic disability. This is the organism that strikes fear in the hearts of physicians who treat children and young adults.
Although the disease is most common in infants, the incidence in adolescents is higher than in the general population. The vaccine is not on the routine schedule in B.C., although it is in some other provinces. It is available with a prescription from your child's doctor at the local pharmacy.
For a copy of the B.C. Immunization Schedule, go to: