Issue 8.10 | Oct 2000
this article for free.
The Big Picture (continued)
In the early 1980s, mathematicians constructed wavelets as a way to better represent rapidly changing data - like those caused by earthquakes, nuclear events, or quick shifts in color and light. Wavelets reflect the frequency, degree, and location of big changes in a data set, and can describe images on various scales: Some wavelets represent the whole image in a crude sweep; others pull out details. In 1987, a Belgian mathematician named Ingred Daubechies helped take wavelets a step further when she began writing the algorithms that would encode digital images using wavelets. A decade-plus later, Kahn will be the first to commercialize this work.
Kahn came up with the idea for LightSurf three years ago, when he tried to send an ephoto of his newborn daughter to her grandmother. While many new dads would be looking around for a shave and a stiff drink, Kahn was crawling the maternity ward for an RJ11 jack. With no landline in sight, he built a crude wireless photo application in Borland C++ and sent the pictures over a 2,400-bps connection from his StarTAC. Later, figuring there had to be better way, he brought together a team and set out to design a way to send a slender image file for online use and a larger one for printing hard copy. It worked just as he imagined. Meanwhile, another group of scientists was working with wavelets to develop a new digital imaging standard, called JPEG 2000, set for commercial release early next year. When Kahn became aware of the development, he worked to make LightSurf's format compliant with JPEG 2000.
Following the path of an image in JPEG 2000 shows how much bandwidth wavelets can save. As soon as the camera's 640 x 480-pixel sensor captures the image, a Samsung ARM Core chip begins crunching a photo into bits. LightSurf's software, called PhotonOne, then hands the data - representing an image file about one-third the size of a typical JPEG - to the phone as TCP/IP packets. Kahn calls them half-baked mathematical expressions waiting to get fully cooked at the server.
Kahn is most proud of what happens once the file arrives at his network. His programmers have tweaked the Linux source code to handle file acceleration and implement the second major component of the business - the LightSurf Universal Imaging Switch (LUIS). This switch, which sits on the network, reads the resolution, file format, and intended destination of an image, then routes it to the appropriate server. "LUIS does for images what Cisco routers do for packets," says Kahn.
"Our ambition is to put a visual communicator in every shirt pocket, on every belt, in every handbag."
Customers never have to contend directly with JPEG 2000 - they need only know where they want their photos to go. If print is the destination, the server sends the highest resolution. For the Web, a medium resolution makes transmission faster. A Palm VII grayscale takes the lightest load. Kahn calls it all a "massively scalable infrastructure" for storing, managing, securing, and serving up millions of images over time. In theory, the entire process - for a photo that will look great in any medium - should take no more than 30 seconds. In practice, as of late July, LightSurf had some work to do. The first samples looked great online, but were too pixilated in print. Nevertheless, they arrived in time.
LightSurf is passing its first market test seamlessly. Since June 26, Kodak, powered by LightSurf, has been enabling consumers who drop off film at any one of 4,100 CVS pharmacies to have their images digitized and stored online. When the film is developed at Kodak's Qualex labs, Kodak scans it at a 1,000 x 1,000-pixel resolution and sends the images to LightSurf, which delivers them to a password-protected Web page. For the customer, it means no more keeping track of negatives; for Kodak, it's all about new print orders. As the enabler of it all, LightSurf gets a licensing fee plus fees based on usage.
It's only a piece of the full package he wants to provide, but Kahn estimates that LightSurf handled more than a million photos in the two weeks following the project's debut. And Kodak couldn't be happier. "Philippe always has some innovation going," says Dennis Hamann, Kodak's general manager of consumer imaging, who collaborated with Kahn while in the PDA business at Hewlett-Packard. "He'll bring the technology to companies like HP or Kodak that can't be as innovative but have the brand recognition. That's why I chose to work with him."
These days, Kahn has three homes, five sailboats, two jets, and five surfboards spread between Santa Cruz and Honolulu. His wife and LightSurf cofounder, Sonia Lee, is a graphic designer by training. They work together on their philanthropic Web site, the Lee-Kahn Foundation (www.lee-kahn.org), as well as on LightSurf and Starfish, where Lee's duties encompass everything from serving as a sounding board for her husband to functioning as VP of human resources. LightSurf's sole investors, the two are living well off the $253 million sale of Starfish to Motorola in 1998 (Kahn is still CEO).
But while Kahn's vision has afforded him a nice lifestyle, there's one thing he's lacking: a demonstrated ability to build the kind of business he's talking about. While Starfish offered some amazing sync technology from the start - linking the Palm to Microsoft Outlook - these days it's a niche product used mostly to integrate PDAs with Web-based organizers. Kahn also had grand plans for Rex, a PDA that slid into a laptop's PCMCIA slot and could fit in a shirt pocket. He billed it as wearable tech; but Rex went nowhere - a fact Kahn blames on his decision to license the device to Franklin Electronic Publishers, a New Jersey company he claims fumbled the marketing. Just as likely, Rex simply didn't have the functionality or appeal of the PalmPilot, which came out a year earlier.
The closest Kahn has come to a LightSurf-sized idea was with Borland. From the outside, Kahn appeared extremely involved in the company's success - and failure. "He was always very hands-on, very robust, and very rigorous," says former Intel chair Andy Grove. To insiders, though, Kahn seemed chaotic: He was a programming whiz who'd spend hours suffering over ad copy. And as a manager, he'd motivate the hell out of his staff to build world-class technology, say he wanted to be involved in every decision, and then disappear for days, or weeks, at a time.