|The First Art Newspaper on the Net
||Established in 1996
|| Tuesday, June 27, 2017
|Archaeologists find 1.4-million-year-old flint in the caves of Atapuerca in Spain |
A handout picture taken on July 22, 2013 and released on July 24, 2013 by EIA (Atapuerca Research Team) shows a carved flint dating back 1,4 million years, which was discovered in the so-called Elephant Chasm at the Archaeological Site of Atapuerca, in the Sierra de Atapuerca, province of Burgos. Archeologists said they have found a flint blade dating back 1.4 million years, the earliest of a human presence at the Atapuerca site. AFP PHOTO /EIA / JORDI MESTRE.
MADRID (AFP).- Archaeologists said Wednesday they have found a flint blade dating back 1.4 million years in the caves of Atapuerca in Spain, the earliest sign of a human presence at the site.
The three-centimetre (1.2-inch) blade was found in the so-called Elephant Chasm cave where in 2007 researchers found a human finger and jawbone dating back 1.2 million years -- considered the remains of the "oldest European" ever found.
The find made this year, considered to be "of great value", came from a carving knife, Eduald Carbonell, one of the directors of the dig, said during a presentation of the discovery.
The site, near the northern city of Burgos, has been under excavation since 1978. In 2000 it was classed by UNESCO as a piece of world heritage.
The oldest parts of the site are one and a half million years old.
Stone tools discovered in this site confirm the continuity of human settlement in Europe, the researchers said.
The finding contradicts the theory of some researchers who believe Europe was populated in small waves without continuity by groups doomed to extinction because of their inability to adapt to new surroundings, they said in their statement.
"Even though they are very archaic tools, they reflect complex activities such as recovering animals that fell into the caves," which functioned as traps, the statement said.
Researchers have also found the remains of a large bear which is an ancestor to the brown bear that exists today.
Various remains of this species were found at the site, as well as those of other animals such as rhinos, giant deer, bison and wild donkeys.
During the current digging season at the site, which just wrapped up, archaeologists presented another rare item they discovered -- a fossilised shoulder blade of a child between the ages of four and six dating back 800,000 years.
It was discovered in 2005, but since it was trapped in a block of calcified clay it took seven years of work to extract.
© 1994-2013 Agence France-Presse
July 27, 2013
Exhibition offers for the first time a parade of the most beautiful circus costumes
Imperial Chinese dragon moonflask hidden for a century for sale at Bonhams
More than 3,700 Marilyn Monroe photos to be auctioned by Profiles in History
Archaeologists find 1.4-million-year-old flint in the caves of Atapuerca in Spain
Iraq, United States reach deal on stolen artefacts: Senior ministry advisor Baha al-Mayahi
National Gallery of Art acquires important works by Weston, Gérôme, Smithson, Mann, Loving, and others
British rain conquers New York; Nearly 70,000 people visit Random International's Rain Room
Dallas Museum of Art discovers a new attribution in its Reves Collection: Giovanni Bonazza's Reclining Nymph
Saint Louis Art Museum announces new Deputy Director for Curatorial Affairs and Museum Programs
Norman Hartnell's sketches of the dresses worn at The Queen's Coronation go on display
Exhibition illustrates the friendship and interconnected creativity of Kenny Scharf and Tseng Kwong Chi
PlayArt Labs launches Artistico to bring the world's greatest art to mobile gaming
Carnegie Museum of Art announces recent acquisitions; Newly acquired objects build on collection strengths
Mecum Auctions offers celebrity cars and motorcycles in Santa Monica
Architectural glass artist Paul Housberg's "Water Walk" offers healing through art
New York-based artist Lucy Dodd exhibits at Blum & Poe
First ever exhibition of Antarctic Architecture opens in Glasgow
Zoe Ryan appointed curator of the 2nd Istanbul Design Biennial
Camden Arts Centre opens major survey of work by Swedish artist Jockum Nordström
Most Popular Last Seven Days
1.- Art community remains divided over Caravaggio found in French attic
2.- Stedelijk Museum presents a snapshot of Rineke Dijkstra's photographic and video work
3.- Hillwood Estate, Museum & Gardens mourns death of Dina Merrill
4.- Exhibition of new paintings by Gerhard Richter opens at Albertinum in Dresden
5.- 18th-century French paintings from across America on view at National Gallery of Art
6.- Major retrospective of Robert Rauschenberg opens at the Museum of Modern Art
7.- Canaletto exhibition reunites two of the Venetian master's greatest series of paintings
8.- King Tutankhamun's bed, chariot paraded through Cairo to new home
9.- Junk sale diamond ring bought for £10 worth a fortune
10.- Exhibition sheds light on one of the most pressing issues of the 21st century: What will we eat in the future?
Museums, Exhibits, Artists, Milestones, Digital Art, Architecture, Photography,
Photographers, Special Photos, Special Reports, Featured Stories, Auctions, Art Fairs,
Anecdotes, Art Quiz, Education, Mythology, 3D Images, Last Week, .
|Royalville Communications, Inc|
Tell a Friend
Dear User, please complete the form below in order to recommend the Artdaily newsletter to someone you know.
Please complete all fields marked *.