Keratoconus is a degenerative disorder of the eye in which structural changes within the cornea cause it to thin and change to a more conical shape than its normal gradual curve. Substantial distortion of vision, streaking and sensitivity to light are symptoms of Keratoconus. Adolescence are the main patients suffering from it. It is a rather intractable eye diseases, and there is no definitive cure for it up to now. For years, researches have been done to find relative solution, and everything comes to him who waits. Advancement in eye surgeries enable people suffering from keratoconus to get a treatment for vision improvement.
In mention of eye surgery, one would firstly remind of laser surgery, however, it is not a good option for keratoconus improvement, and the INTACS is supposed to be more effective. INTACS helps to normalize the irregular cornea curvature, while laser surgery can just change the shape of the cornea by removing tissue. Little complications will be caused with the application of INTACS, because there is no tissue removed, as a result, possibility of infection is small; it is maintenance free; and the option for you to choose other method other than INTACS is open.
Many successful cases have improved the high effectiveness of INTACS in keratoconus cure. Over 90% of people with INTACS have an improved quality of vision with the assistance of glasses or contact lenses. What’s more 20/20 vision is possible resulting from the INTACS. 50% of patients possess such a luck. One of the most unbelievable miracle is that one patient who has had lost his vision over the years obtain his vision again after undergo such a surgery. Besides keratoconus, people with mild nearsightedness are good candidates for a INTACS.
Despite the fact that keratoconus is an intractable eye disease, INTACS has helped many people realize their dream of good vision. It gives hopes to keratoconus patients, besides, it is a true blessing that it doesn’t require lots of maintenance or excessive check ups. Therefore, laser surgery may be not always the best choice to get vision corrected.. Anyhow, prescribing medicine according to each disease is always the truth.