Air Quality Monitoring
About Florida's Air Quality System (FLAQS)
Welcome to Florida's Air Quality System (FLAQS) website. This site's purpose is to provide up-to-date pollution data to the public. Nineteen different state, local and private air programs provide ambient air data to this system. They operate the state's ambient air monitoring network, routinely recording data 24 hours per day.
Ambient air is the air we breathe outside, near ground level. As ambient air quality changes, people respond in different ways. Low concentrations may not affect a person, but at high concentrations, ozone, particle pollution, and other pollutants may cause damage to human health. This site provides air quality information throughout the day to allow you to make better informed decisions for daily activities.
The following mapping and reporting applications available below show carbon monoxide (CO), nitrogen dioxide (NO2), ozone (O3), continuously monitored particulate matter 2.5 (PM2.5) and particulate matter 10 (PM10), and sulfur dioxide (SO2) levels recorded throughout the state's ambient air monitoring network.
It is important to note that the air quality data less than three months old viewed on this website generally have not been verified and checked for quality assurance in accordance with federal requirements.
Please contact the DARM Help Desk if you experience any problems at 850-717-9117.
Air Quality Advisories
Advisories, when available, are posted here.
View a visual representation of customized ambient air data and the Air Quality Index (AQI) on a state of Florida map. The AQI is based on continuously monitored CO, NO2, O3, PM2.5, PM10, and SO2 data.
The following settings are recommended for optimal use:
Multiple Site Data
View Daily, Monthly, Highest Readings, and Attainment Status reports of CO, NO2, O3, PM2.5, PM10, and SO2 pollution levels for more than one site at a time.
Air Quality Animated Maps
View the most recent air quality level (Eastern Standard Time) maps showing the most recent, yesterday and today?s, continuously monitored pollution levels for the state of Florida.
View individual county maps displaying site locations and Daily, Monthly, Highest Readings and Attainment Status reports of CO, NO2, O3, PM2.5, PM10, and SO2 pollution levels recorded for individual sites.
View O3 and PM2.5 forecast reports for the entire state as well as AQI history reports for all monitoring counties in Florida.
Sign up to have your local air quality forecast e-mailed to you. This links to an external web website.
Ozone Tracking Sheets
The 1-hour and 8-hour tracking sheet reports are updated once daily at 7:30 A.M. EST.
Last updated: April 04, 2013