CAMERA LESSONS & ACTIVITIES
The following are
example lessons for teaching with a digital camera
Immokalee Middle School
Lesson Title: Insect Life
Grade level currently teaching: 8th
Courses taught: Science
Lesson Objective: Upon completion of this lesson
the students will show an understanding of the stages of
- Introduce students to metamorphosis.
- Describe the steps of complete metamorphosis.
- Divide the students into groups.
- Give each group a cocoon. (Collected or ordered from
- Have students place the cocoon in a container where
it can be observed and photographed daily.
- Have students use the digital camera to photograph
the insect daily.
- Allow students to upload pictures into the computer
- After the insects have become adults have students
complete one of two activities.
*Have students use their photographs to create a
labeled poster showing the life cycle of an insect
*(Note: May require a 486/66 computer with at least
16 Mb of memory)
*Have students convert ah of their pictures into gif
*Use a .gif animation program to create an animated
gif showing all of the groups photographs in order.
This a time lapsed "video" of complete
metamorphosis that could be included in a web page.
Have groups present their projects to the class.
Demonstrating their understanding of complete metamorphosis.
Follow-up lesson/activity,: Have groups compare
insect life cycles to other life
Florida Sunshine state math/science standards
Manatee Elementary School
Title: Insects-Our Interesting
Grade/Area: Insects First Grade
To review with students collection and classification of
This lesson will reinforce the Insect classification and
the diversity of life right outside the classroom
Digital Camera, specimen container, magnifying glass,
pencil, paper, books on insects
The instructor will review the definition of an insect
and the diversity of type.
Procedure and Modeling
The instructor will outline the procedure to be used,
i.e., break into groups, go onto the school grounds and
around the school collecting different types of insects. A
written analysis is to follow
The instructor specifies the groups and leads them to the
area for collection. She/He joins different groups and
monitors the progress of collection and digitally photographs
the specimens for later study.
The students have their own log, sheets to record all of
the different insects collected within their respective
Following the collection and recording. the students must
descriptively write about the different specimens collected
using prints of digital photos.
The instructor will allow the students to read aloud
their findings and observations.
Student evaluation will be based on their participation
in class and their independent work on the log sheets and on
their independent writing. Students will he given an
0-outstanding, S-satisfactory or an N-needs improvement based
on the effort and accuracy in which they completed the
Florida Sunshine State Standards
SC.H.1.1.3, SC.G.1.1.4, SC.H.3.1.1, SC.H.1.1.4,
SC.H.1.1.5, MA.E.3.1.1, MA.E.1.1.1
Sally A. Johnson
Pine Ridge Middle School
Grade Level currently Teaching: Math 6th and 7th
Lesson Title: Geometry in Nature
and Man-made Constructions
To demonstrate geometric shapes are everywhere around us.
To encourage students to be more aware of geometry in their
At the beginning of class there will be a collection of
pictures of geometric shapes that were found in our community
or from pictures in books. The pictures will be displayed; at
first in a timed sequence without stopping. Next, we will
observe each picture, discuss and game the geometric shapes.
At the end of the unit the same pictures will be used as a
test by numbering the frames to match the numbers on the
test. Students will be required to name the geometric
shape in each frame.
Students will be asked to find pictures of geometric shapes
in their life and either bring the picture to school
so we can take pictures with the digital or check out the
camera to take pictures at home.
Florida Sunshine State Math Standards Addressed:
MA.C.1.3.1 The student understands the basic properties of,
and relationships pertaining to regular and irregular
geometric shapes in two and three dimensions.
Lely High School
Lesson title: Mode, median, mean, and
Students will find the mode, median, mean, and range with
respect to the height of the students in the classroom.
Students will measure the height of everyone in their group.
Their group information will be recorded on the board.
The student groups will then find the mode, median, mean, and
range for the entire class.
Pictures will be taken and displayed for each person who
was the mode, median, and mean of the class. A group photo
will be taken with the students in order from shortest to
tallest to help display the range of the group.
Students will find the mode, median, mean, and range for a
given set of numbers on a test.
Follow up lesson activity:
The same procedure will be used with regard to shoe size.
Florida Sunshine State mathematics standards utilized:
This lesson is designed for a pre-algebra class. This could
easily be adapted to higher level courses by including
charts, tables, and plots (plotting shoe size and
height on a coordinate system and any relationship found).
This would then include the Sunshine State mathematics
standard MA.E.l.4.l. Standard deviation and variance could
also be found in the data
After the data has been recorded on a chart, pictures ken
and displayed on the TV with the members of the group
included with their chart.
Dolores E. (Dodie) Pajer
Lely Elementary School
Grade Level : 4/5 ESOL
Lesson Title: The Water We Drink: where
does it come from and how do we clean it?
Using acquired knowledge of the water cycle and information
presented in a classroom discussion, students will pose
questions to two civil engineers through a Power Point
~ previous lessons, students have drafted, edited and
prepared final versions of their questions.
With the teacher's assistance, the entire class will
decide upon a Power Point layout. Individually, they will
enter their questions, add photos of themselves taken by each
other, and add previously recorded sound flies of their
voices recording their questions.
Students will be observed and the final presentation will be
assessed to determine if they are able to enter their
questions into the document, insert the image files into the
document, and add the sound files to the document.
Follow-up Lesson/ Activity:
The civil engineers will be given a copy of the presentation
to prepare their presentations. At the time of their visit to
the class, the students will photograph themselves with the
responding engineer and will include the photo and the audio
of the engineer's response to the Power Point presentation.
Sunshine State Math and Science Standards Addressed:
- SC.G.l.2.1 SC.H.l.l.4
- SC.G.1.4.2 SC.H.1.2.2
- SC.G.2.1 .2 SC.H.1.3.3
Immokalee High School
Lesson Title: The Solar System
The student will;
- Construct a mobile of the solar system as they see it
- Calculate the time needed to travel from Earth to the
moon, Mars, and other planets
- Act out a commercial to get visitors to come to their
- Write a poem about their favorite planet
- Create a crossword or word search puzzle using the
planet names and other space terms
- Design a planet that we may be able to live on if the
Earth were to become over-populated
Students will choose three of the six activities, complete
them, and prepare a short presentation for the class.
Students will use the Casio Digital Camera to make
presentations to the class (may use TV, VCR, or PC to aid in
Use the digital camera to create an animation of their
favorite planet in orbit around the Sun and present it as a
slide presentation to the class
Sunshine State Standards:
- SC.E.1.4.1 Student understands the relationships
between events on Earth and the movement of the
Earth, Moon, and other Planets and the Sun
- SC.E.1.4.2 Knows how the characteristics of the other
planets and satellites are similar to and different
from those of the Earth.
- SC.E.1.4.3 Knows the various reasons that Earth is
the only planet in our Solar System that appears to
be capable of supporting life as we know it.
Bruce W. Burnett
Naples Park Elementary School
Title: Field Trip Log Book
Objective: To record a field trip on the camera and
reproduce in booklet form.
- Teacher takes photographs of students participating
in the activities of the field trip.
- Print photographs
- Put in booklet form with blank pages in-between
- Students compose meaningful text based upon their
experiences and pictures
- Form a collage on a bulletin board for a display of
the field trip with appropriate captions
- Send photograph copy home to parent of their child
participating on the field trip
- Compose a video to be used at open house or to be
shared with each family on a loan basis
- Video can be shared with sponsors of the trip, such
as the PTO or cooperative business partners (for
excellent public relations).
- Send pictures back to presenters of the field trip to
evaluate and enhance their program
Florida Sunshine State Standards
- SC.G1.2.1 Knows ways that plants, animals and
- SC.G.1.2.2 Knows that living things compete in a
climatic region with others living things and that
structural adaptations make them fit or an
Gulfview Middle School
6Th SCIENCE TEACHER
Title: Life Cycle of
Recording and learning about the life cycle of the
butterfly using a digital camera.
Objective: To show students how the life cycle of
an insect goes through its different stages.
Procedures: This will be a student centered
- Select 2 to 4 students who will be trained on the use
of the digital camera
- The students will be given an outline of procedures
to follow while photographing the butterflies life
- The students will proceed to the school butterfly
garden ( if you have one)
- The students will watch for a butterfly to lay its
eggs! If this is too time consuming, then the
students should look for eggs under the leaves of the
- When the eggs are located they should be photographed
using a magnifying lens (the time, date and location
should be noted)
- Students can report their finding to the class each
day or present the project when the life cycle is
- The students should photograph tile eggs every day
and record the results. This should continue until
the eggs hatch.
- The students should continue to photograph the
emerging larva. (Continue recording time, date, and
time) the camera will record the size and shape.
- The students should continue to photograph
the growth rate of the larva on a daily basis. (if
this is a problem several larva along with their food
plants can be put into an aquarium in the classroom.
- With luck the students will be able to photograph the
lava as it starts to form its pupa.
- The students will continue to record information and
photograph the pupa each day until the butterfly
starts to emerge.
- The students should continue to photograph the
butterfly as it emerges and starts to dry out, then
take some pictures of the butterfly as a flying adult
(life cycle complete)
The students or teacher can put all of these photographs
together with captions to show the life cycle of an insect.
The digital camera allows you to show your photographs as a
slide show (on your computer or TV). You can also video tape
your project, save it to a disk, or use it as a computer
Assessment: The students should be able to draw an
example of the life cycle of an insect.
Follow-up Lesson: Try photographing the life cycle of
another insect such as the mealworm and compare life cycles.
Florida Sunshine State Standards:
- SC.F1.1.3: Describes how organisms change as they
grow and mature
- SC.F.2.1.1 Knows that living things have offspring
that resemble their parents
- SC.G.1.2.5 Knows that animals eat plants or other
animals to acquire the energy they need for survival.
- SC.H.1.2.2 A successful method to explore the natural
world is to observe, record, and then analyze and
communicate the results
Oakridge Middle School
Grade 7 Business Grade 8 Advanced and Regular Math
Title: Picture Polynomials
Lesson objective: Students will be able to
interpret and analyze polynomials using algeblocks.
1. Students need to work in pairs. Prior lessons need to
have taken place introducing the student to algeblocks and
what each piece means.
2. Using your digital camera, create screens that first
have polynomials pictured using only algeblocks. Have
students create and explain what each screen means. (Control
the time each screen is displayed on your screen using + and
buttons on the camera.)
3. Eventually, screen need to advance to polynomials
written out as formulas and then to a screen using the
Assessment: Create a presentation using digital pictures
of algeblocks and have each student write what is pictured.
Follow-up: Students can create presentations for addition
and subtractions of polynomials using the digital camera and
Florida Sunshine Standard:
- Algebraic Thinking - The student describes, analyzes
and generalizes a wide variety of patterns,
relations, and functions.
The digital camera is an excellent tool for all algeblock
presentations. For use year after year, saving in PowerPoint
or on a videotape may be useful.
Avalon Elementary School
Title: Digital Cameras and
Uses of the Casio Digital Camera in this project:
- Create photo badges
- Create PowerPoint presentation of all activities
involved in the unit in sequence: Play, Recycling
Paper Project, Poems, Report on Home Project, and
- Insert pictures into class newsletter
- Use for creating a thank you letter with photos
- Create class book with illustrations from pictures
- Ecology: organisms and their environment
- Ecocide: deliberate destruction of environment by
- Earths natural resources
Language: Writing: write to environmental
organizations with class pictured on paper. Poetry related to
ecology/environment, illustrated with pictures taken by class
Science: create local ecology picture dictionary
using digital photographs
Oakridge Middle School
Current grade level taught: 7th grade science
Title: It's A Match
To familiarize students with plant and animal interactions
Pictures of plants and animals from our pond/hammock area
will be taken with the digital camera. Students will then
research interactions including chemical interactions with
animals who utilize those plants. (defenses, pheromones,
etc.) We will then print and laminate pictures of our plants,
animals and interaction descriptors. We will make a matching
game that students can play in groups to reinforce these
The games themselves as well as student performance in
Student led tours of the pond and hammock for parents and
other students utilizing the various interactions as part of
their presentation. (This could also be used as an
evaluation). We could also have a presentation of the area
done in pictures and text utilizing the camera. Another
option would be to send pictures of our site to schools who
also have existing ponds and/or hammock areas, or who are
considering putting one in.
- knows biological adaptations include changes in
structures, behaviors, or physiology that enhance
reproductive success in a particular environment.
- knows that the interactions of organisms with each
other and with the non-living parts of their
environment result in the flow of energy and he
cycling of matter throughout the system.
Poinciana Elementary School
Grade level: 1 Courses taught: all subjects
Title: Plant Growth
- The learner will recognize the importance of plants
to the environment.
- The learner will describe in writing the stages of
growth in a plant by first hand and pictorial
- The learner will identify the three major parts of a
plant and their function.
- The learner will identify the things that a plant
needs to live and grow.
The students will receive a lecture on the parts of a
plant and their function. The importance of plants will also
be discussed. Posters, photographs, and live plants will be
used in the presentation of material. The students will then
plant their own seeds. The students will keep a written
journal of what they are observing and doing when planting
the seed. During the growth process the students will take
digital pictures of the plants growth. These pictures
will then be used to create a journal to be used for formal
Students will use the digital pictures they took to
create a second journal. They then will write descriptions,
in complete sentences, of what is happening at each stage.
This can be done using a word bank supplied by the teacher,
and with some guidance from the teacher. The descriptions
should include what parts are observed and what their
functions to the growth of the plant are. The journal should
also make mentions of the elements observable in the pictures
(ex. sunlight) that will help the plant live and grow.
After the lesson and journal are complete the students will
recognize the need for plants in our environment by
replanting their plant outside somewhere on school grounds.
Everglades City School (K-5)
Everglades City, Florida
Grade level currently teaching: 3rd grade
Title: Comparing Moths and
Students will learn the similarities and differences of
moths and butterflies and will be able to identify them by
their special characteristics.
The teacher will make a TV presentation of pictures of
moths and butterflies taken with the digital camera. The
teacher will brainstorm with the students about the
similarities and differences of the two insects and make a
list of those ideas on the chalkboard. Those ideas may
include the time of day each insect flies, the kinds of
antennae, shape of bodies, and position of wings at rest.
Using the list of ideas, students may work in small groups to
make a Venn diagram to compare and contrast the two kinds of
insects. Each outer circle of the diagram will include
characteristics that belong to only one of the insects, and.
the overlapping space in the middle should contain ideas that
are for both insects. Time should be given each group to
share their Venn diagram with the rest of the class.
The teacher will print some pictures of moths and
butterflies taken with the digital camera. These pictures
will be printed at the top of a writing activity sheet The
students will be asked to write a descriptive paragraph about
the moth or butterfly that is shown at the top of the page
The paragraph should include those characteristics that help
to identify it as being a moth or butterfly.
Students should be given the opportunity to use the
digital camera to take photos of moths and butterflies on the
school campus. They may print some of their photos to display
on the classroom bulletin board or may create a TV
presentation to show the class.
Florida Sunshine State Science standards addressed:
- F 1 The student describes patterns of structure and
function in living things.
Sea Gate Elementary School
For The Birds
- Upon completion of this activity, the students should
be able to
- Describe the relationship between beak shape and size
and the type of food a bird eats.
- Graph data
- Describe the similarities and differences among a
variety of beaks
- Provide evidence for decisions
- Design a beak for a specific function
- Science Processes/Skills:
- Observing, Inferring, Predicting, Sorting, Recording
data, Graphing, Interpreting data.
Using the Casio camera 1 took several pictures of birds'
beaks. Putting this into a PowerPoint Presentation we viewed
these pictures on the TV and discussed the different shapes
and the food that each bird ate. Discuss similarities and
I put the children into six groups and gave them each a
cup of dry puffed cereal. I asked them to eat the cereal
using the craft stick as an eating utensil. Let them try this
for one minute. It should be a difficult task for the
students. Gather the class for a discussion. Ask the students
what happened when they tried to eat the cereal. Then ask for
suggestions of better things to use to eat the puffed cereal.
Help the students realize that different foods require
different utensils or tools by asking questions such as:
- Would you use a straw to cut a watermelon?
- Would you eat soup with a fork?
- Would you use a spoon to eat a raw apple?
Have each student write and explain what they learned
during this lesson. What was the best part and what they
would add or change. Revisit the pictures of birds and
have the students explain what they eat and what is their
Each child will create their own special bird with a
unique beak. They will then explain to the class the special
features and why this adaptations will increase their bird's
potentia1 for survival. The teacher will be taking
pictures of each group during the simulation and will then
add these pictures to the PowerPoint Presentation.
Florida Sunshine State Math/Science standards
- SC.G.l.l.4 MA.B.1.2.l
- SC.G.1.2.2 MA.B.2.2.1
- SC.G.1.2.5 MA.B.3.2.l
Lely High School
Title: Visual Periodic
- The student will identify elements on the periodic
table by symbol and digital photograph.
- The student will classify elements according to
atomic # and atomic mass.
- The student will learn how to write the electron
configuration for each element on the periodic table
The teacher will take as many pictures as possible of the
elements from the periodic table to introduce this aspect of
periodicity with my chemistry students.
1. The students will be introduced to an element on the
periodic table and with the assistance of the digital camera
be able to visualize what the elements look like.
2. The students will be able to see similarities of
elements according to which group they are in and what the
element looks like.
The students will be able to match the element name,
symbol and photograph. We will use this first in a game
setting (matching, etc.) and then I will test the student
with a Multiple Choice/Matching/True-False Test.
I will also print copies of the pictures and use them as
part of a Lab Practical Exam.
Follow up lesson/activity
As a start-up activity, I will show various
(science-related) digital pictures on the television screen
and have students identify and list as many characteristics
as they can.
Also, I will break the students up into groups and allow
them to photograph additional items that are made up of a
combination of elements (compounds). This will not only
reinforce their learning of elements, but introduce the
combination of two or more elements as compounds.
Florida Sunshine state math/science standards
- SC.A.1.4.1 Knows that the electron configuration in
atoms determines how a substance reacts and how much
energy is involved in its reaction.
- SC.A.2.4. 1 Knows that the number and configuration
of electrons will equal the number of protons in an
electrically neutral atom and when an atom gains or
loses electrons, the charge is unbalanced.
- SC.A.2.4.2 Knows the difference between an element, a
molecule, and a compound.
- SC.A.2.4.5 Knows that elements are arranged into
groups and families based on similarities in electron
structure and that their physical and chemical
properties can be predicted.
- SC.A.2.4.5.a Predicts the chemical and physical
properties of hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, and carbon
atoms and compounds, using the periodic table to make
generalizations about properties of certain elements.
- SC.G.1.4.3 Knows that the chemical elements that
make up the molecules of living things are combined
and recombined in different ways.
Mary Joe Parrish/Marilyn Spooner
Golden Gate Elementary School
Title: Every Picture Tells a
Story: Observations and Images at the Elementary Level.
Lesson Objective: The goal of this lesson is to
demonstrate using current environmental observations and
real-time weather data, and then convert to metric. The
student team uses The Weather Channel on the television to
gather current pressure, precipitation, wind speed, and wind
The teams log onto the G.L.O.B.E project at
WWW.GLOBE.GOV/. A school would need to sign up to be a GLOBE
school before they can access the server. The current weather
information is logged onto the GLOBE server.
The teams compile satellite imagery from the Florida
Explores website at
http://www.fsu.edu/explores/explores.html. The teams
correlate the satellite imagery to their observations. They
then compare and extrapolate their observations and write
about their findings.
Lesson Assessment: Students would be successful if
they can complete a data table from their observations, pull
down the satellite images, and write about how the current
weather conditions at their school correlate with images.
Follow-up lesson activity: Students choose a
particular satellite image (visual, infra-red, or water
vapor). They write a description contrasting the
precipitation ~ the current conditions vs. The image. They
write a description comparing the. temperature in the current
conditions vs. the time of year.
Florida Sunshine State Standards
East Naples Middle School
7th Grade Science
National Park Discovery: I Spy National Parks
Unit objective: To increase students
knowledge, and appreciation of the American National Parks as
limited, natural resources through "hands on"
experience with innovative technology such as the Casio
digital camera, CD ROMs, and multimedia presentation
Lesson Objective: To empower students by teaching
them how to use the Casio digital camera to develop a
- Each student Will Write a business letter to an
American National Park of his/her choice requesting
information on the park
- Working in cooperative learning groups the students
Will use various materials such as CD ROM computer
programs, video encyclopedias, books, pamphlets and
written material received from the National parks to
research information on the national park of h s/her
- Each group of students Will compose one, three
paragraph report each paragraph Will have a minimum
of five sentences on the national park of choice:
- Each cooperative learning group will create a
concrete visual representation of the national park
The group will choose one of the following: diorama,
model, map, or brochure
- Each group will compose a five slide multimedia
presentation using the Casio digital camera to
photograph pictures of the national park Pictures
should include park topography, animals, plants, and
- Production of letter to national park
- Three paragraph report
- Concrete visual representation such as a diorama,
model, map, or brochure.
- Multimedia presentation consisting of a five slide
Follow-up Lesson Activity:
- Cooperative learning groups will present multimedia
presentations to class.
- Video with all multimedia presentations will be aired
on morning announcements, for the schools
- Concrete visual representations (diorama, models,
maps, brochures) Will be displayed in school halls
and Media Center
Florida Sunshine State Science Standards Addressed
- SC.D.2.3.1 The student understands that quality of
life is relevant to personal experience.
- SC.D.2.3.2 The student knows the positive and
negative consequences of human action on the
- SC.G.3.2.3 The student knows that a brief change in
the limited resources of an ecosystem may alter the
size of a population or the average size of
individual organisms and that long term change may
result in the elimination of an animal or plant
population inhabiting the Earth - The student
understands that humans are a part of an ecosystem
and their activities may deliberately or
inadvertently alter the equilibrium in ecosystems
- SC.H.3.3.7 The student knows that computers speed up
and extend peoples ability to collect, sort, and
analyze data; prepare research reports and share data
and ideas with others
- SC.H.3.4.3 The student knows that scientists can
bring information, insights, and analytical skills to
matters of public concern and help people understand
the possible causes and effects of events
Lake Trafford Elementary School
Immokalee, Florida 34142
Title: "You can count on me"
- The kindergarten teacher will use photographic images
of the students, with presentation software, to
introduce different ways numbers can be represented.
- The teacher will use photographic manipulatives to
illustrate ordering and grouping of numbers up to ten
- The teacher and students will work as a class to
identity the numeric symbols and numbers written as
words for all numbers up to ten.
- The students will work cooperatively, in groups of
tour, to identify, order, count and group the
- The students will work independently to make an
illustration of their family, and identify it with
both the numeral and the word representing the number
of members in all.
The teacher will take several sets of photographs of the
students in her class in groups from one to ten. She will
insert the photographs into a Power Point presentation which
will introduce the students first to pictorial representation
of the number, and then, after discussion, the number written
as a word and expressed as a numeral.
The teacher will print out the photographs of the
students, and mount and laminate them. The teacher will also
type, in a 100 point, bolded font, the numbers from one to
ten and the numbers in words. These, too, will be mounted and
laminated. These will be used in teacher directed lessons, to
instruct and illustrate counting, ordering, and grouping of
numbers up to ten.
The students will work cooperatively, in groups of four,
using the laminated manipulatives in a math center for the
skills of counting, ordering, and grouping.
As a culminating project, the students will draw a picture
of their family group. They will write the numeral which
represents how many in their family and the word for the
The teacher will photograph the students' pictures with
the digital camera and print them on paper and on iron-on
transfers. The teacher will make tee-shirts for the students,
and a bulletin board titled "You Can Count on Me"
with all of the pictures. When the students wear the
shirts, they will each describe their families to the class,
and count up the members. Then they will do other activities
such as putting themselves in order according to size of
their families, from smallest to greatest, and grouping
themselves with other students who share the same number. The
last activity will be for the teacher and students 10 count
how many people, all together, are represented on the
childrens shirts to come up with total number. The
teacher will post the total number on the Bulletin board.
- Using other personal statistics of the students
(pets, favorite foods) to count and group.
- Making a graph to illustrate family sizes of the
students in the class.
- Use of the manipulatives for beginning addition
Sunshine State Standards Addressed:
- Strand A. Number Sense, Concepts and Operations.
- MA.A.1.1.1 - associates verbal names, written word
names, and standard numerals with the whole numbers
less than ten.
- MA.A.1 .1.2 - understands the relative size of whole
numbers between one and ten.
- MA.A.1.1.3 - uses objects to represent whole numbers
and relates these numbers to real-world situations
- MA.A.1.1.4 - understands that whole numbers can be
represented in a variety of different forms.
S. Kathryn Grimes
Lower School Instructor
Community School of Naples
Naples, FL 34109
Growth from Parts of Plants
Grade Level: Third or Fourth Grade
Objectives: At the end of this exercise the student
should be able to
- DISTINGUISH between new plant growth and the part of
the plant it is growing from.
- DESCRIBE vegetative growth qualitatively.
- DESCRIBE the techniques used to produce new plant
growth from plant parts other than seeds in terms
precise enough that other people will be able to
follow the procedure -
- PHOTOGRAPH the different stages of new plant growth
with the Casio Digital Camera and print out the
pictures to use on a display board.
Show the children a plant (a philodendron or a geranium)
and say that you did not plant a seed to produce it. Ask
whether anyone can suggest a way the plant may have been
developed. Someone may say that you planted a stem to get the
plant. If not, suggest this yourself.
Ask the children if they have ever observed anything like
this before. For example: "Do you have any plants at
home that were started without seeds? Have you ever planted
potatoes? Have you ever taken strawberry plants on the end of
a runner and set them out? Have you ever seen asparagus
planted? Some of the class may be able to relate such an
experience. If not, you may want to tell them about one.
Arrange several of each of the following on a table near
the front of the room:
- Shallow, wide-mouthed jars, or aluminum pie pans
- Slender glass bottles (olive bottles)
- Paring knives (or serrated plastic knives if
necessary, for safety)
- White potatoes Sweet potatoes Carrots
- Large onions
- Ivy, philodendron, coleus, arid/or geranium plants
(include more than one if you can)
Divide the class into as many groups as there are
different kinds of plants on the table. Invite one of the
groups to come to the front of the room to observe carefully
what you do. Select a carrot, and ask whether anyone has any
ideas about how to make it grow into a green plant. Accept a
general statement that a member of the group may suggest,
such as, "Cut the carrot and put it in water." If
no one says this, you should.
Since most of the class members cannot observe what is
being done, tell the small group at the front of the room
that when you have finished, they will have to report to the
others on what they have seen.
Select an aluminum pen or wide-mouthed jar, and put water
in it to a height of about 2 cm. Remove any leaves from the
carrot, and cut off the top 4 or 5 cm. Put this piece in the
water with the cut surface on the bottom of the container.
Then put the cutting where there is as much daylight as
possible. Have a student photograph this procedure step by
step with the digital camera.
Ask one member of the group to report the procedure
precisely to the rest of the class. Ask other members of the
group to add any information that the first student omitted.
Emphasize accurate, detailed reporting, such as the depth of
the water (2 cm), the place the carrot was cut (4 to 5 cm
from the top), the way the carrot is placed in the container,
and where the container is located. Report what shots were
taken with the camera and why.
Invite each of the other groups in turn to be the
observers, reporters, and photographers as the teacher
demonstrates the following:
a. Select a sweet potato and a pan, or wide-mouthed
jar, and repeat the procedure you used for the carrot.
b. Put a whole white potato in a jar or pan with water 2
c. Select a large onion, three toothpicks, and a jar;
mount the onion so that 1 to 2 cm of the bottom of the
onion dips into the water.
d Select a branch from a coleus or geranium plant with
two or more leaves, and make a sharp cut below the
leaves. Put the stem (cut end) in a slender glass jar
that has been filled with water.
e Make similar cuttings form philodendron and ivy plants.
A leaf and small stern area will constitute a cutting.
f. Photograph each one of these steps.
Students will find out whether other kinds of plants can
produce new plants in this way. Groups of two or three
students might try to grow kinds of plants that are different
from those they have already studied. They might try a celery
stalk, or an apple, and so on. They should be encouraged to
use whatever plants and parts of plants they suggest and can
bring from home.
In all of these investigations, encourage each student to
record what s/he did and what s/he observed and concluded.
The digital photographs can be shown on the TV screen, the
computer monitor, or printed out to make a chart or booklet.
The students should report their findings to the class in a
well-planned way. The use of the digital camera should
facilitate this by enabling the students to record data in a
concise, chronological sequence. Photographic comparison
gives the student instant verification of his/her
experimental results in the area of plant growth.
Title: Digital Image Journal
Objective- To keep a class journal of scientific
concepts studied throughout the school year by recording
observations with a digital camera and incorporating the
pictures into a word processing program where the students
observations are recorded and then placed in a binder after
Materials- digital camera, three ring binder and
Procedure- Take photos of any important observable
concepts being studied. Have students dictate their
observations as you write them on chart paper. Incorporate
the photos into a word processing program and type students
observations below the photos they relate to. If possible
have a student do the typing. If not then have them observe
you as you do it. Print out photos and observations to be
placed in a three ring binder. Your students will have a
visual reminder to look at throughout the school year of all
the neat science activities you have done.
*This activity could also be used to keep a math journal.
Title: Using a
To demonstrate how to properly use a graphing
calculator, demonstrating how to enter the data while showing
the calculators output.
- Digital camera with live video output
- Projection system or large presentation TV
- Graphing Calculator
- Position the camera over the calculator so that the
image of the whole calculator is projected onto the screen for student viewing.
- Enter programming information and data, allowing
students to follow along with the projected image.
- Have students compare their output screens with the
This format can be used with any digital tool manipulation