“A story is a way to say something that can’t be said any other way…You tell a story because a statement would be inadequate.”
- Flannery O’Connor
The library at St Benedict is structurally and metaphorically at the heart of the school. Each book in our collection is chosen for its truth, beauty, and goodness. The stories we tell our children and the texts we give them form their will – their moral understanding and their ability to act upon their convictions. In the grammar stage, children are offered vivid stories – fables, fairy tales, parables, and myths prominent among them, that capture their imaginations and offer examples of virtue and beauty. Our students in the logic stage have a selection of wonderfully written works of fiction and non-fiction at their fingertips. These books include classics of American and world literature, a selection of the best works for middle school students by modern authors, and both text and online reference works. A structured library curriculum teaches them how to navigate a library’s holdings and how to approach research in preparation for high school.
Browse the catalog: http://saintbenedictschool.follettdestiny.com . Once there, click on the “St Benedict Catholic School” link.
The philosophy at St. Benedict in regard to technology is that technology can be a good thing when used properly, but can be unsafe and even addictive if used inappropriately or too frequently. There are two key reasons that we utilize technology:
1. Preparing students for high school
2. Furthering the educational goals of the classroom
To accomplish these ends, St. Benedict maintains a wireless network for use by teachers and supervised use by students. LCD projectors are available to all classroom teachers in order to enhance instructional lessons. SmartBoard technology is available for teachers to use as needed. Teachers may reserve the use of a classroom set of iPads for lessons which would be enhanced by internet access or a specific app. Especially in the middle school, clickers may be used for quick assessment and feedback. Our Technology Integrator, Mrs. Madel, is shared with St. Gertrude High School. She provides training for teachers, maintains the equipment, and assists teachers with technology lessons.