International talks to halt global warming begin on Monday, with existing disagreements ensuring the negotiations will be extremely heated.
The aim of the two week meeting is to finalise a "rule book" to govern the operation of the 1997 Kyoto Protocol. This set targets for reducing greenhouse gas emissions. But even three years later, the 150 countries meeting in The Hague differ widely on its complex proposals.
Matters are not helped by events in the US, which is a key player. Negotiators had expected a new shadow administration to be in place in time to handle the talks jointly with the serving officials.
But delay the result of the Presidential election means the US negotiators may lack a mandate to agree anything.
The Kyoto agreement set targets for the cuts in the main greenhouse gases that industrialised countries should achieve by 2010. The average cut is 5 per cent below 1990 levels. But to make the targets cheaper to meet, it also agreed a set of "flexibility mechanisms". These can be offset against excess emissions.
Countries will be able to:
buy and sell the right to trade emissions
plant forests to soak up carbon dioxide, the most critical greenhouse gas
invest in cutting emissions or in sink forests in other countries
But deep divisions have developed over how these mechanisms should work. The US, Australia, Japan and others want lax rules that will allow them to make maximum use of trading and sinks. The US believes it can absorb 300 million tonnes of carbon every year through sinks. This would be enough to allow its actual emissions to carry on rising.
The European Union says reliance on sinks is an abuse of the Protocol. It says sinks should be seen as welcome addition to emissions cuts, not a replacement. They also fear widespread cheating, with countries claiming carbon "credits" for existing forestry practices. Finally, they are concerned that uncertainty over the fluxes of greenhouse gases between the atmosphere and forest soils could allow cheating on targets.
Many environmentalists fear that countries may chop down natural forests to free land for planting "sink" forests. In the week before the meeting, a coalition of environment groups headed by the Worldwide Fund for Nature and Greenpeace, warned that the protocol "contains a perverse incentive in allowing countries to claim a carbon credit for planting trees but not to incur a carbon debit for deforestation."
The European Union suggests a compromise: nations would have to meet at least half their targets through emissions cuts. This was vigorously opposed by the US under President Clinton. Meanwhile, Russia, Japan and Australia are opposing plans for penalties against countries that do not meet their protocol targets.
Another heated debate will centre on the Clean Development Mechanism. This allows industrial nations to claim credit for investing in clean energy generation in developing countries. The row concerns which "clean" technologies should qualify.
Wind and solar power are included but other possibilities are nuclear energy and large hydroelectric dams. Both of the latter technologies are opposed by environmentalists, and The European Union is split on whether to permit their inclusion.
Conference insiders expect that some sort of agreement will be thrashed out in The Hague. But the acid test will be whether it is acceptable enough to persuade individual governments to ratify it in their own parliaments in time for it to become legally binding by the target date of 2002.
If you would like to reuse any content from New Scientist, either in print or online, please contact the syndication department first for permission. New Scientist does not own rights to photos, but there are a variety of licensing options available for use of articles and graphics we own the copyright to.
Have your say
Only subscribers may leave comments on this article. Please log in.
Only personal subscribers may leave comments on this article