American Heritage® Dictionary of the English Language, Fourth Edition
- n. A white, tasteless, odorless protein precipitated from milk by rennin. It is the basis of cheese and is used to make plastics, adhesives, paints, and foods.
Century Dictionary and Cyclopedia
- n. The chief nitrogenous ingredient of milk. It does not coagulate spontaneously, like fibrin, nor by heat, like albumen, but by the action of acids and of rennet. Cheese made from skimmed milk and well pressed is nearly pure coagulated casein. It is closely allied to, if not identical with, legumin, which occurs in many vegetables. Casein is one of the most important elements of animal nutrition as found in milk and leguminous plants. Its chemical constitution is not fully understood. It contains carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, a little sulphur, and about 15.5 per cent. of nitrogen. Also called
- n. biochemistry A proteid substance present in both the animal and the vegetable kingdom found in milk or in the seeds of leguminous plants.
GNU Webster's 1913
- n. (Physiol. Chem.) A proteid substance present in both the animal and the vegetable kingdom. In the animal kingdom it is chiefly found in milk, and constitutes the main part of the curd separated by rennet; in the vegetable kingdom it is found more or less abundantly in the seeds of leguminous plants. Its reactions resemble those of alkali albumin.
- n. a milk protein used in making e.g. plastics and adhesives
- n. a water-base paint made with a protein precipitated from milk
- Ultimately from Latin cāseus, cheese. (American Heritage® Dictionary of the English Language, Fourth Edition)
“Canada candy casein casein-free celebrity celiac disease cheese cheese alternative children chocolate coconut milk colic congenital LI constipation cookbook cookies cooking coupons cow's milk cream creme cultures dairy allergy dairy products dairy-free dairy. lactose intolerance”
“a peculiar soluble proteid, called casein, which is precipitated by a special ferment, the rennet-ferment, and the insoluble proteid, the curd, thus obtained is then acted on by the pepsin.”
“However, diets that exclude milk and wheat protein (known as casein and gluten) have become popular ways to try to treat certain illnesses.”
“Also, the amino acid composition of casein, which is the characteristic primarily responsible for its property, is similar to most other animal-based proteins.”
“KF: Ok, so I am clear that it's wise to avoid casein, which is intrinsic in dairy (milk and cheese), but how is other animal protein, such as chicken, steak, or pork, implicated in the cause and growth of cancer?”
“The fine flavor is lost, the casein, which is the principal protein of milk, is toughened, the milk, which is normally a living liquid, is killed, the chemical balance is lost, the organic salts being rendered partly inorganic.”
“The food substances that occur in the largest amounts are fat and protein in the form of casein, which is the tissue-building material of milk.”
“Ehrhardt (Eng.Pat. 2,407, 1898) patented a method of making antiseptic mercury soap by using mercury albuminate -- a combination of mercuric chloride and casein, which is soluble in alkali, and added to the soap in an alkaline solution.”
“Another important factor in the breaking down of the casein is the”
“The secretion also dissolved something out of chemically [page 131] prepared casein, which is said to consist of two substances; and although Schiff asserts that casein in this state is not attacked by gastric juice, he might easily have overlooked a minute quantity of some albuminous matter, which Drosera would detect and absorb.”
These user-created lists contain the word ‘casein’.
All the scientific words found in the official EU nomenclature. For the screening I used Vocabgrabber of the Visual Thesaurus.
A list of words that are odd or words that I have looked up.
includes words of the "Prodcom list"
basic prices, buying-in price, agricultural levies, agricultural prices, intervention / tr..., intervention stocks, intervention system, interprofessional..., area aid/payment, area-based subsidy, Community financing, direct assistance and 217 more...
"Any of numerous natural and synthetic compounds of usually high molecular weight consisting of up to millions of repeated linked units, each a relatively light and simple molecule."
Terms used in the EU's Common Agricultural Policy referring to policy issues in the milk sector.
HU translations: input costs, retailer, trader, processor, price transmission, raw milk, milk cow, offset income losses, production quota ..., reference price, Single Area Payme..., Single Payment Sc... and 43 more...
Looking for tweets for casein.