Browse older articles by clicking on a category or tag below to find articles of interest.
TagsActivities Ammonites BCGS Bivalves Black Country Brachiopods Canals Christmas Climate change Collecting collections Collectors Dinosaurs Dud Dudley Dudley Earth history Earthquake Extinct Fossils geological maps Geology Glacial Ice Age Identification Igneous rocks Italy Limestone Microfossils Minerals mines Mining Murchison Museums Places Rocks Seven Sisters Societies The Dudley Bug Trilobites Vesuvius Video volcano volcanoes Workshops Wrens Nest
Join usIf you share our passion for geology why not join us by becoming a member of the Black Country Geological Society
The first time I ever visited Lyme Regis was in the summer of 2007. I packed my bag with the mush have essentials for fossil hunting; hand lens, chisel, hammer and sample bags. First we visited the beach to the right of Lyme Regis. Immediately upon arriving at the beach fossils began catching my eye [...]
Back in February I was invited on a fossil hunting trip with students from my old university; the University of Birmingham. The trip was organised by ‘Lapsoc’, which is the geology department’s student society. With the opportunity of getting muddy in the quarries beckoning I was quick to agree. After a typical student minibus journey [...]
I was reading an article last month in Deposits magazine about the evidence for belemnite’s praying on ammonites during the Jurassic and Cretaceous Periods. A few weeks ago I was asked to produce a geology education pack combining rocks, fossils and mineral specimens from Wednesbury Museum and Art Gallery. After searching through the huge and diverse range [...]
An ammonite is a type of fossil which thrived in shallow seas between the Triassic (251 million years ago) and Cretaceous Periods (65 million years ago). They are now extinct but do resemble the modern day nautilus with their helix shape and appearance. The nearest living relatives are octopus and squid. Ammonites had a shell [...]
Graham Worton, the Keeper of Geology at Dudley Museum and Art Gallery, talks about the various types of fossils. This includes the ones we can see with the naked eye including dinosaurs and trilobites (such as the famous ‘Dudley Bug’) as well as tiny microfossils which are hidden within rocks and can only be seen through a [...]
Here Graham Worton, the Keeper of Geology at Dudley Museum and Art Gallery, explains what a fossil is, how they form and how fossils can be used to tell the story of life on Earth. He demonstrates that a fossil can be anything from a large dinosaur skull to a fossilised shell or Ammonite.