The Travis Co-op cares about your family’s well being and wants to help you grow healthy minds and bodies!
Organic produce delivers more flavor, more nutrients, and is better for the environment. Man-made chemicals found in conventional foods like pesticides, larvicides, fungicides, and herbicides have been proven to cause serious health effects to the farmers, harvesters and people who consume such goods. From neurological effect to birth defects to behavioral changes and cancer, the effects are well documented and studied. Click here for more detailed information.
How to get your kids to eat more fruits & veggies!
Obviously, the earlier you start attuning your children’s taste buds to fresh veggies and fruits the better. However, some people may only discover this lifestyle when the children are beyond their early years and now in adolescence. Good news! All hope is not lost and you CAN adjust their diet. One of the best things you could do is to educate your children on how to read labels and look for “junk-food ingredients” vs “real food ingredients.” Some parents even like the term “grow foods,” referring to foods that help you grow.
The top ingredients to avoid are:
- high fructose corn syrup
- hydrogenated oils, or “trans fats”
- any color additive with a number symbol attached to it, (e.g. blue #1, yellow #5, red #40)
Next, you explain to them that these ingredients do not support their bodies growth and that they deserve better. As a parent you can let them know that this new shift in diet is because you love them and no longer want to see them putting junk-food in their bodies. This shift may come with moans, groans and complaints for a couple of weeks but soon enough their taste buds and sensors will be tuned in to want these fresh, nutrient-dense foods versus the junk-food. This shift is vital to your family’s habit of poor quality, additive and chemically laden foods to fresh, organic and local flavors. For more tips on how to make this shift, check out Dr. William Sears’ page.
Download the Health Eating Made Simple Guide for Busy Parents:
Also, check out:
Houston School Meals Initiative: Real Food 4 Houston Kids