The history of the mule (equus asinus) and modern human race go hand in hand.
Mules have been deliberately bred by humans since the Book of Genesis was first put down on parchment. The Hittites thought Mules to be more valuable than a chariot horse, and the mule was the favored mount of the Kings of Israel in biblical times. The exact origin of the first mule is unknown, but we do know that the mule was deliberately bred by man in ancient times. The breeding of a jackass (male donkey) with a female horse (mare) is the most common and oldest known manmade hybrid. A somewhat less known common hybrid, the hinny, was also bred by crossing a female donkey with a male horse (stud). The inhabitants of paphlagonia and Nicaea in what is northern Turkey today are believed to have been the first to breed mules. Mules were known in Egypt since before the time of Moses. The Greek writer and historian, Homer reported in the Iliad in 800 B.C., the arrival of mules from Henetia in Asia Minor, where breeding was a specialty. In the Old Testament, the mule replaced the donkey as the “royal beast” and was rode by King David and King Solomon at their coronations. In the new world, Christopher Columbus brought four Jack donkeys and two Jennies along with horses. The Conquistadors in Mexico used mules in their exploration of the Americas.
In America, General George Washington became the father of our country, but did you know that about the same time he also became the new nation’s first Mule breeder? Washington was known for his horsemanship and was known to have traveled 120 miles on horseback in less than two days. Washington was also an avid student of agriculture and knew mules could do much more than horses, lived longer, ate less and were much hardier than horses.
In the mid-1700s the best jackasses in the world were in Spain. They were animals of remarkable strength and endurance, which the monarch had long guarded by prohibiting their export. However, in 1784, the King of Spain, King Charles III, agreed to send two fine Spanish jacks and three jenny’s to General George Washington at Mount Vernon. One of the Jacks died en route and the surviving mule was named “Royal Gift” in honor of the King, and it arrived in December of 1785. To the general’s surprise, Royal Gift refused to perform his duty on the 30 plus mares awaiting his services. Undoubtedly, the exhaustive trip to a foreign land full of American breed mares distracted this royal gift. Fortunately, the following spring, Royal Gift responded positively to his duties and the American mule-breeding business was under way. In 1785, the census for Mount Vernon listed 130 working horses and no mules. By 1799, the year President Washington died; Mount Vernon listed 25 horses and 58 mules. By 1807, when Maury County was chartered, there was an estimated 855,000 mules in the U.S.
In 1840, in Kentucky, a high quality jack used for mule breeding could bring up to $5,000 on the market. With the cotton boom, the number of mules in America by 1897 was over 22 million. In 1923, the U.S. Department of Agriculture issued the Farmer’s bulletin No. 1311 entitled, “Mule Production.” The publication explained the attributes of mules and gave specific instructions on how to successfully breed good mule stock. On the old historic Spanish Trail that connected Santa Fe and Los Angeles, trains of pack mules carried 200 pounds of supplies each between the two cities from 1829 to 1849 faster than horses. The 2,700-mile long trail was considered one of the most difficult to navigate, and the mule proved the most adept at handling the trek in the shortest of time. On plains wagon trains that used mules instead of horses, they could travel 30 miles a day, while wagon trains with horses or oxen could only average about five miles per day. In the west, stage coaches preferred mules over horses because large mules could travel at 5-6 mph over flat dry land for hours, but a horse would give out long before a mule would.
In 1957, the U.S. Army officially deactivated the last two operational mule units at Fort Carson, Colo. More recently, at the U.S. Marine Corps Mountain Warfare training center in California, they have again introduced mules to combat units for service in Afghanistan and other remote high-altitude regions. Throughout the history of the human race, you can find that the mule has contributed to the advancement of the human race, and its certain that the human race would be much less than it is today without the help of the mighty mule.
Mike Bennett is a retired autoworker who resides in Spring Hill. E-mail him at email@example.com.