Significance and Use
The 3.5 % NaCl alternate immersion procedure is a general, all-purpose procedure that produces valid comparisons for most metals, particularly when specimens are exposed at high levels of applied stress or stress intensity.
While the alternate immersion test is an accelerated test and is considered to be representative of certain natural conditions, it is not intended to predict performance in specialized chemical environments in which a different mode of cracking may be operative. For example, it does not predict the performance of aluminum alloys in highly acidic environments such as heated inhibited red fuming nitric acid (IRFNA). For such cases, the results of the alternate immersion test are of doubtful significance until a relationship has been established between it and anticipated service environments.
While this practice is applicable in some degree to all metals, it is not equally discriminative of all alloys, even within the same metal system. Consequently, information should be established to allow comparisons of performances of the alloy of interest in the alternate immersion test and in natural environments.
Note 2—The alternate immersion concept can be useful for exposure of corrosion specimens in other solutions because the procedure and apparatus provide a controlled set of conditions. Details of this are beyond the scope of this practice.
1.1 This practice covers procedures for making alternate immersion stress corrosion tests in 3.5 % sodium chloride (NaCl) (). It is primarily for tests of aluminum alloys (Test Method G 47) and ferrous alloys, but may be used for other metals exhibiting susceptibility to chloride ions. It sets forth the environmental conditions of the test and the means for controlling them.Note 1
Alternate immersion stress corrosion exposures are sometimes made in substitute ocean water (without heavy metals) prepared in accordance with Specification D 1141. The general requirements of this present practice are also applicable to such exposures except that the reagents used, the solution concentration, and the solution pH should be as specified in Specification D 1141.
1.2 This practice can be used for both stressed and unstressed corrosion specimens. Historically, it has been used for stress-corrosion cracking testing, but is often used for other forms of corrosion, such as uniform, pitting, intergranular, and galvanic.
1.3 This practice is intended for alloy development and for applications where the alternate immersion test is to serve as a control test on the quality of successive lots of the same material. Therefore, strict test conditions are stipulated for maximum assurance that variations in results are attributable to variations in the material being tested.
1.4 The values stated in SI units are to be regarded as the standard. The values given in parentheses are for information only.
This standard does not purport to address all of the safety concerns, if any, associated with its use. It is the responsibility of the user of this standard to establish appropriate safety and health practices and determine the applicability of regulatory limitations prior to use.
2. Referenced Documents (purchase separately) The documents listed below are referenced within the subject standard but are not provided as part of the standard.
D1141 Practice for the Preparation of Substitute Ocean Water
D1193 Specification for Reagent Water
E3 Guide for Preparation of Metallographic Specimens
G1 Practice for Preparing, Cleaning, and Evaluating Corrosion Test Specimens
G16 Guide for Applying Statistics to Analysis of Corrosion Data
G47 Test Method for Determining Susceptibility to Stress-Corrosion Cracking of 2XXX and 7XXX Aluminum Alloy Products
accelerated corrosion test; alternate immersion test; aluminum alloys; ferrous alloys; quality control test; sodium chloride solution; stress corrosion cracking;
ICS Number Code 77.060 (Corrosion of metals)
ASTM International is a member of CrossRef.
Citing ASTM Standards
[Back to Top]