About Site Map Contact Us
|A service of the U.S. National Library of Medicine®|
On this page:
Reviewed December 2009
What is the official name of the ADAMTSL2 gene?
The official name of this gene is “ADAMTS-like 2.”
ADAMTSL2 is the gene's official symbol. The ADAMTSL2 gene is also known by other names, listed below.
Read more about gene names and symbols on the About page.
What is the normal function of the ADAMTSL2 gene?
The ADAMTSL2 gene provides instructions for making a protein whose function is unknown. The ADAMTSL2 protein is active in many different tissues. It is found in the extracellular matrix, which is the intricate lattice of proteins and other molecules that forms in the spaces between cells.
Studies suggest that the ADAMTSL2 protein interacts with a protein called latent transforming growth factor beta binding protein 1 (LTBP1). The LTBP1 protein is involved in the storage of transforming growth factor beta (TGF-β), a critical growth factor that helps control the growth and division (proliferation) of cells, the process by which cells mature to carry out specific functions (differentiation), cell movement (motility), and the self-destruction of cells (apoptosis). Through its interaction with the LTBP1 protein, researchers suspect that the ADAMTSL2 protein may help regulate the availability of TGF-β.
The interaction between the ADAMTSL2 protein and the LTBP1 protein suggests that ADAMTSL2 may also play a role in the microfibrillar network. This organized clustering of thread-like filaments (called microfibrils) in the extracellular matrix provides strength and flexibility to tissues throughout the body.
How are changes in the ADAMTSL2 gene related to health conditions?
Where is the ADAMTSL2 gene located?
Cytogenetic Location: 9q34.2
Molecular Location on chromosome 9: base pairs 136,397,285 to 136,440,640
The ADAMTSL2 gene is located on the long (q) arm of chromosome 9 at position 34.2.
More precisely, the ADAMTSL2 gene is located from base pair 136,397,285 to base pair 136,440,640 on chromosome 9.
See How do geneticists indicate the location of a gene? in the Handbook.
Where can I find additional information about ADAMTSL2?
You and your healthcare professional may find the following resources about ADAMTSL2 helpful.
You may also be interested in these resources, which are designed for genetics professionals and researchers.
What other names do people use for the ADAMTSL2 gene or gene products?
See How are genetic conditions and genes named? in the Handbook.
Where can I find general information about genes?
The Handbook provides basic information about genetics in clear language.
These links provide additional genetics resources that may be useful.
What glossary definitions help with understanding ADAMTSL2?
You may find definitions for these and many other terms in the Genetics Home Reference Glossary.
See also Understanding Medical Terminology.
References (4 links)
The resources on this site should not be used as a substitute for professional medical care or advice. Users seeking information about a personal genetic disease, syndrome, or condition should consult with a qualified healthcare professional. See How can I find a genetics professional in my area? in the Handbook.