In a world where health was taken for granted, a silent enemy prepared for battle in the shadows. No one knew where it came from, or how to stop it. But the world was soon sure of one thing, the Covid-19 pandemic had begun.

As the virus spread like wildfire across the globe, fear and panic gripped the nations. As governments struggled to contain it and medical professionals worked tirelessly to save lives, the world started to shut down. Travel bans, strict quarantines, and non-essential work shutdowns occurred to try to slow the spread. Still, the virus raged on relentlessly, and the death tolls rose higher and higher with every passing day.

As the world teetered on the brink of total collapse, a multi-national team of hero scientists raced against time to develop a vaccine. But vaccine creation is slow and viruses mutate and evolve each time they are passed to a new host. The virus became more deadly with each passing day.

Amidst all of the international chaos, other heroes emerged - groups of ordinary people banded together to fight back against the virus and bravely help those in need. These front-line workers risked everything to help those in need and battled the virus with all they had.

Sadly, the virus had other plans for our world. Governments scrambled to implement new restrictive measures to contain the virus. Soon, we'd learn viruses can't be truly contained.

As the pandemic continued to drag on, the toll on humanity felt unbearable. So many losses and permanent injuries occurred. But a glimmer of hope emerged from the dark reality. The scientists developed a vaccine, and the world collectively held its breath as it was distributed to those in need. Would it be enough? Or would the disease continue to mutate and evolve and require boosters or yearly shots? 

Find out in the new reality thriller - *Pandemic*!

In a world where nothing is certain, one thing is clear: the Covid-19 pandemic is a thriller like no other, a fight for survival against a silent enemy that threatens to destroy us all.
