Stages of Waste Water Treatment Process.
There is release of variety of waste from both domestic and industrial such as water, solids and gases. These wastes are absorbed into the environment and can be dangerous. The harm made to the environment can, however, be reduced by taking waste through treatment plants. The waste treatment process produces harmless products such as water, recycled products and harmless, biodegradable products. The choice of treatment plant is dependent on the source and type of waste. Wastewater is common in most process including in homes and industries. There are different stages of the wastewater treatment process.
The septic system is used to treat water in most homes. The septic system is not complicated but should always be functional mode. Septic systems serving a larger number of people are more complex since they have to absorb a higher volume of waste. There are however waste water treatment plants for use in large residential estates and factories. There are manufacturers of wastewater treatment plants that can help you design and manufacture a treatment plant. The process needs to be carried out per the circumstances. The manufacturers have engineers who handle the project since its inception to monitoring and maintenance works. These types of plants are huge capital investments and are also sophisticated. These systems remove quality clean water and thus used at commercial levels.
The wastewater treatment plants involve three main stages. Water flows through pipes either by pumping or gravitational force to large reservoirs. In the reservoirs, there is separation of floating and suspending solids from the water. This process happens in the presence of centrifugal force. About 60% of solids will be removed at this stage. Chemicals can be used at times to increase the removal of solids. The water is taken to the second stage of treatment known as the secondary stage of organic stage. In the second stage, the remaining biodegradable and suspending articles are given as food to organism such as fish. These organisms consume the biodegradable components in the water and remove the nutrients such as phosphorus and nitrogen present. About 80% of water impurities is removed at this stage. Water passed through his phase is not hazardous to the environment.
However, to make the water pure, the third stage is incorporated. This phase is known as tertiary level, and the water released here can be used for different purposes. There is application of different water treatment chemicals to make it safe. Some firms use chlorine to remove all impurities though it has become a subject of discussion in the recent.
Water pumped to the treatment plant should not contain industrial chemicals. The company responsible for releasing water with industrial chemical should take responsibility by establishing a treatment plant at their base to remove the chemicals.