Click here for more images.
This analytical report of the soils of New Island was completed as an environmental science independent study. The results reported were obtain using a LaMotte, Combination Soil Outfit, (Model STH-14 Code 5010-01). These results may not be the exact actual concentration of the components of the soil, but are reasonable scientific estimations. Minor variation between actual and deducted soil characteristics may exist where soil analyses were preformed in the absence of digital output capabilities. The results will provide valuable base data for performing additional environmental analysis.
Send comments and questions to firstname.lastname@example.org
report of analysis of soil of New Island was done as an Independent Study, ENVS
399: Soil Analysis, for Environmental Science curriculum at State University of
New York, College at Oneonta, also, to satisfy an EPA grand requirement. The
grant was awarded to Assistant Professor of Geography and Environmental Science,
Dr. Tracy Allen.
Island is located along the banks of the Susquehanna River within the city
limits of Oneonta, New York. It is an 82-acre riparian lowland, located in the
floodplain of the Susquehanna River.
New Island Project will provide environmental science students with hands-on
environmental experience, enabling them to better understand issues related to
environmental planning and ecosystem conservation. Students will identify plant
species, animal species, soil types, and landform change in the area. Based on
these studies, they will evaluate potential routes for a multi-use nature trail
to best incorporate and preserve important ecological features, thus increasing
public awareness and knowledge about environmental issues.
The soil samples were collected
and analyzed by Ralph B. Narain, an Environmental Science major, with concentration
in Chemistry. The analyses were done using a LaMotte,
Combination Soil Outfit, (Model STH-14 Code 5010-01).
The soil samples were analyzed for pH, nitrate nitrogen, nitrite nitrogen, ammonia
nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium (potash), magnesium, calcium, sulfate, aluminum,
chlorides, ferric iron, manganese and humus.
What is a soil test?
What is a soil test?
Soil samples were collected
using the 1.5-inch by 4-feet drill. The samples
were collected at different dept, dried, crushed, mixed and then a representative
sample analyzed. Sample locations were marked by GPS position.
The colorimetric analyses
of nitrate nitrogen, ammonia nitrogen, nitrite nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium
(potash), magnesium, calcium, sulfate, aluminum, ferric iron, and manganese
were done from one extraction using Universal Extracting Solution.
The pH, humus and
chloride test were done with separate extractions.
Click on the tests to get a brief description of the analytical procedure for each test according to Lamotte Combination Soil Outfit Instruction Manual.
A more detailed description
of soil sampling, preparation, test procedures and results are available from
the Lamotte Combination Soil Outfit Instruction Manual, provided with the
Click on results for a tabulated format of analyses. All concentration are given in parts per million (ppm).
Click here sample location on island.
Samples were collected from through out the island and analyzed. The result did not show any noticeable trend in any direction.
The average pH of the soil on the island is about 6.2, with variation from 5.8 to 6.4. This pH is about what the soil in the area should be, because of the numerous coniferous trees and the pH of the precipitation. Needles that fall from coniferous trees make the soil acidic. The pH of the soil is not too acidic to prevent a variety of plant and animal to line on and in the area. The soil will also support a variety of agricultural crop, if needed. To view a graph of pH click here.
Macronutrient are the main nutrients that plants need for healthy growth, these are nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium. According to the results of the soil analysis there are ample amount for a variety plants. There is always exceptions, some plants will thrive best in soil that is high in one or more of the macronutrients, while some will grow best in very low concentration of any or all the macronutrients. Click here for graph of macronutrients
The average concentration of nitrogen is 30ppm, varying from 81 to 11, 81ppm was from sample # 2 and 11ppm from sample #'s 4,8 and 11. Average phosphorus on the island is 22ppm with most of the area sampled have 12.5ppm, sample #10 had the most at 50ppm. 60ppm was the average of potassium on the island. The highest was 90 from sample #10 and most of the sample have 50ppm.
Trace elements or micronutrients are elements that a plant can grow without, but need in low concentration to grow healthy, to prevent disease, or to help some other way, like to prevent all the flowers from falling, or help the fruits to mature or to make other vitamins and compounds the plant cannot get otherwise. Some of these tested for are magnesium, chlorine, iron, etc (check methodology).
Of the trace elements that was analyzed aluminum is the only one that was of concern, because most of the sample have a concentration of 125ppm, this was classified as very high according to the LaMotte handbook supplied with the kit.
The test for calcium is not how much is available, but how much should be replaced for optimum plant growth. This may be why the concentration is so high.
Posted: May 13,2002.