New protein a natural defence against cancer
For the first time, researchers have shown that a natural protein found in the body significantly inhibits the growth of lung cancer by stimulating an immune response against the disease.
The Journal of Immunology reports that a protein found in secondary lymphoid tissue (SLC), one of the group of chemokine proteins, was found to eradicate lung cancer in 40 per cent of animal models. Researchers from UCLA also found that the protein slowed tumour growth when it was injected into the remaining animals.
Dr. Steven Dubinett and colleagues from UCLA School said the findings may serve as a basis for future treatments for lung and other kinds of cancer.
"We're very encouraged by our results, and they have led us to the early stages of developing a genetic immunotherapy to maximize the cancer-fighting abilities of patients' immune systems," said Dr Dubinett.
Dr Dubinett said a therapy may be available for testing in patients within one to two years.
SLC, found in the lymph nodes, is part of a group of proteins called chemokines. These proteins have the ability to attract white blood cells and dendritic cells (central to the immune system's ability to recognize cancer and stimulate an attack against tumor cells).
When injected into tumors, SLC attracts lymphocytes and dendritic cells to the tumor, where it is believed that they corner and attack the cancer cells.
Dendritic cells are usually unsuccessful in stimulating the body to fight cancer, even though cancer cells express abnormal proteins and molecules. Research has suggested that cancer can trick the immune system and prevent dendritic cells from responding against tumor cells.
"But after we injected tumors with SLC, we noticed a significant increase in the amount of immune-enhancing proteins and a significant decrease in the number of immune-inhibiting proteins in those tumors," Dubinett said. "This shows that SLC can help prevent important immune cells from being tricked into ignoring invading cancer cells."