Hyacinths are often known for their tall, colorful blooms. They are one of the most recognizable flowers in gardens worldwide. With beautiful blooms and a pleasant fragrance, they are sure to be a favorite in your garden this year.
As a perennial, the hyacinth flower is one that many gardeners love as a base in their flower beds. With longer stems and large blooms, they are ideal for creating a nice base in the back or middle of a flower bed with shorter flowering varieties around the edges. These Tips for Growing Hyacinths are ideal for making sure yours thrive in your flower bed this year.
Tips for Growing Hyacinths
Plant hyacinths in full sun when possible. Small amounts of shade are okay, but they prefer full sunlight. Most people add these flowers to open gardens or to the back of a flower garden against a home. Sunlight hitting them directly the bulk of the day will help them to thrive.
While hyacinth flowers manage well in colder temperatures, extreme climates may require extra protection. Negative soil temperatures can be damaging to the bulbs, so you may need to dig your hyacinth flower bulbs up and store during harsher winters. Typically this is only a concern in climates that reach negative soil temperatures during winter months. When in doubt, ask a local master gardener or nursery for suggestions.
Hyacinths prefer sandy soil to help wick away moisture. Standing water is a sure way to kill your plants. Make sure your garden has a great mix of soil and sand with quality drainage. Planting on an elevated bed is a great way to help moisture roll away from the plants instead of standing when there is excess rainfall.
Plant your hyacinth bulbs pointed side up and 6″-8″ deep for best results. Plant bulbs at least 4″ apart for optimum growth. This will allow the roots plenty of room to grow without tangling with each other. Crowded roots can prevent a flower from growing tall and beautiful.
If your goal is to have a beautiful flower garden this year, a hyacinth flower bed is a great addition. With so many beautiful colors, these tall hyacinths blooms make an excellent choice for lining a garden or simply adding to your walkway.