Voyager 2 image of Uranus and it's 10 innermost moons. Satellite 1986 U 10 is in the upper right corner.
Click on image for full size
Courtesy of NASA
Yet Another Moon for Uranus...
News story originally written on August 16, 1999
Another moon has been found orbiting the planet Uranus. This increases the total number to 18, leaving Uranus tied with Saturn as the planet with the most moons. Discovered by a University of Arizona scientist, the satellite is named Satellite 1986 U 10.
This finding is particularly interesting because 13 year old photographs were used to find the moon. In January, 1986, Voyager 2 took seven pictures of Satellite 1986 U 10. At that time, only nine innermost satellites were known of.
Scientists say most moon are discovered days after the images are taken. It took 13 years to find this new satellite.
After one year, Satellite 1986 U 10 will be given a new name. Currently, the other nine innermost moons are named for characters in Shakespeare plays.
Shop Windows to the Universe Science Store!
Learn about Earth and space science, and have fun while doing it! The games
section of our online store
includes a climate change card game
and the Traveling Nitrogen game
You might also be interested in:
The rare arrangement of planets Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune in the 1980's made it possible for the Voyager spacecrafts to visit them over a 12 year span instead of the normal 30. They used gravity...more
It was another exciting and frustrating year for the space science program. It seemed that every step forward led to one backwards. Either way, NASA led the way to a great century of discovery. Unfortunately,...more
The Space Shuttle Discovery lifted off from Kennedy Space Center on October 29th at 2:19 p.m. EST. The weather was great as Discovery took 8 1/2 minutes to reach orbit. This was the United States' 123rd...more
A moon was discovered orbiting the asteroid, Eugenia. This is only the second time in history that a satellite has been seen circling an asteroid. A special mirror allowed scientists to find the moon...more
Will Russia ever put the service module for the International Space Station in space? NASA officials want an answer from the Russian government. The necessary service module is currently waiting to be...more
A coronal mass ejection (CME) happened on the Sun early last month. The material that was thrown out from this explosion passed the ACE spacecraft. The SWICS instrument on ACE has produced a new and very...more
J.S. Maini of the Canadian Forest Service called forests the "heart and lungs of the world." This is because forests filter air and water pollution, absorb carbon dioxide, release oxygen, and maintain...more