He was born of a virgin on December 25th.
A birth witnessed by shepherds, and by followed by gift-bearers & a falling star to guide them.
Considered a great teacher, who performed miracles like raising of the dead.
Popularly known as "the good shepherd,” "the way, the truth and the light,” “redeemer,” “saviour,” and even “Messiah."
Celebrated a Last Supper with his 12 disciples.
He was sacrificed at the spring equinox, rose up after three days, and ascended to paradise. His resurrection is celebrated every year as well.
In memory of this, his worshippers 'eat' their god in the form of wafers and bread.
His followers also believe in atonement of sins, a Saviour who is human and yet divine, a Eucharist and a baptism.
You all know who I’m talking about here, right?
It’s MITHRAS of course.
It's his statue in the photo above, looking strangely like kind that of someone else, I've seen.
That’s right not Jesus but Mithras, the Persian/Indian God who shared a great number of similarities to Jesus, and who ‘for the record’ was on to the scene in the 6th Century BC.
So many similarities in fact, it’s obvious the writers of the Bible have been doing an ancient version of what we would now call ‘cut & pasting’.
Of course Christians out there believe Jesus is, unique and the first of his kind.
Load of Cobblers!
What is so different about the story of Jesus and other ancient Gods floating about around that time?
Not much, if anything of his life is that dramatically different than the stories of other Gods – all of who preceded Jesus, in some cases by a thousand years.
For example there can’t have been a lot to do in those long northern winter nights, even for Gods, because being born on the 25th December wasn’t an unusual thing for heavenly off-spring. Attis, Dionysus, Krishna, Horus etc all just happened to share Jesus so-called ‘divine’ birthday.
Their mothers were virgins as well.
Similarly Easter was also a favourite time for Gods to die & resurrect. Dionysus, Attis, Zoroaster etc.
The list of parallels between the stories of Jesus and those of other God-men who pre-dated him is extensive.
Horus walked on water
Attis of Phrygia, was considered the saviour who was slain for the salvation of mankind.
Dionysus turned water into wine.
Horus was baptized in the river Eridanus (a.k.a Jordan) by “Anup the Baptiser” (think John the Baptist)
The 23rd Psalm copied an Egyptian text appealing to Osiris the Good Shepherd to lead the deceased to the “green pastures” and “still waters” of the Nefer-Nefer land, to restore the soul to the body, and to give protection in the valley of the shadow of death (the Tuat).
The Lord’s Prayer was prefigured by an Egyptian hymn to Osiris-Amen beginning, “O Amen, O Amen, who are in heaven.” Amen was also invoked at the end of every prayer.
Zoroaster was tempted in the wilderness by the devil and his followers waited for his second coming.
Dionysus, was a wandering holy man who transfigured in the presence of some of his disciples.
The Indian God Krishna died on a tree & was crucified between two thieves.
Where have I heard that one?
Osiris was also said to have been wrapped in linen and anointed with myrrh, before burial.
Horus delivered a sermon on the mount.
Tammuz was known by his epithet, 'the shepherd'.
All sound familiar?
Nor as it happens, is the name Jesus even original.
The followers of the Indian messiah Krishna gave him the title “Jezeus,” or “Jeseus,” meaning ‘pure essence’.
The list of biblical plagiarisms are extensive & irrefutable.
The evidence simply so compelling, it makes one wonder why Christians nowadays so readily dismiss other God’s like Mithra, when the ‘original’ story bears such a striking resemblances to that of Jesus?
Oh that’s right, Mithra is a pagan God, not a proper one, eh.
It’s only possible to believe Jesus died was resurrected, can atone for sins, be your guide in the after-life etc - no other invisible entity.
Silly old me.
PS: The Vatican was built upon the grounds previously devoted to the worship of Mithra (also known as Mithras) Like all of the other detail, share coincidence, I’m sure.