Hospital administration has become one of the most lucrative careers in the fast growing field of health sector for graduates willing to serve the humanity. As health sector is booming day by day in the perspective of globalization the demand of hospital administrator has increased tremendously. Health Administration/Management is among the top ten millennium professions according to a recent US survey. A large number of private hospitals and clinics have come up all over the country. With increasing emphasis on quality of health care and patient satisfaction there is a tremendous need for persons with a professional qualification in Hospital Management. The healthcare concept in India has undergone a tremendous change in recent years. People have become increasingly aware of the importance of healthcare and this has led to higher expectations and an increased demand for a high quality of medical care and facilities.
Hospital administration is concerned with planning, organising, staffing, co-ordinating, controlling and evaluating health services for the community to provide maximum patient care of superior quality at low cost so as to reduce morbidity and mortality. Administration or management is a science and an art like medical sciences. Professional hospital administrators have proven how institutions can be managed efficiently, economically and effectively in a targeted time period.
Health care administration or hospital management provides management skills for the delivery of healthcare services. Doctors and medical specialists have so far been managing hospitals and health centers, without possessing the necessary managerial training. Moreover, it takes away precious time required by doctors to carry out their medical responsibilities. Therefore, of late most large and medium sized hospitals have specially trained professional hospital administrators with a management team responsible for the management of the healthcare services and medical staff, for planning and control, for continuous supply of materials, the management of the research and clinical work, and so on.
This is an exciting time for healthcare management. Healthcare is changing more rapidly than almost any other field. The field is changing in terms of how and where care is delivered, who is providing those services, and how that care is financed. Healthcare management requires talented people to manage the changes taking place. In their roles, healthcare executives have an opportunity to make a significant contribution to improving the health of the communities their organizations serve.
Nature of Work
The work of hospital administrators is challenging, responsible and difficult. Hospital administrators manage hospitals, outpatient clinics, hospices, and drug-abuse treatment centers. In large hospitals, there may be several administrators, one for each department. In smaller facilities, they oversee the day-to-day operations of all departments. Administrators make sure hospitals operate efficiently and provide adequate medical care to patients. They act as liaisons between governing boards, medical staff, and department heads and integrate the activities of all departments so they function as a whole. Administrators recruit, hire, and sometimes train doctors, nurses, interns, and assistant administrators. Administrators plan budgets and set rates for health services. In research hospitals, administrators develop and expand programs and services for scientific research and preventive medicine. In teaching hospitals, they aid in the education of new doctors. Administrators plan departmental activities, evaluate doctors and other hospital employees, create and maintain policies, help develop procedures for medical treatments, quality assurance, patient services, and public relations activities such as active participation in fund-raising and community health planning. Hospital administrators work long or irregular hours. Hospitals are open round the clock 24/7 and administrators may be called in at any hour to make decisions and resolve disputes. Administrators also attend staff meetings, participate in health planning councils, go to fund-raising events, and travel to professional association conventions. They need to keep up with advances in medicine, computerized diagnostic and treatment equipment, data processing technology, government regulations, health insurance changes, and financing options. While doctors strive to keep the blood flowing and the heart beating, the hospital administrator is doing his job in keeping the hospital alive and healthy.
The work of hospital managers, therefore, includes the recruitment and management of other staff, the maintenance of the hospital and of services other than medical services, accounts and finance, marketing and communications and security. Hospital managers work from the premises of the hospital and need to be physically present in the hospital complex. They need to walk around the hospital and monitor the different services. They also need to maintain good communications with the management and staff of all departments, doctors and medical specialists, para-medical staff, health workers, and ensure the well-being of all patients.
Besides an understanding of the functions of the different departments, hospital managers should be familiar with financial operations, personnel management, purchase of materials and storage, organisational development and patient care.
Anyone opting for a career in hospital administration should have a blend of some unique qualities like innovation, responsibility, self motivation & devotion towards humanity. To be a successful healthcare professional a person requires a service-oriented bent of mind, high emotional quotient and the ability to work for long hours. The sector also offers prospects of global recognition with medical tourism becoming more widespread. Service to man is service to God should be motto of a hospital administrator.
Because health services and medical managers are responsible for hundreds of employees and very expensive equipment and facilities, they must be able to make effective decisions, interpret data, and understand information systems and finance. Strong leadership skills are necessary to motivate and execute their decisions. Communication skills, diplomacy, flexibility, and tact are critical because of their constant interaction with people.
For making a career in Hospital Administration the individual may be from medical or non-medical background. Pre-requisite for career in hospital administration is graduation (medical/non-medical) and a degree/diploma in Hospital Administration.
There are many courses available in the field of Hospital Administration for both medical and non-medical persons e.g. Bachelor of Hospital Administration (BHA) after 10+2/XII standard, Post Graduate Diploma in Hospital Administration (PGDHA) after graduation in any subject, Master of Hospital Administration (MHA) or MBA (Hospital Administration) after graduation in any field, as well as M Phil (Hospital Administration) after MHA.
The primary objective of the courses is to impart training to medical and non-medical students to empower them to deliver world-class healthcare with a service focus. Indeed, there is a great need for excellently trained hospital administrators, who can deliver and maintain high standards in healthcare.
The programme combines training in management skills, management principles, accounting and business communication, along with specialized knowledge on the working of a hospital, marketing of hospital services and logistics management. You also get to know about basic healthcare and nutrition, prevention of communicable diseases, community health and other medical related services.
How to choose the Course/Institute?
The selection of the course/institute depends on personal interest and ofcourse economic conditions of an individual. Three different Modes of courses are available. Students can opt for Full Time Regular Course, Part Time Course or Correspondence Course. The employment opportunity is more for full time regular course & this is suitable for non-working candidates, at the same time for working individuals part time course or correspondence course is the option. The selection of institute is one of the important factors to make a better future in hospital administration. Some top institutes provide better placement or even campus selection e.g. TISS, Mumbai, IIHMR, Jaipur, etc. The desired institute must be selected on the basis of previous placement records of the institute which is the prime factor for a better tomorrow. PG Diploma course and correspondence course can be selected by those having medical background e.g. MBBS.
Colleges, Institutions and Universities
- All India Institute of Medical Sciences
- Apollo Institute of Hospital Administration
Apollo Hospital Campus
Phone 040-23543269 / 23607777
- Birla Institute of Technology
Vidhya Vihar Campus,
Pilani, Rajasthan- 333031
- Tata Institute of Social Sciences
P.O. Box 8313 , Deonar, Mumbai 400 088
Ph:22-2556 3289/ 90/ 91/ 92/ 93/ 94/ 95/ 96
- Symbiosis Centre of Health Car
Senapati Bapat Road, Pune - 411004,
- Armed Forces Medical College, Pune
Armed Forces Medical College, Wanowrie, Pune - 411040
- Kasturba Medical College,
Manipal Kasturba Medical College (KMC)
Phone: +91 820 2571201 - 2571230.
Fax: +91 820 2571927, 2570061, 2570062
- Indian Institute of social Welfare and Management College
Square West, Kolkata-700 073
Phone :+91-33-22413648 /3756 /5792 /8694
Fax : +91-33-2241 3975
- Nizam Institute of Medical Sciences, Hyderabad
Nizam Institute of Medical Sciences,Hyderabad 500 082
- Faculty of Management Studies (FMS),
Delhi University New Delhi Faculty of Management Studies, University of Delhi
Delhi - 110007
Tel : +91 11 2766 7419 / 7017
Fax : +91 11 2766 7002
- Hinduja Institute of Healthcare Management, Hyderabad
ASCI-Hinduja Institute of Healthcare Management
College Park Campus
Road No 3, Banjara Hills
Hyderabad -- 500 034
Phone: 040-23355053/ 23310952
Web site: www.asci-hihm.org
- Devi Ahilya Institute of Hospital Administration, Indore
Institute Of Management Studies
Devi Ahilya University
Khandwa Road, Indore(M.P)
Phone: 91-731-478800/470022 Fax: 91-731-476687/763618
Web site: www.davv.ac.in
- Indian Institute of Health Management Research (IIHMR)
Prabhu Dayal Marg, Sanganer Airport, Jaipur - 302011.
Ph- 0141-2791431-34 Fax-0141- 2792138
Web site: www.iihmr.org
The career prospects for the young postgraduates in Hospital Management are excellent. It is a well known fact that hospitals, healthcare organizations are to be managed professionally like any business entity creating surplus for survival and growth. The emerging health insurance sector adds to the prospects of these professionals. The scope indeed is large enough to provide ample job opportunities.
Healthcare is a business and, like every other business, it needs good management to keep it running smoothly. The term "medical and health services manager" applies to those professionals who plan, direct, coordinate, and supervise the delivery of healthcare.
No wonder large companies like Apollo, Wockhardt, Max, Fortis, Tata and Duncans are setting up state-of-the-art hospitals and clinics across the country for providing multi-speciality healthcare services. Moreover, due to the high costs and shortage of doctors for medical treatment in the West, India is emerging as an alternative centre for medical treatment All this action translates into growing opportunities for healthcare professionals, not just doctors, nurses and technicians, but managers and administrators as well. who have an understanding of general management and its application to the healthcare delivery systems.
So if you are good with people, have patience, tact and communication skills you can look at a fulfilling career as a manager or consultant with a hospital, nursing home or clinic, working to help people with medical problems. With some experience you could also set up a nursing home or hospital.
The average starting salary for Hospital Administrator varies from Rs 12,000 to Rs 40,000 per month according to the Institute. There is no constraint in higher remuneration for deserving candidates.
Employment opportunity is excellent in the field of Hospital Administration if you select a good course and institute. Because of a growing health services industry, the employment of health services and medical managers is expanding day by day. Increasing opportunities will be found in large corporate hospitals private/govt, Clinics Consulting firms, Health insurance organizations, Healthcare associations, Nursing homes, Mental health organizations, Public health departments, Rehabilitation centers, Universities and research institutions.
Today, an estimated 100,000 people occupy health management positions at numerous organizational levels, from department head to chief executive officer. Requirements for senior-level positions in healthcare organizations are demanding, but these jobs also offer opportunities to improve the system of care giving. Thus, the overall conclusion is Hospital Administration is not only a career rather an opportunity to serve the humanity.