ST. JOSEPH, MO--(Marketwire - November 08, 2011) -
Diabetes isn't just a human disease. This November -- American Diabetes Month® -- pet owners should know that the feline members of their families could suffer from the condition, too.
Type 2 diabetes is the most common form in the United States and occurs in both cats and people. Feline diabetes, a treatable and manageable disease on the rise, affects approximately one in 200 cats nationwide(1).
"Similar to humans, obesity predisposes cats to diabetes, making diet a major factor in maintaining a cat's health," says Ruth MacPete, DVM, a San Diego based veterinarian "Feline diabetes, like most diseases, is easier to treat the earlier it is diagnosed."
Early warning signs include:
- Increased thirst
- Sudden increase in appetite
- Sudden weight loss (despite an increase in appetite)
- Increased urination
- Increased lethargy
Most cats with feline diabetes may still maintain an active and healthy lifestyle. Along with appropriate diet and exercise, veterinarians often recommend insulin injections.
"Veterinarians are fortunate enough to now have PROZINC, the first and only FDA approved protamine zinc insulin. PROZINC has an appropriate duration of effect specifically for cats, making it an ideal first choice to help them regulate their feline diabetic patients." says MacPete. As with all insulins, cats should be evaluated for pre-existing conditions and currently prescribed medications prior to treatment with PROZINC. Routine monitoring of clinical signs and blood parameters, such as glucose and fructosamine, is essential to maintain a regulated cat.
PROZINC is for use in cats only. The safety and effectiveness of PROZINC insulin in kittens and in breeding, pregnant, and lactating cats has not been evaluated.
While November is American Diabetes Month®, pet owners should monitor their cats for symptoms of feline diabetes year-round. The American Association of Feline Practitioners recommends that a veterinarian examine cats at least once a year and twice annually if they are over the age of seven(2).
For more information about feline diabetes, please visit www.MyCatHasDiabetes.com.
For more information about PROZINC, please visit www.prozinc.us.
About Boehringer Ingelheim Vetmedica, Inc.
Boehringer Ingelheim Vetmedica, Inc. (St. Joseph, MO), is a subsidiary of Boehringer Ingelheim Corporation based in Ridgefield, CT and a member of the Boehringer Ingelheim group of companies.
The Boehringer Ingelheim group is one of the world's 20 leading pharmaceutical companies. Headquartered in Ingelheim, Germany, it operates globally with 145 affiliates and more than 42,000 employees. Since it was founded in 1885, the family-owned company has been committed to researching, developing, manufacturing and marketing novel products of high therapeutic value for human and veterinary medicine.
For Boehringer Ingelheim -- and its employees -- carrying a good share of social responsibility is an important component in its business culture. Both global commitments in social projects and properly caring for all its employees are included. Respect, equal opportunity, and the balance of career and family life form the basis for mutual cooperation. And, environmental protection and sustainability are always the main focus during any of Boehringer Ingelheim's undertakings.
In 2010, Boehringer Ingelheim posted net sales of approximately $16.7 billion (about 12.6 billion euro) while spending almost 24% of net sales in its largest business segment, Prescription Medicines, on research and development.
For more information, please visit http://us.boehringer-ingelheim.com and follow us on Twitter at http://twitter.com/boehringerus.
For more information, please visit: www.bi-vetmedica.com
(1.) Nelson RW. Disorders of the Endocrine Pancreas. In: Nelson RW, Couto CG, eds. Small Animal Internal Medicine. 4th ed. St. Louis, MO: Mosby Elsevier; 2008:764-802.
(2.) Pittari, J, Rodan I, Beekman G, et al. American Association of Feline Practitioners' senior care guidelines. J Feline Med Surg 2009 11: 763-78.