Our professional development videos will help you learn and implement successful teaching strategies for elementary mathematics. These videos include workshops, activities, and educators' advice about developing measurement concepts in your classroom. There are great tips from John Van de Walle, celebrated math instructor and best-selling textbook author, about teaching children the fundamentals of measurement and how this can change your approach in the classroom.
You can purchase the Van de Walle Professional Mathematics Series, which provides practical guidance along with proven strategies for practicing teachers, directly from the publisher's Website.
During this measurement activity, students learn about volume by examining the capacity of several containers.
Children use 36 tiles to explore fixed areas, in this classroom math activity.
Measurement vs. Geometry
John Van de Walle makes a distinction between measurement and geometry, in this interview.
The Meaning of Measurement
In this interview, John Van de Walle discusses how to teach children what it means to measure.
Learn a student-centered approach for teaching children to measure area without a ruler.
John Van de Walle discusses degrees, wedges, and a student-centered strategy for teaching students about angles and protractors.
Further enhance your math curriculum with more Professional Development Resources for Teaching Measurement, Grades K-5.
Asian-Pacific-American Heritage Month
May is Asian-Pacific-American Heritage Month! Don't overlook this opportunity to study and enjoy activities about the history and culture of Asian-Pacific American communities.
Top 10 Galleries
Explore our most popular Top 10 galleries, from Top 10 Behavior Management Tips for the Classroom and Top 10 Classroom Organization Tips from Veteran Teachers to Top 10 Free (& Cheap) Rewards for Students and Top 10 Things Every Teacher Needs in the Classroom. We'll help you get organized and prepared for every classroom situation, holiday, and more! Check out all of our galleries today.
May Calendar of Events
May is full of holidays and events that you can incorporate into your standard curriculum. Our Educators' Calendar outlines activities for each event, including: Children's Book Week (5/13-19), Biographers Day (5/16), and Memorial Day (5/27). Plus, celebrate Asian-Pacific-American Heritage Month, Clean Air Month, and Physical Fitness & Sports Month all May long!
Common Core Lessons & Resources
Is your school district adopting the Common Core? Work these new standards into your curriculum with our reading, writing, speaking, social studies, and math lessons and activities. Each piece of content incorporates the Common Core State Standards into the activity or lesson.