At Medical Express Clinic – the award winning Harley Street Clinic, we offer everything you need to keep your kidneys and your body healthy.
If you have high blood pressure, diabetes or a family history of kidney failure you should visit your nearest private gp practices in London and consult with your doctor, because you may have an increased risk of developing kidney disease. Even if you are not in an ‘at risk’ category taking care of these critically important organs is very important.
There are things you can do that will keep your kidneys healthy and functioning properly all through your life.
Bear in mind that there is no scientific evidence that over-hydration enhances kidney function.
Our kidneys are capable of coping with diverse dietary habits. Most problems with the kidneys stem from other conditions such as diabetes or high blood pressure. Following healthy eating habits will keep your weight and your blood pressure under control.
If you are healthy, exercise regularly because, like eating healthily taking regular exercise helps avoid high blood pressure and weight gain, but if you’re not conditioned to exercise this may strain your kidneys, so ask us first.
Overdoing supplements can harm the kidneys. Talk to us about any herbs or vitamins you want to include in your diet.
Smoking can cause damage to blood vessels, decreasing the blood flow within the kidneys. They will then fail to function properly. High blood pressure risk also increases with smoking, will also increases the risk of high blood pressure as well as cancer of the kidney.
Common non-prescription over the counter pills (NSAID’s) can, if taken often and for a long time, cause kidney damage. If your kidneys are healthy and you use these medicines only occasionally for pain they should not be a risk. If, however you have a condition like arthritis or chronic pain talk to us about monitoring kidney function or finding other suitable pain control solutions.
If you suffer from hypertension (high blood pressure) or diabetes we can screen you for and kidney dysfunction as part of a routine care package that monitors those conditions.
There are many causes and symptoms of kidney infections like unitary tract infections. The best thing is to visit our harley street medical clinic to keep your kidneys healthy and functional. This will reduce the chances of developing diseases that affect your kidneys.
Eat healthily, take regular exercise and keep weight under control. These healthy practices will ensure that everything, including your kidneys, stay healthy.