The year was 2356, and humanity was facing an existential threat of extinction. The Tahexo, an interplanetary collective of aliens, came across planet Earth in their search for rare materials. With shapeshifting abilities, the Tahexo assumed human forms to infiltrate Earth's population, hoping to discover what resources dominate the planet. The aliens discovered something more enticing than minerals: sugar. The Tahexo's planets didn't support the production of sugarcane, thus, the sensation of a chocolate bar hitting their tastebuds for the first time was enough to ignite an unsatiable desire for sweetness. With this, the Great Intergalactic Sugar War had begun.

After mobilizing their force of 100,000 on Earth's surface, the Tahexo revealed their true form and superior weaponry to intimidate farmers worldwide into relinquishing their sugar crops with little resistance. These world's militaries united to protect Earth's sugar. But they were no match. The troops were unable to match the sophistication of the Tahexo's ranged weaponry. The UN assembled once again to discuss what could be done to ward off these invaders. They all agreed there was only one hope for saving humanity: George Washington. 

While still a nascent technology, scientists discovered a way of taking DNA from human remains and injecting it into a blank-slate, lab-grown body to give life to the deceased. The plan worked, and George Washington was born again. However, Washington quickly realized that he too was no match for these aliens. He went for a walk to make a plan when he came across a family of moles burrowing in the ground. He said hello to the moles, and, to his surprise, the mole responded in kind. In the process of extracting his DNA, scientists accidentally gathered some mole DNA from the ground where he was resting. Realizing this newfound ability, Washington explained to the moles what was happening and convinced the moles to help defeat the Tahexo.

Moles worldwide began digging under the alien fortifications. Using their hole-digging abilities, they were able to sink the aliens into the ground on which they sat. The aliens were no match for the cunning moles who sunk every last alien into their holes. Not long after, there were no remaining Tahexo left on the surface of Earth. The war was won and the sugar was saved all thanks to George Washington and his moles!
