Swine flu may have temporarily burned out in Houston, but that doesn’t mean it’s all hunky dory out there. Local doctors report that the H1N1 virus has been replaced by another highly contagious seasonal virus.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
RSV season, which typically goes from November to December, has arrived in Houston.
The respiratory syncytial virus, or RSV, which causes inflammation of the lungs and respiratory tract and is particularly dangerous in premature infants, has been circulating widely in Texas since November. The Texas Department of Health and Human Services reports the virus has been increasing in the state the last three weeks, culminating in positive tests in nearly 20 percent of suspected cases the last week of November, the latest for which data is available.
At Houston’s Texas Children’s Hospital, 14 percent of patients tested for RSV in November were positive, up from 2 percent in October.
“RSV is definitely the most common virus we are detecting now in children being tested for viral respiratory disease here at Texas Children’s,” said Dr. Gail Demmler-Harrison, a Baylor College of Medicine pediatrician and director of Texas Children’s diagnostic virology laboratory.
In a study earlier this year, RSV was found to be far more common than previously believed, annually sending 2.1 million children under the age of 5 to the doctor or hospital, most of them otherwise healthy. It found that 20 percent of children hospitalized for respiratory symptoms had RSV, a rate three times higher than those for most seasonal influenzas or influenza-like viruses.
A vaccine for RSV is under development.
In the meantime, doctors stress the same sort of common-sense precautions for RSV as for swine flu — hand-washing, avoiding contact with people with fevers or colds. The most common symptoms are congested or runny noses, dry cough, low-grade fever, sore throat, mild headache and general feeling of unease and discomfort. Definitely contact your doctor if the symptoms are more severe — high fever, wheezing, rapid breathing or difficulty breathing, bluish color of the skin due to lack of oxygen.