logging in or signing up Asian Alphabet Book 04 17 06 Peppar Download Post to : URL : Related Presentations : Share Add to Flag Embed Email Send to Blogs and Networks Add to Channel Uploaded from authorPOINT Insert YouTube videos in PowerPont slides with aS Desktop Copy embed code: Embed: Flash iPad Dynamic Copy Does not support media & animations Automatically changes to Flash or non-Flash embed WordPress Embed Customize Embed URL: Copy Thumbnail: Copy The presentation is successfully added In Your Favorites. Views: 2663 Category: Entertainment License: All Rights Reserved Like it (4) Dislike it (0) Added: August 07, 2007 This Presentation is Public Favorites: 0 Presentation Description No description available. Comments Posting comment... Premium member Presentation Transcript Asian Alphabet Book: Asian Alphabet Book Paul Deaton 5th Period Geography April 17, 2006 A is for Atoll: A is for Atoll An atoll is a low, ring-shaped island surrounding a lagoon and is found often in the Maldives. Atolls in the Maldives are beautiful islands for tourists, whose money helps the local economy. B is for Buddhism: B is for Buddhism Buddhism is a major religion in southwest Asia. This religion teaches a better life in reincarnation and appeals to Asian people who live hard lives and have little comfort. C is for Cyclone: C is for Cyclone Cyclones are Pacific Ocean storms that may strike countries like Bangladesh after the monsoons end. Cyclones, like their Atlantic cousins hurricanes, cause massive death and destruction to anywhere in Asia near the ocean. D is for Dynasty: D is for Dynasty A Dynasty is a line of rulers from a single family, such as the Chinese Ming Dynasty. Under the dynasties, China conquered neighboring lands and built a highly-developed culture. E is for Mount Everest: E is for Mount Everest Mt. Everest is the highest mountain in the world and is in Nepal, the most mountainous country in the world. Mt. Everest attracts thousands of climbers each year and brings in many tourist dollars to Nepal, a poor country. F is for Mt. Fuji: F is for Mt. Fuji Mt. Fuji is a dormant volcano and Japan’s highest mountain and national symbol. Mt. Fuji is a historical and religious symbol for the people of Japan. G is for the Great Wall of China: G is for the Great Wall of China The Great Wall exists from east to west for over 4,000 miles across China and still stands today. The Great Wall was started in about 770 B.C. to keep out Mongolian invaders and was completed about 476 B.C. H is for Ho Chi Minh (1890 – 1969): H is for Ho Chi Minh (1890 – 1969) Ho Chi Minh was a Vietnamese revolutionary and statesman who later became Prime Minister and President of North Vietnam. Ho Chi Minh is one of the most well-known Vietnamese because of his leading role in the war between North and South Vietnam as well as being the eternal spiritual leader of the current Vietnamese Communist regime. I is for Islamabad: I is for Islamabad Islamabad is the capitol of Pakistan and is located on the Pothohar Plateau. Built in the 1960s to replace Karachi as the capitol, Islamabad is a cultural and political center in Pakistan. J is for Jakarta: J is for Jakarta Jakarta, located on the island of Java, is the Indonesian capitol and largest city. A modern city with colonial roots, Jakarta is now a thriving community. K is for Kamikaze: K is for Kamikaze Kamikaze, a Japanese word, refers to the suicide attacks by Japanese pilots against Allied forces in the Pacific in World War II. Kamikaze tactics were unconventional to western warfare but were an effective tactic for Japan against our large warships. L is for Lagoon : L is for Lagoon Beautiful lagoons are found in many islands in the Maldives. Lagoons are an important part of the tourist industry in the Maldives, as they are popular with swimmers and divers alike. M is for Mahatma Gandhi(1869 – 1948): M is for Mahatma Gandhi (1869 – 1948) Mahatma Gandhi became one of the pivotal figures in India’s history in the Twentieth Century. Gandhi preached passive resistance in India toward British rule, believing that acts of violence against the British only provoked a negative reaction. N is for Nomads : N is for Nomads Nomads are communities of people who move from place to place, rather than settling down in one location. The Mongolian people started out as nomads but eventually settled down in their present location. O is for Osaka: O is for Osaka Osaka is the third-largest city in Japan, with a population of 2.7 million. Osaka is the historical commercial capital of Japan and is still one of Japan’s major industrial centers and ports P is for Pagoda: P is for Pagoda A pagoda is a term in the English language for a tiered tower with multiple eaves common in China, Japan and Korea. Most pagodas were built to have a religious function to Buddhists and were often located in or near temples. Q is for Quetta: Q is for Quetta Quetta is an important military station in Pakistan, with native people known for their friendliness and hospitality. Quetta occupies a vital and strategic position since the boundaries of Iran and Afghanistan meet there and the Bolan Pass lies on important lines of communications. R is for Reincarnation: R is for Reincarnation Reincarnation literally means 'to be made flesh again', and is a mystical belief that holds the notion that one's spirit returns to the material world after physical death to be reborn in a new body. Reincarnation is a central belief in Hinduism, Sikhism, Buddhism and other Asian religions S is for Siddhartha Guatama (560 - 480 B.C.): S is for Siddhartha Guatama (560 - 480 B.C.) Siddhartha Guatama was a spiritual teacher who was born in Lumbini, a town in Nepal near the border with India. He became 'the Buddha' after embarking on a quest for spiritual meaning and is universally recognized by Buddhists as the Supreme Buddha of the current age. T is for Taj Mahal: T is for Taj Mahal The Taj Mahal in Agra, India is considered one of Seven Wonders of the World. The history of the Taj Mahal is a love story that transcends time and continues to be retold each day to the tourists who visit the famous mausoleum. U is for Ulaanbataar: U is for Ulaanbataar Ulaanbaatar, also known as Ulan Bator, is the capital of Mongolia. Ulaanbaatar is the largest city in Mongolia, having almost 1/3 of the total population of the country. V is for The Vietnam War: V is for The Vietnam War The Vietnam War or Second Indochina War was a conflict between the Democratic Republic of Vietnam (North Vietnam) and the Republic of Vietnam (South Vietnam). U.S. troops were allied with South Vietnam and were involved in a losing effort from 1965 until the official withdrawal in 1973. W is for Wood-Block Printing: W is for Wood-Block Printing Woodblock printing, originating in China sometime between the mid-6th and late 9th centuries, is a technique for making text or images from wood cuts, paper and ink. The world's earliest dated printed book, a Chinese Diamond Sutra text of 868 A.D., was created with woodblocks. X is for The Xi Jian River: X is for The Xi Jian River The Xi Jian River is a river located in the southeast of China, in the southern province of Guangdong. The Xi Jian region is one of the most productive mining regions in China and is known for its deposits of tungsten, lead, zinc, and gold. Y is for Yurt: Y is for Yurt Yurt is the name commonly used to refer to a Mongolian Felt Tent or Ger and is a portable dwelling traditionally used by the Nomads in the steppes of Central Asia. The design of yurts has been developed for generations to suit the needs of the nomads -- it can be warm in arctic cold, yet cool in summer and the structure can collapse small enough to fit on one draft animal and can be set up again in a half an hour. Z is for Mao Zedong (1893–1976): Z is for Mao Zedong (1893–1976) Mao Zedong, born a peasant in the Hunan province of China, was the founder of the People's Republic of China. Mao was one of the most prominent Communist theoreticians and his ideas on revolutionary struggle and guerrilla warfare have been extremely influential, especially among Third World revolutionaries. You do not have the permission to view this presentation. In order to view it, please contact the author of the presentation.