Skip to main content
Skip to main navigation
You are here:
are producing medical advances that improve how we fight diseases such as
diabetes, cancer and asthma. Here you can learn what that progress looks like
for common health conditions. You'll see how far we've come and what new hope is
on the horizon. Be sure to check out the latest headlines and current trials in
need of volunteers. When you hear from patients in their own words, you may be
inspired to join a clinical trial too.
Research is making important progress in understanding how Alzheimer’s
affects the brain, and a number of promising therapies are in clinical
Important advances in treating
rheumatoid arthritis have proven to slow the progression of this degenerative
disease. New therapies for osteoarthritis are reducing inflammation and control
When treated properly, asthma no longer
puts the same limits on patients it once did. Research was dramatically
improved asthma treatment with medicines that relieve acute attacks and control
Clinical research is helping unravel
some of cancer's secrets to save and improve more lives. If more cancer
patients joined clinical trials, that progress could accelerate.
Heart disease is the number one cause of death in the world, but research and treatment have come a long way in the last ten years.
Pain affects everyone of all
ages. It may be temporary like migraine or long-term like arthritis. Recent
advances in pain management include new agents to target specific kinds of
Experts estimate that more than 120
million people suffer from depressive disorders. But we've made great strides
in the past 30 years. Today, depression is highly treatable with better
medicines that can control symptoms with fewer side effects.
This life-threatening disease is increasing worldwide at epidemic
rates. But the good news is the research pipeline holds more than 500 potential
medicines for both type 1 and type 2 diabetes.
GI diseases include irritable bowel syndrome
(IBS), Crohn's disease and colitis. Although some digestive disorders may be
managed by diet and medication, clinical trials offer hope for new
Significant progress is being made in Lupus research, and today, people with lupus can live full, active lives at home and at work.
Advances in genetics and stem cell therapy offer hope to improve
treatment and quality of life for people suffering from this debilitating