BOOK REVIEW ON CITIES AS SUSTAINABLE ECOSYSTEMS: PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICES. Authors: Peter Newman and Isabella Jennings
AbstractThe book is a positive image of how cities can contribute not only to a better economic and social future but also a profoundly better ecological future. "Cities as Sustainable Ecosystems" shows how cities can begin to reintegrate into their bioregional environment and planned taking into account nature's organizing principles. Therefore, professor Peter Newman and Isabella Jennings reassess urban design by exploring flows of energy, materials, and information, along with the interactions between human and non-human parts of the system. "Cities as Sustainable Ecosystems" describes aspects of urban ecosystems, being a powerful model for urban redevelopment
Download InfoIf you experience problems downloading a file, check if you have the proper application to view it first. In case of further problems read the IDEAS help page. Note that these files are not on the IDEAS site. Please be patient as the files may be large.
Bibliographic InfoArticle provided by Research Centre in Public Administration and Public Services, Bucharest, Romania in its journal Theoretical and Empirical Researches in Urban Management.
Volume (Year): 4 (2009)
Issue (Month): 2(11) (May)
Sustainable Ecosystems; urban development; urban ecosystems;
Find related papers by JEL classification:
- Y30 - Miscellaneous Categories - - Book Reviews - - - Book Reviews
- R00 - Urban, Rural, Regional, Real Estate, and Transportation Economics - - General - - - General
- O18 - Economic Development, Technological Change, and Growth - - Economic Development - - - Urban, Rural, Regional, and Transportation Analysis; Housing; Infrastructure
You can help add them by filling out this form.
reading list or among the top items on IDEAS.Access and download statistics
For technical questions regarding this item, or to correct its authors, title, abstract, bibliographic or download information, contact: (Colesca Sofia).
If references are entirely missing, you can add them using this form.