By year's end, the Great Sphinx of Giza is to re-emerge in unfettered glory, stripped of scaffolding for the first time in a decade on the completion of the most extensive repair work undertaken since it was unburied from the sands by French explorers a century and a half ago.
The Sphinx has undergone countless such repairs, and yet it remains a source of boundless fascination -- part lion, part god, part Pharaoh; so old that it was ancient even to the ancient Greeks; sentry for millenniums to the Great Pyramids on the plateau above.
Might there be something else the sculptured beast is guarding?
That question has been asked for as long as the Sphinx has reigned, and now, just as workers are applying the finishing touches to a new protective limestone coat, it is being asked with urgency by visitors to this site on the outskirts of Cairo.
''Zahi Hawass has basically obstructed us,'' said John Anthony West, an American author and tour leader whose accusation is typical of the vitriol that has turned what might have been the year of the Sphinx into one of bitterness and backbiting.
At issue is whether Egyptian officials are blocking research that might shed new light on the Sphinx and its origins. But because many of the accusers have relied more heavily on mysticism and speculation than on science, the response from officials like Dr. Hawass, the director of the Pyramids, has been been equally scathing.
''I call them the Pyramidiots,'' Dr. Hawass said of the most outspoken of his critics, who believe that beneath the Sphinx there may lie an undiscovered secret chamber containing the records of an advanced civilization lost to history.
In Greek, Roman and ancient Arab texts, there is much speculation that something may indeed lie beneath the Sphinx, perhaps inspired by ancient hieroglyphics that depict the sculpture as sitting atop a pedestal with a doorway beneath it.
But while ancient and modern researchers have probed various cracks and tunnels, they have found no sign of a pedestal, a doorway or the secret chamber that an American mystic, Edgar Allen Cayce, claimed to have seen in a vision. Mr. Cayce died in 1945.
But in one way or another, his vision of buried secrets has inspired a widening band of followers, including Mr. West, who produced a 1993 NBC television film about the quest, and two authors, Graham Hancock and Robert Bouvall, whose best-selling book in 1996, ''The Message of the Sphinx,'' points to what they say are scientific facts to support some of Mr. Cayce's contentions.
Borrowing variously from seismography, geology and astronomy, all have argued that there is ample reason to believe that the Sphinx, and perhaps the Great Pyramid itself, were built not by the ancient Egyptians about 2600 B.C., but thousands of years earlier, at a time when there is no evidence of any advanced civilization anywhere on earth.
All have also said there is ample reason to believe that the hidden chamber may lie somewhere beneath the Sphinx's paws and that its contents -- Mr. Cayce called it the Hall of Records -- may contain the secrets of Atlantis.
And because Mr. Cayce predicted that 1998 would bring about first the discovery of the Hall of Records and then the Second Coming of Christ, the issue of delving into the ground beneath the Sphinx is seen by some with growing urgency.
''We will all begin to understand more fully what it's all about,'' John Van Auken, a disciple of Mr. Cayce, said before leading a group of 52 Americans on a tour that included special access to areas near the paws of the Sphinx -- a proximity prized by those who come to Giza not only to marvel at the wonders above the sands, but also to wonder at the marvels that may lie beneath them.