Home > Patients & Visitors > Health Library > Interactive Tool: How Does Smoking Increase Your Risk of Heart Attack?
tool helps you find out how smoking affects
your chance of having a heart attack in the next 10 years. The information for this tool is based on
the Framingham Heart Study. Since 1948 the Framingham Heart Study has studied
the progression of heart disease and the risk factors of heart disease.
If you smoke and also have other
risk factors for heart disease, your risk may be higher than this tool says it is.
Your score will appear
in values from 1% to 99%. If your score is Nonsmoker: 2%
and Smoker: 6%, it means that for your age and gender 2
out of 100 nonsmokers compared with 6 out of 100 smokers will have a heart
attack in the next 10 years. In this example, smokers are 3 times more likely
than nonsmokers to have a heart attack in the next 10 years.
If you are concerned about your score,
talk to your doctor about lowering your risk for a heart attack. Quitting
smoking may be the most important step you can take to reduce your risk of
heart disease. According to the World Health Organization, the risk of coronary
artery disease decreases by 50% in the first year after quitting. You can start lowering your risk right away by quitting smoking.
more, see the topic
Other Works Consulted
Grundy SM, et al. (2001). Executive summary of the third report of the National Cholesterol Education Program (NCEP) Expert Panel on Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Cholesterol in Adults (Adult Treatment Panel III). JAMA, 285(19): 2486–2497.
Grundy SM, et al. (2004). Implications of recent clinical trials of the National Cholesterol Education Program Adult Treatment Panel III Guidelines. Circulation, 110(2): 227–239. [Erratum in Circulation, 110(6): 763.]
National Cholesterol Education Program and National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, a part of the National Institutes of Health and the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2004). Risk Assessment tool for estimating your 10-year risk of having a heart attack. Available online: http://hp2010.nhlbihin.net/atpiii/calculator.asp.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (2010). A Report of the Surgeon
General: How tobacco smoke causes disease: The biology and
behavioral basis for smoking-attributable disease. Available online: http://www.surgeongeneral.gov/library/tobaccosmoke/report/full_report.pdf.
ByHealthwise StaffPrimary Medical ReviewerKathleen Romito, MD - Family MedicineMartin J. Gabica, MD - Family MedicineSpecialist Medical ReviewerRobert A. Kloner, MD, PhD - Cardiology
Current as ofJanuary 27, 2016
Current as of:
January 27, 2016
Kathleen Romito, MD - Family Medicine & Martin J. Gabica, MD - Family Medicine & Robert A. Kloner, MD, PhD - Cardiology
To learn more about Healthwise, visit Healthwise.org.
© 1995-2016 Healthwise, Incorporated. Healthwise, Healthwise for every health decision, and the Healthwise logo are trademarks of Healthwise, Incorporated.
Our interactive Decision Points guide you through making key health decisions by combining medical information with your personal information.
You'll find Decision Points to help you answer questions about:
Get started learning more about your health!
Our Interactive Tools can help you make smart decisions for a healthier life. You'll find personal calculators and tools for health and fitness, lifestyle checkups and pregnancy.
Feeling under the weather?
Use our interactive symptom checker to evaluate your symptoms and determine appropriate action or treatment.