21-Day Habit Formation: What Is Your Next Big Thing?
Truly brain is power. Even those who hate exercise might just find themselves loving it after 21 days!
Habits can create a cascade of positive or negative impact in you life. Your habits can directly determine your achievements and failures. This is why it is important to examine your habits and be sensitive to generate new ones if needed. The good news is it only takes 21 days to make or break a habit. It has been said that anything you do with repetition and emotion will become your reality. Good habits make a good life. Bad habits can stunt growth and even hurt your overall well-being.
This 21-day habit formation theory says your brain circuits produce neuro-connections and neuro-pathways from engrams or memory traces fed to it for 21 days in a row. This means that your brain only accepts a new data pushing for a change of habit when repeated for 21 days - without missing a day.
Athletes know too well how important it is to stick to habits, especially in training. But most people struggle with their day to day practice of exercising. Though the value of exercise cannot be overrated, many could not just get themselves into it. The problem for these people is that they attack their issues with too much energy in the beginning and then give up if they don't see instant results.
How about devoting 21 days to develop your own exercise regimen? Here are some tips to help you pull through.
1. Set a goal. Know what you want. Visualize the habit in your head.
2. Make a specific list of the benefits of your new habit. Jot down what it can do for you, burning of calories, losing unwanted pounds, higher energy levels, improved immune system.
3. Commit to the habit. When you get all things set and prepared, check if you have the full heart to jumpstart it. Never start doing something without taking your heart into it. If you do things half-heartedly, you can't expect great results.
4. Baby steps count. So, make sure you have divided your big goal into segments and reward yourself each time.
5. Start slowly. Choose to be consistent than being a showtime-performer. Choose short exercises at first and gradually, increase your workout intensity. If your goal is to do daily push-ups, it's better to start by doing five push up's every day for three weeks than doing 20 push-ups for two days and then giving up.
6. Motivate yourself. Pick up a good habit and drop an unhealthy one like quitting smoking. Use a certain day, for example, Monday to recommit, if there are times you fall off track. You have 52 chances a year to get motivated to make a change in your life. Set a day to do things for your health.
To learn more about the benefits of exercise, please visit www.sherpa-strength.com.