When Anxiety Leads to Panic Disorder
Recurring attacks of panic and fear accompanied by physical symptoms are signs of panic disorder.
Everyone knows that unsettling feeling of panic. It comes over you when you realize that you forgot something or got something wrong, for instance, and your palms get clammy, your heart pounds, and you can't catch your breath. But most people can usually rationalize in their head that things are okay, calm themselves down, and breathe easily again.
For people with panic disorder, however, rational thinking doesn’t bring that response. People who have an anxiety disorder like panic disorder just can't cope with the anxiety that they feel, and it gets worse and worse until panic sets in.
Panic Disorder: Extreme Anxiety
"Some people would say that panic disorder has a true physiological basis. I would say that panic disorder represents an extreme version of what I call the universal anxiety that people have," says Charles Goodstein, MD, a clinical professor of psychiatry at New York University Langone Medical Center. “Panic disorder shows generally the true inability to defend oneself against that kind of universal anxiety. It's anxiety to the Nth degree."
Panic disorder is usually described as people having particular responses to certain kinds of events or circumstances in which they feel extreme anxiety and physical symptoms, says Dr. Goodstein.
People with panic disorder often think that they are dying, having a heart attack, or are going crazy. And the physical symptoms often look like a serious health problem and should be evaluated, according to Goodstein.
"The classic panic disorder presentation is the patient who arrives in an emergency room with chest pain," says Goodstein. Someone having a panic attack will have difficulty breathing, be sweating, and look like he's having a heart attack. And, adds Goodstein, this may be just the first of a number of panic episodes.
Other symptoms of panic attacks include a racing heart, shaking, choking, dizziness, feeling numb or experiencing a tingling sensation, nausea, and a sense of doom.
Panic Disorder: Causes
There may be a genetic basis to panic disorder that makes people prone to frequent panic attacks. Almost anything can trigger a panic attack. Severe, extreme fear or terror can strike at home, work, and even during sleep. Quite often, people with anxiety disorder often become so afraid of having a panic attack that they develop agoraphobia, another anxiety disorder that makes them afraid to leave their homes.
Panic Disorder: Diagnosis and Treatment
Panic disorder is diagnosed through a full physical and psychiatric evaluation. Other health conditions and problems like substance abuse have to be ruled out before a panic disorder diagnosis can be made.
Treatment for panic disorder usually involves a combination approach of medications, usually antidepressants and anti-anxiety drugs, and therapy. People with panic disorder can work with a psychiatrist or therapist to talk about their fears and anxieties, determine which fears are realistic and which unrealistic, and find ways of coping with their anxiety and frightening situations.
Panic attacks are frightening. And anyone with repeated panic attacks isn't likely dealing with one simple fear. But with the help of a solid diagnosis and counseling to work through fears and anxiety, panic disorder can be controlled.