With these simple cards made of folded card stock, kids can experiment with making different shapes with buttons.
Construction paper cutouts and a snip of ribbon help turn green buttons into a wreath, tiny red ones into holly berries, and white ones into a friendly snowman. (When they're turned vertically, the holes in the snowman's belly button look like buttons themselves.)
Have kids choose images from wrapping paper or magazines and cut out along outlines, or punch shapes from decorative papers using a craft punch.
Once backed with glue and allowed to dry, they can be remoistened later and stuck on notebooks, lunch bags, stationery -- just about anything.
Kids can decorate a variety of envelopes, such as those used for CDs and airmail, with rubber stamps, vinyl lettering, or labels to keep coins, stamps, and other small collections in order.
Stack envelopes of the same size, and punch a hole in each (for thin paper, reinforce the corner with a plain round sticker before punching). Insert a keychain or loose-leaf ring into the hole, and add more envelopes as needed.
Have kids create their own textbook covers with sturdy road maps.
Cut a piece of map large enough to wrap around a closed book, leaving at least a 2-inch border on all sides. Once the book is covered, tie a ribbon to a paper clip; slide the clip onto the cover's spine for a bookmark.
A picnic at the beach deserves the proper dishes -- what could be more fitting than colorful plates posing as a lobster, sun, and seagull? Kids can just cut parts from another plate and affix with double-sided tape.
Use our templates for the wings and claws. For the beak and sun's rays, cut out triangles. Punch holes from black construction paper for the eyes; then affix with white glue.
Kids can create small albums for their scrapbook, each with a story to tell -- the ones here are devoted to family and summer friends. Stiff paper covers along with paper spines and corners give them a fancy hardcover feel. The book on top has a closure made with a paper fastener and string.
These patriotic whirligigs spin in the wind and are easy for kids to make. They're tacked to clothespins, so you can clip them to anything -- like a bicycle basket.
Cut two 5-inch squares in different colors from patterned paper. Glue back-to-back; let dry. Draw diagonal lines from corner to corner. Make a 3-inch cut along each line. Fold every other point toward center; glue. Affix to clothespin with map tack.
A pageful of envelopes in many sizes and colors is ideal for kids to store hard-to-glue items or keepsakes they'll want to pull out and admire, like these birthday party mementos.
So the envelopes don't get sticky, remove the adhesive with a wet paper towel, and let dry. Then glue on with flaps open, overlapping slightly.