Aboriginal language decline: the digital intervention
Most Australians are completely oblivious to the fact that our nation is home to some of the world's language diversity hotspots. Indigenous languages hold important stories of human history, but they are sadly in decline. As ABC's Ben Collins writes, it is now hoped that digital technology will preserve these languages and the secrets they hold.
You might think that the reach of digital technology into the most remote parts of Australia will be the final straw for Aboriginal languages, which have been in decline since European occupation, and that maybe that doesn't really matter in this modern world. But there are signs that mobile phones and the applications being designed for them could actually be the best tools yet to preserve Australia's poorly understood wealth of languages.
How many times have you heard that the reason most Australians are monolingual (over three-quarters of us) is because of our geographic isolation from languages other than English? And yet Australia is home to some of the world's language diversity hotspots.
West Arnhem Land and the Kimberley's Fitzroy Valley are areas of an extraordinary mix of Aboriginal languages. Bruce Birch, a linguist from the School of Culture, History and Language at the Australian National University, uses the more broadly known languages of Europe to illustrate the diversity we've got right here in Australia.
The Indigenous languages of most of Australia, excepting Western Arnhem Land and the Kimberley, belong to a single language family known as Pama-Nyungan. This is equivalent to the Indo-European language family.
"Many European languages as well as Indian languages and Persian etc. are all part of Indo-European," he says.
But within those small areas of Australia's north without Pama-Nyungan languages, you find not only many distinct languages, but even distinct language families.
"Even within Western Arnhem Land you've got different language families," Mr Birch says. "It'd be like going from English to Russian."
It's a bit of a mystery why these small parts of northern Australia are so linguistically rich. Likely factors include the ancient colonisation of Australia by humans from the north, ice-ages, and the ongoing history of contact from Asia. No one's entirely sure what the full story is, but the secret is locked inside the languages themselves.
In the same way that the English language tells the story of ancient empires stretching across Europe, and subsequent invasions of Germans and French, to name a few influences, Indigenous languages can tell equally important stories of human history.
For instance, a Brazilian tourist to West Arnhmen Land would understand the words for 'be quiet' in the Iwaidja (pronounced 'ee-WHY-jah') language from the Coburg Peninsula. This is because Iwaidja includes some Portuguese and Dutch words brought to Arnhem Land by Makassan traders from about 1700, Mr Birch says.
The Iwaidja word for trousers had an equally extraordinary, but more ancient, journey through colonial expansion.
What's originally a Persian word [for trousers] 'shalwar' ... was then loaned into Indian languages. And with the Hindu conquest of the Indonesian archipelago in the 11th century ... ends up being spoken by those languages on [Australia's] north coast.
So you can see that Australians aren't so linguistically poor after all. We've just had some problems valuing what we've got. But we had better change our attitude quick smart, because Iwaidja, with all its richness, is now spoken by fewer than 200 people on Croker Island.
Mr Birch says, "It's highly endangered because the current generation of kids are not using it very much."
Croker Island is a language goldmine.
"It's this amazing situation where you've got 300 people living in a community on an island speaking four different Indigenous languages as well as English," Mr Birch says.
This is a shadow of our former linguistic wealth. According to the 2005 National Indigenous Language Survey, over 100 of around 250 Australian Indigenous languages are no longer spoken. And less than 20 are considered strong in the sense that they are being passed to younger generations.
But there does appear to be a growing interest in preserving and revitalising Aboriginal languages. A 2008 study found over 80 Indigenous languages are being taught in schools across Australia. Although speakers of Iwaidja are still declining, there's every indication that trend will be reversed at some point. The trick is to preserve the language in the meantime, and that is where linguists are using the popularity of the digital revolution in remote communities.
Recent research shows a massive uptake of mobile phones in remote Aboriginal communities in the past few years. Figures from Charles Darwin University put mobile telephone ownership in Indigenous communities at between 60 and 80 per cent. Even in places where there is still no mobile coverage like Croker Island, phones are becoming ubiquitous for their other functions such as media players and recorders.
Mr Birch worked with a project team to develop the Ma Iwaidja App for smart phones. This turns all those phones now in communities into tools for preserving and passing on the Iwaidja language.
"With little or no training, users can upload recordings of new dictionary entries and phrases to be moderated and checked for accuracy before being made available for download to all users of the app," says Mr Birch.
It's part of a growing trend to put language conservation in the realm of the people. Facebook has been translated into the Paakantyi language of Western New South Wales. It's hoped putting these traditional languages into the social media realm will promote their use by the next generation of speakers.
And it's in this way that digital technology might conserve a richness of the human story that many Australians are yet to discover.
Ben Collins is the Cross-Media Reporter for ABC Kimberley. View his full profile here.