By Marla Lise
Scientific Name: Jabiru mycteria
The Jabiru Stork is a large bird with a big, black and slightly upturned bill. It can be found around South America, from Mexico down to Argentina, but is most commonly found in Pantanal region and in Paraguay.
The Brazilians call this bird, ‘Tuiuiu’ and in the Tupi-Guarani language spoken around South America, ‘Jabiru’ actually means swollen neck. There is also another bird called a Jabiru bird that comes from Australia, however, this is the Asian Black-necked Stork (Ephippiorhynchus asiaticus).
Here’s an interesting fact for you - words like jaguar and tapioca are also from of the Tupi–Guarani origin.
The Jabiru Stork is the tallest flying bird in South and Central America, growing up to 140cm (4.6 feet). They make huge nests out of sticks that they built upon every season. The nests can be several meters in diameter.
This bird lives in groups near water bodies and feeds on amphibians and other little aquatic creatures like fish and mollusks. They will sometimes even eat dead animals that they find in the water. By doing this, they help keep the water clean.
Jabiru Storks are not listed as an endangered species, however, they are highly sensitive to disturbances around their nesting sites. Therefore, with people encroaching into their habitats, there is a high risk that they will be affected negatively.
Blue and Gold Macaw
Grey Winged Trumpeter
Asian black bear
Black-and-white ruffed lemur
Black-faced spider monkey
Brown capuchin monkey
Capybara [2nd profile]
Eastern Long Beaked Echidna
Malagasy Giant Jumping Rat
Plains Zebra not a rainforest species
South American tapir
South American coatimundi
Leatherback Sea Turtle not a rainforest species
Pygmy stump-tailed chameleon
Giant Chinese Salamander
Gladiator Tree Frog
Green Poison Arrow Frog
Indian Purple Frog
All about Rainforests
May I use graphics from mongabay.com for my projects?
Yes, you may provided that you don't remove the mongabay label from the images. You may use information from the site for class projects and can cite kids.mongabay.com as the source.
Can I interview the founder of mongabay.com for my school project?
Unfortunately due to the large number of requests and the need to work on the main mongabay.com site, Rhett (the person who runs mongabay.com) is not available for interviews. However he has answered some common questions on the Rainforest Interview page.
Do you have any games or activities?
Currently there are a few on the resources page. There may be more in the future.
Who are some scientists who study rainforests?
Take a look at the Interviews with rainforest experts page.
How can I help save rainforests?
Some ideas are listed on the Rainforest Solutions page.
Where can I learn more about rainforests?
There is a wealth of information at the main rainforest site
Simplified version (fewer images and links)