Joint Vibrance provides cartilage-building cells called chondrocytes with the proper nutrients necessary for construction of new cartilage and synthesis of hyaluronic acid. It is the most comprehensive formula to nutritionally support healthy joint function. The entire formula is truly remarkable, and provides sound nutritional support for joint health.
Before we are born, chondrocytes work rapidly to build protection into our developing skeletons. Then we are born, grow, and age. The older we become, the slower chondrocytes work.
As chondrocyte activity flags over time, they eventually fail to adequately compensate for the daily wear and tear placed on joints by an active lifestyle. As a result, nearly everyone has some degree of cartilage breakdown by the age of 32 to 35. For centuries it was thought that the gradual deterioration made joint pain and loss of mobility an inevitable fact of aging.
Today’s science has shown us that the function of cartilage-building cells (chondrocytes) can be sustained as long as their nutritional requirements are met. Cartilage can indeed be brought back to greater levels of health, strengthened and thickened if proper nutrients are supplied.
There is one controlling principle in the effort to rebuild cartilage: There must be some cartilage with viable chondrocytes in the joint in order for repair to proceed. If prior joint surgeries have removed all cartilage, or if all cartilage in the joint has been worn completely away, then there would be no chondrocytes on site that could initiate the reconstruction process.
But most damaged joints do retain a good measure of cartilage. They can benefit from Joint Vibrance.
In Joint vibrance, two types of hydrolyzed collagen serve as the backbone of the formula. Human clinical trials have shown that after six weeks of consuming 7 to 10 grams of type 1 collagen, or 1 to 2 grams of type 2 collagen, new cartilage could be detected by x-ray examination of the joints. Joint Vibrance version 4.0 supplies both type 2 and type 1 collagen.
To understand why they are so important, you must understand that cartilage is made up of a mass of collagen fibers held together in a proteoglycan matrix or glue. (That glue is primarily synthesized from chondroitin sulfate A.) The collagen in cartilage – type 2 collagen – is slightly different in its composition than type 1 collagen found in bone, skin, tendon, blood vessel walls, and organs.
Supplemental type 2 collagen directly benefits cartilage synthesis. Type 1 collagen aids the synthesis of cartilage, supports bone health, and supports the integrity of tendons.
Cartilage deterioration is often accompanied by bone deterioration. Since bone is composed of 30% to 36% type 1 collagen, it makes sense to provide nutritional support not only to cartilage but also to bone in a dietary supplement targeted for joint health. Tendons also rely on type 1 collagen for health. The type 1 collagen in Joint Vibrance will help maintain the integrity of the stabilizing tendons wrapped across joints. Joint Vibrance then, does not just seek to build cartilage, but expands past that role to improve the health of all components of the joint.
CSA & Glucosamine & Hyaluronic acid
Chondroitin sulfate A, with a little help from the other glycosaminoglycans in Joint Vibrance, is fashioned by chondrocytes into the sticky protein-sugar (proteoglycan) matrix, or glue, that holds all the collagen fibers together to form cartilage.
Glucosamine, a popular supplement for joint health, is converted to hyaluronic acid by chondrocytes. Each molecule of hyaluronic acid contains 5 molecules of water, giving it a very large, slippery structure. Its goal is to escape the chondrocyte where it was made, and slowly work its way out through the cartilage to take its place in synovial fluid. Along the way, the glucosamine that has now become hyaluronic acid acts to rehydrate cartilage, giving it greater cushioning power. In addition, Joint Vibrance delivers 264 mg of natural hyaluronic acid from chicken sternum. This is intended to support and replenish the hyaluronic acid content of synovial fluids in every joint.
But it takes more than glucosamine, chondroitin and hyaluronic acid to provide first class nutritional support to chondrocytes.
Silica from horsetail contributes the element silicon to connective tissue, giving them strength and stability. It is found in precisely the tissues we are discussing here: bone, cartilage, and tendons (as well as skin and blood vessels) helping to make them strong.
Antioxidants and anti-inflammatories
Inflammation in sore, aching joints is characterized by oxidative damage to cells in the affected area. White blood cells (leucocytes) and macrophages, immune cells that travel through tissues looking for damage to clean up, utilize free radicals to dismantle the cellular debris they ingest as part of their cleanup work. Free radicals, inadvertently released during the process, run amok, inflicting some damage to healthy tissue surrounding the original site of injury. Antioxidants and anti-inflammatory agents can help control these biochemical events.
Grape seed extract, Curcuminoids, ApresFlex® Boswellia serrata extract and bromelain extracted from pineapple stems, as part of the Joint Vibrance formula, are intended to corral and quench the free radicals that participate in joint inflammation. Grape seed extract also helps bind broken collagen fibers in connective tissues (e.g. ligaments, tendons, skin etc.)
ApresFlex® concentrates AKBA, the acronym for 3-O-Acetyl-11-keto-beta-boswellic acid. AKBA is the most active compound of Boswellia serrata extracts. In the biochemical cascade that creates inflammation at the cellular level, AKBA is a potent inhibitor of the enzyme, 5-lipoxygenase (5-LOX). 5-LOX is a key enzyme in the synthesis of inflammatory cell messengers (leukotrienes) that are made from the ubiquitous omega-6 fatty acid, arachidonic acid. The dose of ApresFlex® required to quell the manufacture of inflammatory leukotrienes is just 100 mg. That is what you will find in each serving of Joint Vibrance 4.0.
But Joint Vibrance does not stop there. It contains a full gram of methyl sulfonyl methane, or MSM. This ingredient supports the re-synthesis of flexible disulfide bonds in connective tissue, including tendons and ligaments of the joint. The goal is to support overall flexibility and ease of movement.
Disulfide bonds work like hinges in a door. They contain two sulfur molecules, and predominate in the connective tissue of infants, and children. Those disulfide bonds tend to be replaced by stiffer, protein bonds as we age. It has been suggested that the replacement of disulfide bonds by protein bonds is due to a chronic, subclinical deficiency of sulfur throughout our lifetimes. Whether or not that is true, we do know that supplementing the diet with MSM can help increase again the number of flexible disulfide bonds in connective tissue.
Minerals and enzymes
In order for new synthesis of cartilage to take place within chondrocytes, certain enzymes are required. You can look at enzymes as miniature carpenters. These are the agents within cells that catalyze the chemical reactions that build tissue and keep us alive. An enzyme is made up of three primary components. One is a protein fraction; another is a vitamin or vitamin metabolite; and the last essential component is a mineral. As soon as the mineral takes its place, the enzyme comes alive and can do its work. It is somewhat like sticking the key into a car's ignition, and giving it a turn.
Joint Vibrance includes a selection of minerals that are known to be required by the chondrocytes’ enzymes responsible for cartilage synthesis. This helps assure that enzymes can be synthesized within the chondrocytes when they are needed, and then get to work on schedule to build new cartilage.
Cartilage-building chondrocytes are lodged deep inside cartilage which is hidden away behind a protective synovial membrane inside the ligaments that bind the joint together. Wrapped over the joint are muscles and their tendons, providing extra stability. Although chondrocytes never lose the ability to do their job, nutrients reach them only by slow, passive diffusion through the synovial membrane and into synovial fluid lubricating the joint. That is why it is important to use Joint Vibrance daily, causing a steady, regular flow of nutrients to the ends of the capillaries that end at the barrier of the synovial membrane.
As we said at the start, no other joint health formula is as complete as Joint Vibrance.
Orange-Pineapple flavor powder Unflavored tablets BSE Free Effective