Tripping through the Doors of Perception? Psychedelic lessons from the past
Professor Erika Dyck, Canada Research Chair in the History of Medicine at the University of Saskatchewan
Psychedelics fell from medical grace nearly half a century ago, but recent activity suggests that some researchers have ‘high hopes’ for their return. Over sixty years ago Albert Hofmann at Sandoz Pharmaceutical Laboratories in Switzerland first synthesized LSD and personally experienced its effects in 1943. Over the next 15 years, over a thousand articles appeared in medical and scientific publications based on LSD research. By the mid-1960s, LSD research ground to halt as it had become synonymous with countercultural activities, hedonism, and drug abuse. Recently, that situation has started to change. A new generation of researchers has taken up the torch with an eye to resurrecting the psychedelic science of the 1950s, particularly along the paths of addiction research and palliative care. Will this new group of enthusiasts be more nimble, or have cultural circumstances changed sufficiently to embrace psychedelics anew?
Wednesday, 9 November 2016, 16:00-18:00
Council Room at Firth Court
University of Sheffield, Western Bank,
Sheffield, S10 2TN, United Kingdom https://goo.gl/maps/mHbr9WWdsqJ2
Professor Dyck is the author of Psychedelic Psychiatry: LSD on the Canadian Prairies (2012, Winnipeg: University of Manitoba Press) and Facing Eugenics: Reproduction, Sterilization, and the Politics of Choice(2013, Toronto: University of Toronto Press). For more on Professor Dyck please refer to http://research-groups.usask.ca/history-medicine/biography.php
This special session of “Windows into Research”, a series that brings together research-in-progress reports under a common theme, will focus on current projects at the University of Sheffield. Over the course of an hour, we will have short presentations from representatives of three major research projects:
A £730,000 award by the Economic and Social Research Council (ESRC) and Arts and Humanities Research Council (AHRC) will allow researchers to explore the social, economic, political, and cultural significance of intoxicants between 1580 and 1740.
The project, Intoxicants and Early Modernity, aims to enrich and enhance contemporary debates about intoxicants from a fully researched historical perspective.
Led by the Department of History’s Professor Phil Withington the project team involves the Humanities Research Institute (HRI) and the Victoria and Albert Museum (V&A).
The HRI will play a key role in the project, developing an ontology-based dataset which records the entire economy of intoxicants during the early modern period using primary source materials located in The National Archives, V&A and regional archives. The team will be able to interrogate the data and visualise the results in ways which reveal new trends and relationships.