The goal of the expedition was never met, but the story of survival that emerged from Sir Earnest Shackleton's failed 1914 journey to Antarctica remains one of the most compelling and harrowing tales of polar exploration.
That story, subject of numerous books and a planned Hollywood film, is retold in "The Endurance: Shackleton's Legendary Antarctic Expedition," a new exhibit at the Field Museum opening Saturday.
Told through the pictures of the ship's photographer, James "Frank" Hurley, diary entries, film footage and artifacts, the exhibit recreates the adventure of Shackleton and the 27 crew members aboard the Endurance as they set out to become the first humans to cross the Antarctic on foot.
One of the men aboard the Endurance was Joliet native William Bakewell.
"When my grandfather saw the Endurance ... it was love at first sight," said Sarah Rajala, one of Bakewell's granddaughters, at a preview of the exhibit today.
The 18-month ordeal of Shackleton and the crew began after the vessel was trapped in ice on the Weddell Sea and was slowly crushed. For months, the men stayed with the stranded ship, waiting for the surrounding ice to melt so they could escape in lifeboats.
Shackleton and the crew spent five months camping on ice floes before they boarded three lifeboats. They traveled in open sea for several days until they reached uninhabited Elephant Island.
From there, Shackleton and five crewmen left the rest of the crew behind and made an 800-mile, 17-day journey to a whaling station on South Georgia Island to seek help. In the end, the entire crew was rescued.
One of the highlights of the exhibit is a life-size model of the James Caird, the lifeboat that Shackleton and his five comrades used to reach help. Museumgoers can attempt to navigate the boat the same way the crew did, with a sextant, a primitive navigation device that uses the sun's alignment on the horizon to plot a course.
"The Endurance: Shackleton's Legendary Antarctic Expedition" runs through Jan. 14. Admission to the Field Museum is $8 for adults and $4 for children and senior citizens; there is no additional charge for entrance to the exhibit.
The exhibit runs in conjunction with "To the Ends of the Earth: Exploring the Poles" at the Newberry Library, a new exhibit highlighting 500 years of polar exploration. The library is at 60 W. Walton St., and the exhibit is free.