B> This highly-acclaimed, brief survey of the workings and issues of the American political system--and the constitutional and political values that shape American politics and policies--focuses on the people that have made this country what it is today, and covers up-to-the-minute developments on the national, international, and local scenes. Features a dramatic 4-color design--with many state-of-the-art graphics, exciting photos, and witty cartoons, and intriguing and thought-provoking boxed material: People Debates boxes with challenging arguments on significant political topics; A Closer Look with background information on timely key issues; You Decide question-and-answer boxes with a problem in context; and We the People boxes that reflect the concerns and experiences of minorities in relation to the American government. Constitutional Democracy The Constitution of the United States. American Federalism. First Amendment Rights. Equal Justice Under the Law. Political Culture and Ideology. The American Political Landscape. Political Parties and Interest Groups. Public Opinion and Elections. The Media and American Politics. Congress: The People's Branch. The Presidency: The Leadership Branch? The Judiciary: The Balancing Branch. The Bureaucracy: The Real Power? Domestic Policy. Foreign and Defense Policy. For anyone who wants a solid, but brief introduction to the workings and issues of American government.
"synopsis" may belong to another edition of this title.
This access code card gives you access to all of MyPoliSciLab’s grade-boosting resources! Want a complete e-book of your textbook, too? Buy immediate access to MyPoliSciLab with E-Book online with a credit card at www.mypoliscilab.com.From the Publisher:
Acclaimed for its superb writing style, pedagogical support, and comprehensive treatment of the American political system, this Texas version of Government by The People, has been thoroughly updated to meet the needs of American government classes today. Now for the first time ever, the bestseller in the field for 39 years is available in a Texas version. Consisting of all the material found in the National version plus eight chapters examining Texas State and local politics, the Texas version offers a significant price savings to students.
"About this title" may belong to another edition of this title.
(No Available Copies)
If you know the book but cannot find it on AbeBooks, we can automatically search for it on your behalf as new inventory is added. If it is added to AbeBooks by one of our member booksellers, we will notify you!Create a Want