The use or the use of medicinal plants, or also called medical plants, has occurred in all cultures from all time. The interest today, on issues phytotherapy (medicinal plants), not due to a single event or a particular fashion. Our time is marked by the search for a much healthier lifestyle and improved quality of life, to get it, man has realized the need to turn our eyes to the essential values that are still basically in nature, as is the case of medicinal plants.
HOW TO USE THE PLANTS
They usually consumed in tea but it was necessary to find a method of administration that have a hygiene and efficiency that could measure consumption in periods of treatment. Thus were born between various dosage forms which include the criomolido powder plants, presented in the form of capsules, being is way easier to take.
On this site, we try everything about medicinal plants, their names, use, applications, bloom, applications, management, abstract, family, habitat, medicinal properties and parts used. We will have some drawings and photos of them. We also have a glossary of related words and recommended books on medicinal plants.
PROPERTIES OF STEVIA
You at the multitude of studies and the experience of thousands of diabetics who consume in countries like Spain and South America, it follows that as a medicinal plant:
Regulates blood sugar.
Reduces blood pressure.
Regulates the digestive system in general.
It acts favorably in people with anxiety.
Decreases fat in obese people.
It is diuretic, eliminating kilos of retained body fluids.
Lowers cholesterol and helps burn triglycerides.
Research shows conclusively that consumption of stevia for long time is safe for people, their consumption helps favorably on blood glucose levels in diabetic and stabilizes blood pressure of hypertensive. Also, consumption of this herb does not alter other parameters (lipids, renal and liver function). This opinion differs with the irreducible pressure sweetener industry so that it can be used as a food additive in the United States, the largest consumer of sweeteners worldwide, ignoring all their medicinal properties.
Scientists at the University of Aarhus (Denmark) have provided promising new perspectives on the components of stevia in the treatment of type-2 diabetes, results are also noting affected by this disease in Spain and even cases of type 1. This also advancing identify their properties as an antiseptic and anti-inflammatory mouth. Moreover, in Japan this widespread use as soil improver, plant or to the health of farm animals.
Both FAO and WHO have already taken determinations for certifying the safety of this herb and therefore include stevia on a temporary list as a step to the final passage of his "Codex Alimentarius". In fact, the FAO / WHO Expert Committee on Food Aditives (JECFA) and admitted intake to 2 milligrams per kg / day of steviol glycosides (calculated as steviol), much too high (equivalent to 110 grams of sugar per day) which opens a clear path for widespread recognition.
Some studies suggest that antibiotic activity, especially with bacteria that attack the oral mucosa and fungi that give rise to vaginitis in women. For its healing properties, especially in South America this herb is used also to counter fatigue and to combat diseases in the liver, pancreas and spleen. Beyond the sweetening power of the active ingredients contained in the leaf of the stevia, this herb, is emerging as an extraordinary plant that could benefit the health of humanity and contribute to improving the economy of farmers. Paraguay medicine in Stevia rebaudiana used as hypoglycemic, digestive, cardiotonic, diuretic, hypotensive, vasodilator, antacid, etc., in addition to the aforementioned beneficial effects on the absorption of fat and blood pressure.
Important: The use of information on medicinal plants, without the minimum knowledge in dosage and descriptions can cause problems or side effects. You should always talk to a doctor, pharmacist or qualified personnel before taking herbs or medicinal plants. Take the texts and information such as single orientation for subsequent verification contrast and medical professionals. World Topic assumes no liability in connection with the material on the web.