Hindi is one of the most spoken languages in the world. It is one of the official languages of India and the most spoken language in India too. It is also one of the official languages in many states of India too.
In this article, we have provided the best, famous, unknown, mind blowing, important, amazing, interesting, and funny facts about Hindi language.
12 Amazing, Interesting and Important Facts About Hindi Language
1. Roots with Sanskrit Language
Hindi language has its roots with Sanskrit language, dates back to nearly 5000 BC
2. Millions of Native Speakers
Hindi language has 180 million native speakers, which makes it one of the most popular languages in the world. However, the figure is reach more than 400 million speakers who can speak the language.
3. Hindi Language Regulation in India
The language is regulated by Central Hindi Directorate, Government of India.
4. Each Character Has A Different Sound
In Hindi language, each character has a different sound. Thus, it is one of the easiest languages to learn in the world.
5. Many Hindi Words Used in English
A lot of Hindi words are being used in English, which includes bungalow, jungle, looting, guru, cheetah, yoga, thug, and others.
6. India Celebrates Hindi Day
The Government of India adopted Hindi language as the official language on September 14, 1949. Later on, the day becomes “Hindi Day” and celebrated around the country.
7. Spoken in many states
Hindi language is spoken in many states, which includes Delhi, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, Bihar, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh, Haryana and Madhya Pradesh. However, the language is widely understood in most of states in India.
8. Popular Hindi Words
Namaste, Kaise Hain, Main Thik Hu, Kaha Chale, and Kaise Ho are popular Hindi phrases used in daily basis in India.
9. Used in Other Countries Too
Hindi is not only used in India but in other countries too. Fiji, Nepal, Guyana, Trinidad and Tobago, Sri Lanka, Singapore, United Arab Emirates, New Zealand, United States of America, Australia, Pakistan, and a few other countries people use Hindi too.
10. Write From Left to Right
Hindi language is written same as English, from left to right.
11. Hindi Grammar Facts
There is no article in Hindi language. The alphabet of Hindi language contains 33 consonants, and 11 vowels.
12. Popular Characters in Hindi Jokes
Santa and Banta are the most popular characters in Hindi jokes.
Article first published on May 18, 2016.