Caring for your Home Apple and Fruit Trees
We get lots of questions about caring for your home fruit trees. Here is some of the best information we feel is out there about taking care of apple trees at home.
What should I know before growing my own fruit trees?
There are several things you should know before you plant fruit trees. Here are a few:
You will need to plant more than one variety of trees. Apple trees must be cross-pollinated with another variety (this can include ornamental crab apples) that blooms at the same time.
Apple trees do take some maintenance to get a good crop in the fall. You should plant to prune or trim your trees in the spring of the year, as well as, spray regularly during the spring/summer to keep out unwanted pests.
Apple trees must be grown from baby trees, not from seed.
There are different sizes of apple trees. You can choose between large trees or smaller dwarf trees. The tree’s size is determined by the size of the root stock. We suggest smaller dwarf trees for home use as they are easier to care for.
What varieties should you plant?
A good publication from Purdue on the best varieties: Apple Cultivars for Indiana
Another helpful publication from Kentucky State on Varieties: Home Fruit Tree Variety Recommendations
Where can I find apple trees in Indianapolis area?
Allisonville Nursery, 116th and Allisonville Road area in Fishers
It is best to buy your trees from a location that is familiar with apple trees for fruit and not just for ornamental purposes. If you are looking to buy several trees, we would highly recommend Stark Brothers Nursery. This is where we get our apple trees. They are one of the oldest and most respected nurseries of fruit trees.
Caring for your Trees:
Here is a link to the publication about managing pests in home fruit trees that is available from Purdue. We highly recommend this for caring for any type of fruit (including berries). Information about pruning, spraying, and much more is included. Managing Pests in Home Fruit Trees
Some other publications that you might also find helpful are: Apple Scab on Tree Fruit in the Home Orchard Fire Blight on Fruit Trees in the Home Orchard
Disease Susceptibility of Common Apple Varieties
For information on pruning your apple trees, join us for our Fruit Tree Pruning Workshop held each spring.
You can also get more information on Apple Works’ (another great Indiana orchard) website under pruning guide.
You are always welcome to call us with any other questions you have about your fruit tree care. We can also get you more information on the Eastern Indiana Horticulture Society (a group of small and large orchard growers that meet for meetings and instructional activities) and the Indiana Horticulture Society.