One morning, Tex decided to take a walk in the nearby woods to clear his head. He was having a difficult time trying to take his mind off the fact that just the day before he had missed his opportunity to go on a trip with his friends to Las Vegas, and now he was stuck at home, alone.

"Well," he thought, "at least I can save some money for Christmas." Tex wandered into the dense forest, a place he has been to many times before, and took a seat on his favorite tree stump. He took a deep breath of fresh air into his lungs and exhaled the stress out of his body. As he did this, he spotted the flapping of tiny wings in his periphery; a beautiful, orange monarch butterfly had landed on a stump right in front of him, resting its wings upon landing. The sun beamed down onto the orange and black of its form, and its antennae prominently jutted out from its head.

Tex became mesmerized by the sight of the butterfly and decided to approach it to get a better look. The butterfly, unfazed by the approaching human, flapped its wings gently to show off its vibrant, colorful design. 

Tex became so enamored by the butterfly that he grabbed it and put it in his cupped hands to take back with him to his house. When he got back, Tex opened his hands and discovered that they were empty; the butterfly had vanished!

As he looked around his immediate area hoping to find the butterfly, Tex found a beautiful woman standing behind him. The woman was dressed in a white gown, but had the wings of a butterfly; the wings were glistening in the sun as if they were sprinkled with silver glitter. Her hair was as white as wool, and her face bore a subtle smile that comforted him and eased his surprise at her presence.

"I will grant you three wishes," the woman spoke gently, "and then after that, I must leave. Choose wisely, friend."

Tex, taking a moment to think, put his head down and contemplated the gravity of this situation before finally looking up at the woman and making his decision. "I want to hang out with you for the day!" The woman nodded in the affirmative, and then replied, "We can do that, I guess!"
