Women often have problems in their urethra-genital area after childbirth, medical journals say. Bladder prolapse is one of them. Before excretion, urine is stored in the hollow muscular organ called the urinary bladder. The vaginal wall performs a unique support function for the bladder. After giving birth, the woman’s vaginal wall loosens. The woman’s vaginal wall is not strong enough to support her bladder by the time she reaches menopause. This would lead to bladder prolapse.
Sudden urinary incontinence or SUI is also a problem. This sudden and involuntary release of urine happens when one is laughing, sneezing or exerting effort. This may also be due to the strain on the pelvis or menopause. Adult women may experience this once in their lives and 40% have reported this problem. Rectocele or bowel prolapse is also one of the problems caused by weakened vaginal walls. Giving birth, aging and straining are causes of bowel prolapse. Pain follows straining during constipation. Vaginal hernia may also be caused by surgery.
Undergoing operations are often due to these three problems. In order to support the vaginal wall, a surgeon will insert a transvaginal mesh. A transvaginal mesh implant helps prevent the recurrence of vaginal prolapse. Since its introduction in the late 1950s, there have been a number of various complaints. Most of the pains patients felt occur after surgery. They thought that it was only due to the surgery but stayed longer even if the wound was already healed.
It was only after different researches were conducted that they pinpointed the mesh to be the cause. The Food and Drug Administration has issued a warning regarding this surgical procedure due to increasing complaints against it. There have been documentations of infection around the area of the implanted mesh. Corroding mesh around the tissues is one of the reasons of infection. Recipients have also reported experiencing pain during sexual intercourse. Perforation of blood vessels, bowel and bladder has been reported in some of the operations.
Women are encouraged by the FDA to report any severe bodily reactions like pelvic organ prolapse from their experience with transvaginal mesh. Cases have been already filed in the courts against the manufacturer by some of the recipients. One of the complainants, a woman who had three operations before knowing that the problem was due to the mesh, lodged a lawsuit against the manufacturer. Most of the recipients have experienced pain for a long time due to the mesh and they seek reparation for it.