|[Note Guidelines] Photographer's Note|
|Looking through my files I found this shot, taken at Periyar National Park, on my last trip to India. I have been to India 6 times, but this is only my second Indian posting! This is partly due to the fact that we mainly visit cultural places when we go.|
The Bonnet Macaque (Macaca radiata) is a macaque endemic to southern India. Its distribution is limited by the Indian Ocean on three sides and the Godavari and Tapti Rivers along with a related competing species of Rhesus Macaque in the north.
This Old World monkey is a diurnal animal. It is 35-60 cm long plus a tail of 35-68 cm. Males weigh 5.5 to 9 kg., females 3.5 to 4.5 kg. It can live more than 30 years.
The Bonnet Macaque feeds on fruits, nuts, seeds, flowers, invertebrates and cereals. In southern India this macaque exists as commensal to humans, feeding on food given by humans and raiding crops and houses.
Two subspecies of Bonnet Macaques have been identified: Macaca radiata radiata and Macaca radiata diluta.
The Bonnet Macaque, like other macaques, share a dominance hierarchy which is linear. It means that there is an 'alpha' male who is the most dominant male of the troop, followed by a 'beta' male and 'gamma' and so on according to their dominance. Similarly for females also there is an 'alpha' female, 'beta' female 'gamma' female etc. The male and female hierarchies are different and of a non overlapping or non mixing type. Usually males are dominant over females, but this is not always so.
The females have a stable dominance hierarchy, which changes very rarely, whilst the dominance hierarchy of males is very dynamic. In the male hierarchy there is always a competition to rise in rank with fights between close ranks common. A male has the best chance of obtaining high rank in his prime age resulting in the greatest benefits to reproduction. High rank individuals have first access to breeding females. Females are receptive during only a few months in a year resulting in competition between males. In this situation the rank which has been established by aggressive encounters come into play. Most of these aggressive encounters are easily resolved however when similarly built or similarly aggressive males compete its results into brutal and sometime fatal fights. Different males may employ various means to rise in rank. Coalition formation between unrelated males to oust a more dominant male has been observed. Males often move from troop to troop to gain higher rank with the resulting benefits. However there have been cases observed when a male remains in a single troop, rising to become dominant male of that troop.
In the case of females the stable dominance hierarchy is a result of female philopatry. Philopatry indicates that individuals tend to remain with the troop that they are born into. This results in the formation of matrilines, groupings of closely related females. These matrilines help each other during antagonistic interactions. As the matrilines are continuously reinforced with new births of females in a troop there is rarely any upturning of ranks. There are a few rare cases of rank reversal for females in which matrilines have become extremely depleted due to few female births. Male infants would not help to reinforce the matrilines as they move off to new troops leaving their natal troops.
The Bonnet Macaque has a very wide range of gestures and behavior which can be easily differentiated. 'Lip smacking' is one of the most common and affiliative behavior, where one individual may open and close the mouth in rapid succession with tongue in between teeth and lips pressing against each other giving an audible sound. "Grimace" is the most common gesture of fear or submission in which a subordinate shows to a dominant individual during aggressive encounters. It consists of pulling back of the upper lip showing the upper teeth. They also have distinct alarm calls for predators.
PERIYAR NATIONAL PARK
Periyar is a protected area, and a nature reserve in the South Indian State of Kerala, set high in the mountains of the Western Ghats at the border to Tamil Nadu. It lies in the districts of Idukki and Pathanamthitta. The protected area covers an area of 777 km², out of which a 350 km² part of the core zone was made into the Periyar National Park and Tiger Reserve, sometimes dubbed the Periyar Wildlife Sanctuary. The park is often called by the name thekkady also. Thekkady is located four km from Kumily, approximately 100 km east of Alappuzha, 110 km west of Madurai and 120 km southeast from Kochi.
Argus, CeltickRanger, uleko, Heaven, siggi, eng55, rousettus, jaycee, boreocypriensis, Adanac, anemone, nasokoun, MMM has marked this note useful
Only registered TrekNature members may rate photo notes.
|You must be logged in to start a discussion.|
- [2010-01-28 7:28]
Guzel ve sevimli bir kare
Basarili cekim ayrica
- [2010-01-28 7:30]
Very nice photo in great clarity. Excellent sharpness and details. Beautiful natural colours. Good POV, DOF and composition. Funny pose.
Nice monkey with great expression, beautiful picture. Congratulations!
- [2010-01-28 8:07]
Another fine find from your archives!
This time an excellent capture of a male Bonnet Macaque.
The pose is excellent for this portrait and taken from a great POV at a very high standard.
Thanks and all the best,
pic with great clarity and expressions nicely captured.
i love this funny looking Macaque with his lovely glance,
excellent and very beautiful photo of the Bonnet Macaque
with fine frontal POV, appropriate framing, lovely pose,
fine focus great sharpness and details, TFS
- [2010-01-28 9:34]
This one is a real show-off with a very fine bonnet! Excellent sharp capture in natural colours and very well composed!
TFS and best wishes, Ulla
- [2010-01-28 10:14]
You present us a fine portrait of the Bonnet Macaque, well put on stage with a narrow focus. The details are well highlighted and the picture allows the viewer to get a good overall impression of the animal's characteristics. I also appreciate your instructive and well elaborated notes.
- [2010-01-28 11:09]
fine portrait shot, liked the expressions, lighting and the deatils, well composed shot with fine pov.
Best regards Siggi
- [2010-01-28 13:16]
Lovely capture.Sharpness,POV,details and 3D effect are wonderful.
Thanks for posting..
Today's post is from India and belongs to lovely Bonnet Macaque. You greatly captured it with sharp focus, great eyes contact and composition. notes very good informative as always.
thanks for sharing, best wishes,
- [2010-01-28 15:23]
I wasn't able to get a good picture of a Macaque. You were much more successful and captured him in a wonderful pose. He looks very comfortable sitting in that tree. He even seems to be smiling for the camera. I love the colors and textures of his fur.
:))) haha. i am sure that this is absolutely a male:)
Great capture of this macaca mail with impressive facial expression Bro James.
TFS and have a nice night!
- [2010-01-28 17:23]
Superb image, but hand that primate a loin cloth. The face is outstanding and it looks totally comfortable with its seat. Great work as usual James, thank you.
Hello James. lovely catch of this cute male monkey from great pov.
the moment is great, best clarity and good light, beautiful natural colors, great photo!
keep photographing! TFS
Ciao James, great portrait of lovely chimp in nice pose, fine details and splendid sharpness, very well done my friend, ciao Silvio
- [2010-01-29 5:42]
What a great close up.Excellent POV and razor sharp image.Amasing detail and great pose from your subject.