Over the past couple of years, S.T.E.M toys have really taken the world by storm. More and more parents are turning to these toys because they believe they are the best for their kids and they’re right. For those of you that aren’t familiar with the term “STEM,” this is an acronym for Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math. These are the skills that children need to adjust to in order to stay relevant in today’s tech-centric world. While there are many different STEM toys currently available on the market, the one we would like to talk to you about today is one that isn’t out yet, it’s the IQ Key’s Green Solar Kit. In this review, we’re going to tell you what we already know about IQ Key’s Green Solar Kit, so pay close attention …
What does IQ Key’s Green Solar Kit Focus on?
IQ Key’s Green Solar Kit is fully focused on the mechanics of engineering and construction. Using the solar panels, children can build a total of five models. Children will spend hours on end putting together the solar operated models with the practical engineering kit.
The Green solar kit allows individuals to construction functional models that move and rotate. This is done by using the electrical parts, plastic models and clear polycarbonate capsules.
Why is the capsule clear? That is a question many children may ask. The capsules are clear in order to ensure the workings of the gears – the gears can easily be seen by the users so that they can gain an understanding of the mechanical workings of each model.
Of course, this kit, along with every other kit offered by this company, comes with an instruction manual. This one in particular comes with an eight page instruction manual with step-by-step instructions on putting each model together. Each model can be put together between one and four steps. Since there aren’t a whole lot of steps to follow, putting the model together will be easy for children.
In the guide, they outline the components, how to assemble and connect the different parts, and they explain the purpose of each capsule. They also explain how the solar panels operate, which is pretty cool. The instruction guide also has a memo page, so users can write down any observations or notes they feel necessary.
In the Box
In the box, you will receive quite a few pieces. Here’s what you will get:
Speed reduction capsule
2 x Crown gear capsule
Worm gear capsule
3 x IQ capsule
2 x Transmission capsule
Inter gear capsule
2 x Axle support
12 x Octagonal connector (small)
6 x Octagonal connector (large)
4 x Lead line
Battery case (large)
9 x Cap
5 x Coupler
9 x Cap
5 x Tire (small)
4 x Wheel (small)
2 x Impeller
4 x Float
4 x Bar connector
3 X Cap
2 x Diagonal bar connector (small)
2 x Straight bar connector (large)
2 x diagonal bar connector (large)
2 x Leadline binder
3 x Connecting pin
2 x Triangle block
As an added note, you can use two AA batteries if desired, but these are not included with the kit.
This kit is recommended for the ages nine and over and yes, adult supervision is required. It isn’t suitable for children that are three and under due to the small parts. The capsule size is 65mm diameter. Overall, this is a pretty cool kit that will offer an exciting learning experience to your little one.