YOU might think that once your airplane crashes into the open sea, things couldn't get any worse.
Not so, according to the Flight Safety Foundation, a nonprofit organization founded in 1947 to provide information to the aviation industry. This month's Flight Safety Digest, titled ''Waterproof Flight Operations,'' offers guidance on what to do after ''ditching'' an airplane in the water, including hints on how to set the plane down on a wave, who should be in charge of the life raft and whether to stay near the aircraft. (The answers: on the back side of the swell, the captain and no.)
As any B-movie fan knows, the next hazard for survivors is sharks.
Actually, the foundation says, attacks are quite rare, with far greater risks posed by hypothermia and dehydration. Still, the digest contains plenty of advice on how to handle unwelcome company. Excerpts follow.
MATTHEW L. WALD
First of all, there's no need to panic -- most of the time:
Sharks and other ocean creatures ''are really of no concern at all'' -- as long as the survivors are in a life raft, said George Burgess, director of the International Shark Attack File (ISAF), which investigates reports of shark-human interactions and maintains records of sharks that have bitten humans worldwide dating from the mid-1500's.
''Food, water, communication with whoever's going to save you -- not to mention the health and safety of people on the raft -- would all be of greater concern than a shark attack,'' Burgess said.Continue reading the main story
Without a life raft, however, the situation might be different. ''Once you're in the water, there is concern,'' Burgess said. ''Sharks can, and occasionally do, damage human beings. Humans can be attractive targets, especially if they're bleeding.''
The unlucky can expect three types of ''unprovoked shark bites'':
''Hit-and-run'' bites, in which the shark bites a human while apparently perceiving that the human is one of the shark's customary food sources -- for example, a seal. These bites usually occur in the surf in turbulent water conditions that include poor visibility for the shark. ISAF specialists say that the shark probably recognizes immediately upon biting that the human is not the food it was seeking, and then releases the human and does not return.
''Bump-and-bite'' bites, in which the shark circles and bumps its victim before biting. These bites usually occur in deeper water and may involve repeated bites and/or sustained bites, and severe injuries.
''Sneak'' bites, which occur without warning. These bites, like bump-and-bite bites, usually occur in deeper water and may involve repeated bites and/or sustained bites, and severe injuries.
Bites involving survivors of aircraft accidents and marine-vessel accidents typically are either bump-and-bite bites or sneak bites, which ISAF said are a result of ''feeding or antagonistic behaviors'' by the shark.
After some harrowing first-person accounts by survivors of plane and ship disasters (''When I moved my legs slowly, with the object of resting, I touched with my feet the bodies of these animals, which were constantly below mine in order to attack me''), we learn that sharks are more likely to go after solitary swimmers and are attracted by shiny jewelry and bright colors:
''The safety orange/yellow used in [life vests] is referred to as 'yum-yum yellow' by shark biologists,'' said Burgess, who noted that although studies have indicated sharks' attraction to bright and/or contrasting colors, there are no data to show that sharks have been attracted to -- and bitten -- people because of their yellow or orange life vests. ''But it's a trade-off. To be readily seen by rescue folks in the air or from a vessel, you also must be seen by sharks.''
If you are in a raft and spot sharks, here's what to do:
Do not fish. If a fish has been hooked, let it go. Do not clean fish in the water.
Do not let arms, legs or equipment dangle in the water. Remain quiet and still.
Bury the dead as soon as possible by pushing the bodies into the ocean.
For those stuck in the water, ''the following actions are advised'':
Survivors should float vertically and move as little as possible. Someone lying horizontally in the water is more likely to resemble sharks' typical prey, said Erich Ritter, chief scientist with the Shark Research Institute's Global Shark Attack File.
Remain in a group ''at all costs'' and gather together as much floating material as possible, Burgess said.
Do not remove any clothing, including shoes. Sharks generally bite unclothed people -- and those with bare feet -- before they bite those wearing clothing. Clothing also protects against cuts and scrapes from the shark's rough skin -- injuries that might occur if a shark brushes against a human.
Do not urinate or defecate while sharks are in the area.
If you are injured and bleeding, stop the bleeding as quickly as possible. If a group of people is in the water, form a circle around the bleeding survivor.
Ritter said that, if a shark actually bites and does not let go, ''the best thing to do is to not fight the shark, besides trying to get its mouth open. Any motion, such as jerking away from the shark, will lead to much more severe wounds and can be much more devastating than the actual bite.
Opening a shark's mouth should not be attempted by hitting the animal, since that reflects a 'prey action.' I consider it the best to go after the gills or the eyes and poke them, if reachable.''
Blood loss and drowning are the most serious risks for victims:
Wounds inflicted by a shark's rough skin or its multiple rows of sharp teeth can be relatively minor, such as skin abrasions after a shark's body brushes against a victim or relatively small cuts from bites -- usually on the legs -- that are inflicted during a hit-and-run bite. Other bites, especially those inflicted during bump-and-bite and sneak encounters, can result in more serious injuries.
Paul S. Auerbach, M.D., clinical professor of surgery in the Stanford University Medical Center Division of Emergency Medicine, said that when a shark bites a human, the shark most frequently bites the legs, arms and hands, as the victim tries to fight off the shark. In more severe bites, a shark often ''shakes its head and forebody in an effort to tear flesh from the victim,'' Auerbach said. . . .
If the wound severs major arteries, the victim may suffer a ''torrential'' hemorrhage; injuries also can include broken bones and massive internal injuries, Auerbach said. ''Because the victim is generally far from medical assistance, blood loss may be profound.'' . . .
Hypovolemic shock (shock resulting from loss of blood) usually is the greatest threat to life. Recommended treatment, while a victim is in the water, includes manual compression of wounds. After a victim is out of the water, ''All means available must be used to ligate [tie off] large, disrupted blood vessels or to apply compression dressings,'' Auerbach said.
Wounds inflicted by sharks often contain a variety of contaminants, including ocean water, sand, shark teeth and marine organisms. Ideally, the wounds should be washed and bandaged, and a victim should receive antibiotics to prevent infection. This may be difficult on a life raft. . . .
Apparently, sharks aren't the only creatures to worry about:
Peter Fenner, M.D., a specialist in jellyfish envenomation and an Australian designated aviation medical examiner, said that survivors of an aircraft ditching or other water-contact accident in the open ocean would have only a remote chance of being stung by jellyfish, unless the aircraft landed ''in an armada of Portuguese man-of-war.''
''[Survivors'] best protection is that they are in clothing, which prevents being stung, except in exposed areas,'' Fenner said. . . .
The report concludes by citing yet more potential hazards, including barracuda, venomous sea snakes, electric rays (also known as torpedoes), stingrays, sea anemones and even estuarine crocodiles:
Although many ocean creatures can inflict serious injuries on humans, specialists say that the risk of an encounter with a dangerous predator is relatively slight for survivors of a water-contact accident. Nevertheless, not all dangers can be eliminated.Continue reading the main story