Mittwoch, 17. November 2010
AGNIHOTRA ASH AND RADIOACTIVITY
A group of former Soviet scientists have confirmed that Agnihotra ash is the only absolutely pure substance which can work directly against radioactivity. It works on a very simple principle. Our body is not able to recognize different elements like for example atoms of iron, and even less if they are radioactive or not. For example I eat an iron atom with my food and my body is not able to recognize it. When my body is filled with non-radioactive elements, then any radioactive element I ingest will be thrown out; that is the principle of metabolism. Be it caesium, iron or any other element. We need caesium every day, iodine too. But when I take these same non-radioactive elements before, through the intake of Agnihotra ash before eating, then radioactive elements will not stay in the body; they come in and go out again!
That means that from the Agnihotra ash we can make tablets and they will act against radioactivity! Each scientist must say 'Yes' to this possibility! But the cow dung, the ghee, the rice, all the substances used for the Agnihotra process should not be radioactive. I know that in India and in Australia these substances are not polluted by radioactivity. We should start to produce Agnihotra ash tablets, either in India or in Europe, but with non-radioactive substances. This must be done on a mass scale!
Chernobyl was very dangerous, but today it is even more dangerous. Before the radioactive elements were in the air - now they are in the soil. Europe is suffering! Children don't have enough non-radioactive elements. Of course the TVs, newspapers and radios don't speak about the real situation, but the scientists and experts know that it is very dangerous. Every day becomes more and more difficult. Again I say that we must produce Agnihotra ash tablets!
In the Agnihotra ash there are 92 elements! We have to check the elements that are in the ash. Then we have to know the quality and the quantity of each of these elements within the ash and how much Agnihotra ash a man needs for a daily dose. The main point is, that the elements of Agnihotra ash have not become radioactive. All medical medicine, every tablet, vitamin, etc. is radioactive, especially in Europe.
An example: the cow takes 92 elements when she eats grass and during the whole cycle 92 elements go out daily. So 92 elements go in, 92 go out and within the cow there also remain 92 elements all the time. That is the cycle. The same happens with every animal. It is only a difference in the concentration of the elements. Cows, men and goats have quite a similar concentration of these elements. When we take the product of a cow, what comes out has all the 92 elements! A cow is like a factory producing ghee and cow-dung! Ghee has about 90% carbon. It is very rare, to find such an amount of carbon in any substance. The analysis of the Agnihotra ash will show if there is some radioactive carbon in the ghee. After the burning of the ghee it is not an organic material anymore. It becomes again a mineral substance. The mineral is again prepared to be returned to the earth. The burning process can take place by Agnihotra. The input and output weight are the same. Both cannot undergo any change. The atomic weight of the carbon is 6, and it does not change. You can burn it, you can feed a cow with it, or give it to a person, it always has the same weight.
Here the scientists think in a different way. They think it is not the same if carbon is going through a man’s or a cow’s body, the weight remains the same, but within the carbon there are some subatomic particles. The physicist has found - beside protons, neutrons and electrons - about 2223 subatomic particles, but science does not know what to do with them. Why they are like that, nobody knows.
So the two important points are:
1. Agnihotra ash contains more elements than any tablet known up to now
2. Conventional tablets are radioactive and Agnihotra ash is not radioactive!