In a decade, the demand for tech-based jobs rose at an unprecedented rate. Web design particularly saw an average growth of 20% per year since 2010. Not surprising given that brands and companies today recognize the need to establish their presence online.
But what really constitutes a good website? Is it design? Navigability? Good copy?
Ideally, it’s supposed to be a good balance of all three. But when you think about it, it really all comes down to aesthetics. It’s the first thing that catches your eye even before you decide to read what it has to say or before you start clicking around to explore.
The primary issue with many sites however, is that their designers were neither imaginative nor detail-oriented enough to plan how users will actually use them. The goal is always to anticipate a particular need or action that your users will want to find and organize the site so that all the information is delivered promptly. It has to be engaging, efficient and effective. And fortunately, for anyone looking into capitalizing into the promise of the tech industry, it can be learned.
There are thousands of guides and tutorials available online for anyone who wants to learn, but the best way to go about it is to learn through live instruction.
The dynamic nature of the Internet means that web design will constantly be changing and evolving, but learning the basics of it requires structured curriculums that will allow you to go through it step by step. The best courses often present learning through one-on-one interaction and personal training, which aids in breaking through mental barriers faster—even for newbies.
This is something that The Next_ School understands and prioritizes. Their web design course begins with web design fundamentals using HTML (Hypertext Markup Language) and CSS (Cascading Style Sheets) as the backbone and using basic Photoshop for adding images to your web layout before moving on to using Adobe Dreamweaver as a way to build web pages faster and more efficiently, and be able to use basic WordPress as a popular CMS application in creating websites.
More importantly, it combines theoretical lessons with practical applications. Meaning it’s not just about learning about tags or syntax or code, it’s also about understanding your target audience, the users and how web design can make or break a brand by the way they respond to the design.
Courses are brief and designed with students or employees seeking to gain an edge in the industry in mind, with flexible class schedules that make it easy for students to attend after school or work.
Straightforward though the concept of web design may sound, the most common mistake made by today’s designers or aspiring designers is to prioritize style over substance—what NEXT offers is the chance to not only learn the basics but to understand the nuances that drive this industry as well.
iACADEMY’s The NEXT_ School, formerly known as School of Continuing Education (iSCE), answers the demand for learning opportunities that go beyond the school setting. Our short courses are designed to aid in the growth and development of individuals as well as organizations, through various classes in the fields of Computing, Business, and Design. Our premier courses also include Six Sigma, PSE Securities Specialist and Disaster Risk Reduction. For questions and inquiries, please call (02) 8897777loc. 820-21 or visit www.thenextschool.ph
Natural disasters are on the rise. In the past year, the world has seen devastating earthquakes, massive storms wiping out whole provinces, tsunamis barreling through vulnerable cities.
For years, some of the biggest companies around the globe have worked hard to embed the tenets of Six Sigma. Most, regardless of industry, recognize it as a business approach designed to measure and quantify business operations and bring the company toward operational excellence. Today, more and more businesses, big and small, continue to adapt Six Sigma as a way of life.