Intravascular Ultrasound Systems (IVUS) is an imaging method with which we can visualize a coronary artery from the inside out. Intravascular Ultrasound Systems are usually designed in such a way that the individual can have a complete view of the coronary artery blockade using a catheter which is attached to an ultrasound probe at one end and the other end is attached to a computerized ultrasound equipment.
The inside out view helps to find out the sent sizing, fixation, and in confirmation that the stent implanted are appropriately placed with full expansion of the stent, which fits tightly round around vessel wall. By this the cardiologist sense that the information acquired by the IVUS medium can a make a huge different in knowing how well the patients are treated and can obtain accuracy about the stent placement with reduced complications.
Now a days the IVUS diagnostic procedure is majorly used in coronary interventions where it determines and provides the qualitative information about the composition of the plaques and its echogenicity strategies. IVUS demonstrates the consistency of the plaque (soft, fibrous, calcific or mixed) and its differentiation from thrombus.
Request Report Sample@ http://www.futuremarketinsights.com/reports/sample/rep-gb-1858
IVUS instrumentation overview:
The Intravascular Ultrasound is designed with two major components i.e.
- Catheter with a miniaturized transducer at its tip
- Console containing the electronics necessary to reconstruct the image
The imagining is captured by the frequency of the ultrasound which varies type of vessels which is to be scanned.
- Often used frequency is 20 MHz
- Vascular imagining for a medium sized vessel is 12.5 – 50 MHz
- Vascular imagining for a large vessel such a aorta is 12.5 – 20 MHz
- Smaller vessels require high frequency of probes within a range of 30-40 MHz
Two types of catheter systems are, one with an end-hole which are delivered over the guide wire, and those which do not have an end-hole and are introduced directly through the sheath.
The transducer design have been approached into two basic ways, i.e.
- Mechanical type
In the phased-array systems, there are multiple transducer elements (32-64) which are in arranged in an array are activated sequentially to generate the image.
Mechanical probes rotates an electric transducer at 1800 rpm, which has the capacity to produce 30 images per second.
Request For TOC@ http://www.futuremarketinsights.com/toc/rep-gb-1858
Intravascular Ultrasound Systems Market: Drivers and Restraints
There is drastic Increase in the number percutaneous coronary interventions and number of stent procedures. Major Lot of population now a days prefer less invasive procedures, the technological advancements in image guided therapeutic treatment and growing incidence of cardiovascular disease led to the increase in the intravascular ultrasound systems market.
The drawback for the IVUS is the high cost, lack of uniform reimbursement and threat from optical coherence tomography.
Intravascular Ultrasound Systems Market: Segmentation
The global market for intravascular ultrasound systems are broadly classified on the basis of product type, applications and end user.