Effects on Children: A Primer for School Psychologists and
Counselors. By Peter Breggin M.D.
prospective longitudinal study of ADHD and age-mate control
subjects...has provided evidence that childhood use of CNS
treatment is significantly and pervasively implicated in the
uptake of regular smoking, in daily smoking in adulthood, in
dependence, and in the lifetime use of cocaine and
Lambert. Research Presented at the NIH Consensus Development
Conference 1998 Stimulant
Treatment as a Risk Factor for Nicotine Use
and Substance Abuse. Dr.
Lambert is a professor and the Chairperson of The
Berkeley Psychology Division
In the United States more money is spent on drugs
for children with behavior issues than for antibiotics and asthma.
A 49 percent rise in the use of attention deficit disorder drugs
by children younger than 5 in the past three years contributed to
a 23 percent increase in usage for all children. Today more
than 9 million American children are taking these drugs.
The effects of Methylphenidate, Amphetamine, and Cocaine
on the brain are strikingly similar.
The truth of ADHD and Brain Scans
Did you know that no controls were used in brain scans
when looking for ADHD. The scans were only performed on children
taking drugs and not compared to one that were not.
"The issue of prior medication
in ADHD subjects constitutes a serious confound in
this body of research, and still continues
to be dismissed and willfully obscured by researchers in this
The Institute of Mind and Behavior
DEA Report on
use of methylphenidate in the United States has increased
dramatically in recent years.Since 1990, there has been a six-fold increase in the U.S.
production and utilization of methylphenidate.This increase contrasts sharply with trends in medical
practice seen in the rest of the world" To read the
entire report posted on www.ablechild.org:
This website is operated by Ablechild.org
(Parents for Label and Drug Free Education). The intent of this site
is to educate and inform the public on the issues surrounding ADD/ADHD,
the testing, and the drugs involved. Since there is no medical proof
of any ADD or ADHD "disorder", we ask that you do not use this
site for medical reasons. For real medical solutions please contact your
doctor - for real educational solutions contact your school.