[gley-zing] /ˈgleɪ zɪŋ/
the act of furnishing or fitting with glass; the business or work of a glazier.
panes or sheets of glass set or made to be set in frames, as in windows, doors, or mirrors.
the act of applying a .
the glassy surface of something .
verb (used with object), glazed, glazing.
to furnish or fill with glass:
to glaze a window.
to give a vitreous surface or coating to (a ceramic or the like), as by the application of a substance or by fusion of the body.
to cover with a smooth, glossy surface or coating.
Cookery. to coat (a food) with sugar, a sugar syrup, or some other glossy, edible substance.
Fine Arts. to cover (a painted surface or parts of it) with a thin layer of transparent color in order to modify the tone.
to give a glassy surface to, as by polishing.
to give a coating of ice to (frozen food) by dipping in water.
to grind (cutlery blades) in preparation for finishing.
verb (used without object), glazed, glazing.
to become glazed or glassy:
Their eyes glazed over as the lecturer droned on.
(of a grinding wheel) to lose abrasive quality through polishing of the surface from wear.
a smooth, glossy surface or coating.
the substance for producing such a coating.
Fine Arts. a thin layer of transparent color spread over a painted surface.
a smooth, lustrous surface on certain fabrics, produced by treating the material with a chemical and calendering.
Also called glaze ice, silver frost, silver thaw, verglas; especially British, glazed frost. a thin coating of ice on terrestrial objects, caused by rain that freezes on impact.
Compare 1 (def 1).
the surface of a glazed object
glass fitted, or to be fitted, in a door, frame, etc
(transitive) to fit or cover with glass
(transitive) (ceramics) to cover with a vitreous solution, rendering impervious to liquid and smooth to the touch
(transitive) to cover (a painting) with a layer of semitransparent colour to modify the tones
(transitive) to cover (foods) with a shiny coating by applying beaten egg, sugar, etc
(transitive) to make glossy or shiny
when intr, often foll by over. to become or cause to become glassy: his eyes were glazing over
a semitransparent coating applied to a painting to modify the tones
a smooth lustrous finish on a fabric produced by applying various chemicals
something used to give a glossy surface to foods: a syrup glaze
mid-14c., glasen “to fit with glass,” from glas (see glass), probably influenced by glazier. Noun sense of “substance used to make a glossy coating” is first attested 1784; in reference to ice, from 1752. Related: Glazed; glazing.
noun 1. a supporting or strengthening bar for a glass window, door, etc Usual US word muntin
noun a passion for listmaking
Mathematics. 1. . 1. gay, lesbian, bisexual. greatest lower bound
adjective 1. pertaining to gays, lesbians, bisexuals, and transgenders collectively. noun 2. Usually, GLBTs, GLBT’s. a person in this group. adjective 1. relating to lesbians, gays, bisexuals, and transgenders collectively: the LGBT community. noun 2. Usually, LGBTs, LGBT’s. a person in this group: Which city has the most LGBTs? abbreviation 1. lesbian, gay, bisexual, and […]