Zayd ibn Haritha, who was Muhammad's ex-slave, was the third
person to be converted to Muhammad's religion. Although he was Muhammad's
companion for a long time, Zayd was
revengeful, cruel, and without compassion. What a contrast
between the companions of Muhammad and the 12 disciples of Jesus Christ.
The followers of Jesus saw an example of one who walk in submissive love and
healing power among men.
Umm Qirfa Fatima, daughter of Rabi'a, was a very old women when
Zayd led an attack against her village. This old lady was capture
and ordered to be killed. As cruel as it is to kill an old helpless
woman, Muhammad's disciple had lost all feelings of human decency and ordered Qays
b. Al-Musahhar to kill her.
Like cruel animals sporting with prey, Muhammad's warriors
decided to rip Umm's body in two. They were
getting excited, soon they would hear her cries for mercy, screams,
and the sounds of her bones breaking inside her stretched out body.
They grabbed her legs and tied each leg to a separate rope.
They did not want to kill her first and then desecrate her body.
They needed the screams, the breaking bones, the tearing flesh, and
the hot pulsating blood flowing from her body to have a climax of
sadistic pleasure. After the ropes were tied firmly and securely to
two strong camels, they whipped the camels, driving them to pull
with their greatest force. At first there were just the cries for
mercy, and then the screams of unbearable pain. After that, the
bones started to break and joints between bones pulled apart.
Finally, the flesh and blood vessels tore apart and her frail body
ripped in two. Their diabolic sport had no sense of modesty when they exposed
her body to their prying eyes. Finally, the sadistic pleasure was
over, and they had to untied the ropes from the camels that were
pulling the two pieces of her
mangled and bloody corpse.
Qays b. Al-Musahhar had supervised the killing of Umm.
Afterwards, he could not contain his bragging and boasting. So, Qays
wrote a poem in honor of himself for killing Mas'ada. He
believed there was no greater joy than killing for Muhammad and his
The ancient Muslim sources leave us the following record,
ZAYD B. HARITHA'S RAID ON B. FAZARA AND THE DEATH OF UMM QIRFA
Zayd also raided Wadi'l-Qura, where he met B. Fazara and some
of this companions were killed; he himself was carried wounded from
the field. Ward b. 'Amr b. Madash, one of the b. Sa'd b. Hudhayl,
was killed by one of B. Badr (whose name was Sa'd b. HudhaymT.
And I.H.) When Zayd came he swore that he would use no ablution
until he raided b. Fazara; and when he recovered from his wounds the
apostle sent him against them with a force. He fought (T. He met)
them in Wadi'l-Qura and killed some of them. Qays b. Al-Musahhar
al-Ya'muri killed Mas'ada b. Hakama b. Malik b. Hudhayfa b.
Badr, and Umm Qirfa Fatima d. Rabi'a b. Badr was taken prisoner. She
was a very old women, wife of Malik. Her daughter and 'Abdullah
b. Mas'ada were also taken. Zayd ordered Qays b. Al-Musahhar to kill
Umm Qirfa and he killed her cruelly (T. By putting a rope to her
two legs and to two camels and driving them until they rent her in
two). Then they brought Umm Qirfa's daughter and Mas'ada's
son to the Apostle. The daughter of Umm Qirfa belonged to Salama b.
'Amr b. Al-Akwa' who had taken her. She held a position of
honour among her people, and the Arabs used to say, 'Had you been
more powerful than Umm Qirfa you can have done no more.' Salama
asked the apostle to let him have her and he gave her to him and he
presented her to his uncle Hazn b. Abu Wahb and she bare him 'Abdu'l-Rahma
Qays b. Al-Musahhar said about the killing of Mas'ada:
I tried as his mother's son would to get revenge for Ward.
As long as I live I will avenge Ward.
When I saw him I attacked him on my steed,
That doughty warrior of the family of Badr.
I impaled him on my lance of Qa'dabi make
Which seemed to flash like a fire in an open space.1
It is our desire that our readers will consider their sins before
the Day of the Last Judgment. The answer to your deep
spiritual need is found in Jesus Christ who died for
Last edited 03/11/2001
Top of Page.