Treating the causes of acid reflux in a non-invasive way.
Many people suffer “heartburn,” but it’s not the heart that’s burning – it’s the esophagus, the tube that carries food from your throat to your stomach. Acid reflux, also called acid indigestion, is caused by acid traveling back up from the stomach. The symptoms are more than simply uncomfortable. Left untreated, they can develop into a more serious condition called gastroesophageal reflux disease, or GERD, which can cause serious, even life-threatening problems.
To address the underlying causes of your gastrointestinal (GI) distress, it’s vitally important to get a medical diagnosis and start treatment. Surgery is always the last option. But if surgery is required, the Heartburn and Acid Reflux Center treats a variety of GI conditions with several minimally invasive robotically assisted procedures performed in an outpatient setting. These procedures include the groundbreaking new LINX Reflux Management System, hiatal hernia repair surgery and nissen fundoplication.
Robotic surgery is performed using the da Vinci Si, the most advanced robotic system in the world. The miVIP Centers were the first outpatient facility in the country to feature the da Vinci. Robotic surgery has been shown to produce excellent outcomes with less blood loss, less pain, little or no scarring and faster recovery times, so patients are back to work or school quickly.
The first line of treatment for GERD usually involves lifestyle adjustments. Maintaining a healthy weight, and avoiding alcohol, cigarettes, and certain foods are often enough to alleviate the disorder. If lifestyle changes aren’t enough, medications known as Proton Pump Inhibitors (PPIs), are the next option. These medicines are better known by such trade names as Prilosec®, Prevacid® and Nexium®, and are the most commonly prescribed and potent medications for treating GERD.
However, medications only treat the symptoms of GERD, they do not treat the underlying cause. When used long term, these medications cause serious side effects, including osteoporosis, low magnesium levels, and increased risk of infectious colitis. They are also associated with significantly higher risk of esophageal cancer.
When lifestyle changes and medications fail, your doctor may recommend surgery. Our surgeons are board certified by the American College of Surgeons, and our Center is accredited by the Joint Commission, ensuring that our patients receive the highest-quality medical treatment in an outpatient setting.
To learn more about the comprehensive diagnostic and treatments we offer, call us today at 855.648.4799.