Plantar fasciitis is one of the most common inflammatory conditions .The severe pain they cause (especially a heel pain) leads many patients to the podiatrist. It is important to understand that plantar fasciitis is basically inflammation of the fibrous ligament, called the plantar fascia, with the function of supporting the foot’s arch. More details about this can be obtained from https://nydnrehab.com/what-we-treat/foot-and-ankle-pain/plantar-fasciitis-physical-therapy/.
What are the symptoms of plantar fasciitis?
The main symptom is a sharp pain in the heel. It is also common to experience pain in the foot’s arch Plantar fasciitis can also be accompanied by secondary symptoms such as pain behind the heel or the Achilles tendon.
When are these pains felt?
They appear especially in the morning, during the first steps then, will fade or even disappear in a some minutes. They can also be felt when the patient gets up after a long period of sitting. It also happens that they manifest themselves in athletes, during and after the sporting activity.
How to quickly relieve the pain caused by plantar fasciitis?
First, a good way to relieve pain is to avoid walking barefoot and not hesitate to apply ice from the first onset of pain. Then also it recommended to wear shoes that offer good support and are not too flexible to let the foot sag.
Is a shoe with good support an inevitable orthopedic shoe?
No, not necessarily. A shoe that offers good support is a shoe whose heel is neither too flat nor too high. Ballerinas shoes for example, should be avoided, as should shoes with heels too high.
Are some people predisposed to developing plantar fasciitis? Yes, unfortunately, some patients are more at risk than others. First, people with flat feet or hollow feet are more susceptible to this type of problem. Then there are overweight patients or those who have gained a lot of weight in a short time. Athletes who are very demanding on their feet are also at significant risk, especially if they do not care to stretch before training. Finally, but it is more rare that some patients who suffer from inflammatory diseases are likely to develop plantar fasciitis.
Is plantar fasciitis a more recurrent or punctual podiatric condition in a patient?
Generally, as long as the cause of the inflammation is not controlled, the problem is called to return. Most of my patients who suffer from recurrent plantar fasciitis are already suffering from poor biomechanical conditions of their feet. However, in some very rare cases, plantar fasciitis may occur in isolation. For example, a patient who is over-using his feet (during a particularly intense physical relocation or training) may have heel pain due to plantar fasciitis. On the other hand, if it has a good mechanics of the foot, it will disappear on its own.
Can plantar fasciitis be hereditary?
Yes, to the extent that one inherits the shape of the foot (e.g a flat foot or a hollow foot). Eventually, it is these positions of the foot that can lead to plantar fasciitis. However, it is possible to inherit the shape of the foot of its parents without suffering the same pain in the feet.
Is plantar fasciitis a condition that can become permanent?
No, not if one has the proper treatment to cure it. When first heel pain occurs, it may be good to do some stretching and apply ice. If it does not work, you should quickly consult a podiatrist.
How can a podiatrist help a patient better live with plantar fasciitis? Through a thorough examination of the foot biomechanics, the podiatrist can accurately diagnose the causes of inflammation of the fascia and suggest appropriate treatments, including foot orthotics.