More renewable materials in our products means less packaging from fossil fuels.
But, how do you ensure they keep renewing?
You work with experts
Forests are essential for life on earth, for people and for business. One of the ways of protecting forests comes from ensuring traceability through protection, certification and identification of paper and wood.
On average, 52% of the JUST water package's weight is made up of paperboard. By using wood fibers as our main raw material, we minimize the need for materials made from fossil fuels (Coal, Petroleum, Natural gas).
It is critical to understand the origin of the wood-based products, whether the wood is derived from known and legal sources and lastly, the sustainability of that source.
To that end, our materials are certified by the Forest Stewardship Council® - a global, not-for-profit organization dedicated to the promotion of responsible forest management worldwide.
The FSC guarantees that the wood based products purchased come from responsible healthy, forests, and strong communities.
Chain of Custody
1. Compliance with International Laws And Forest Stewardship Principles
Forest Management shall respect all applicable laws of the country in which they occur, and international treaties and agreements to which the country is a signatory, and comply with all FSC Principles and Criteria.
2. Tenure and Use Rights And Responsibilities
Long-term tenure and use rights to the land and forest resources shall be clearly defined, documented and legally established.
3. Indigenous Peoples’ Rights
The legal and customary rights of indigenous peoples to own, use and manage their lands, territories, and resources shall be recognized and respected.
4. Community Relations And Worker’s Rights
Forest management operations shall maintain or enhance the long-term social and economic well being of forest workers and local communities.
5. Benefits From The Forest
Forest management operations shall encourage the efficient use of the forest’s multiple products and services to ensure economic viablity and a wide range of environmental and social benefits.
6. Environmental Impact
Forest management operations shall conserve biological diversity and its associated values, water resources, soils and unique and fragile ecosystems and landscapes, and by so doing, maintain the ecological functions and the integrity of the forest.
7. Management Plan
A management plan – appropriate to the scale and intensity of the operations – shall be written, implemented, and kept up to date. The long-term objectives of management, and the means of achieving them, shall be clearly stated.
8. Monitoring And Assesment
Monitoring shall be conducted – appropriate to the scale and intensity of forest management – to assess the condition of the forest, yields of forest products, chain of custody, management activities and their social and environmental impacts.
9. Maintenance Of High Conservation Value Forests
Management activities in high conservation value forests shall maintain or enhance the attributes which define such forests. Decisions regarding high conservation value forests shall always be considered in the context of precautionary approach.
Plantations shall be planned and managed in accordance with Principles and Criteria 1-9, and Principle 10 and its Criteria. While plantations can provide an array of social and economic benefits, and can contribute to satisfying the world’s needs for forest products, they should complement the management of, reduce pressures on, and promote the restoration and conservation of natural forests.
Additional certification groups within our chain of custody
The Rainforest Alliance is an international NGO that works to conserve biodiversity and ensure sustainable livelihoods by transforming land use, business practices and consumer behavior. The Rainforest Alliance, one of the worlds largest FSC accredited certification bodies, worked with Tetra Pak – our packaging partner – as an independent verifier of their Chain of Custody.
The Rainforest Alliance works with forest companies to responsibly manage their lands. We certify these lands to the standards of the Forest Stewardship Council (FSC). FSC-certified forests protect ecosystems, wildlife habitat, soils and waterways and contribute to the well being of forest workers and communities.
The Global Forest & Trade Network is the World Wildlife Fund’s initiative to eliminate illegal logging and drive improvements in forest management while transforming the global marketplace into a force for saving the world’s valuable and threatened forests. Our partnership with Tetra Pak ensures that there is a commitment in place to source paper for our products only through certified suppliers and mills – those that adhere to the standards of the Forest Stewardship Council (FSC).