I’ve been getting lots of emails and questions lately about the effect of the drought on the various plants that our readers have in their yards. The editor of the Gardening Volunteers of South Texas (GVST) Newsletter, Anne Schiller, got the following article off the Internet from the Colorado State University web site. I wrote to the author and got permission to use parts of it for your information here.
The article is written by Mary Small, Cooperative Extension Agent, Urban IPM. The original title was Recognizing Drought Injury to Plants and you can see the entire article (with pictures) at www.coopext.colostate.edu/4dmg/Garden/drought6.htm.
Drought stress occurs when plant roots are not absorbing enough water for their needs. There are many causes for drought stress. The obvious one is insufficient moisture. However, sufficient moisture may be present but plant roots are not functioning properly to absorb it. There may be just enough present for the plant to maintain itself, but no extra available for growth. In some cases, plants that are over-watered suffer drought stress symptoms. Overwatering drives oxygen out of the soil, this is needed by plant roots for proper functioning. If there is insufficient oxygen, roots die, just as they do when there is insufficient water.
Drought may be of two kinds: short-term and long-term. An example of a short-term drought is the length of the growing season. A long-term drought lasts more than one growing season. While a short-term can damage plants, the long-term droughts are more harmful due to the chronic moisture stress.
Symptoms Found on an Entire Plant
The pattern of plant damage or death occurs from the top of the plant down and from the outside of the plant inward.
Plants wilt. One of the first symptoms of drought-stressed plants is the loss of turgidity.
Plants or plant parts become limp and droopy.
Plants show a decrease in growth or have no growth, both in girth and in length.
Plants or sections of them appear chlorotic (yellow or yellow-green).
Tree canopy may be thin.
Plants may leaf out, then die later in the growing season, a result of depleted food reserves.
Wood or bark cracks.
Entire plants may die, as the result of root death from dehydration.
Symptoms Found on Leaves
Leaves are smaller than normal.
Deciduous leaves turn brown from the outside edges inward and in between the veins (“scorch”).
Leaves roll up and/or are misshapen.
Leaves drop prematurely.
Leaves remain attached to tree, even though brown.
Leaves are dull in appearance rather than shiny.
Leaves may turn blue-green.
Flower and Fruit Symptoms
Flowers fail to open properly.
The flowering period is shorter than normal.
Fruit drops early.
Fruit and seed production may be reduced or absent.
Pest Problems Related to Drought:
Moderate to large amount of spider mites can be found. Spider mites are attracted to, and
proliferate on drought-stressed plants.
Presence of certain twig beetles and borers, which are attracted to drought-stressed plants.
Drought decreases a plant’s resistance to these pests.
Additional Lawn Symptoms:
Turf browns, in entire patches or in spots.
Thinning lawns as a result of decreased food production and storage.
Appearance of more lawn weeds, a result of lawn thinning.
Classes Coming Up Next Monday
On Monday, July 20, 2009, The Gardening Volunteers of South Texas (GVST) Gardening Essentials class will feature Ed Bradley, San Antonio’s resident rose expert talking about “Solving Summertime Rose Problems”. This topic will be especially useful to those of you who really enjoy your roses but may be having a hard time with them during this drought.
Diane Lewis will be speaking on “Creating Herbal Landscapes.” Diane has addressed several of the herbal societies in the area and is an interesting speaker. If herbs are your thing or if you want to dress up your landscape with edible plants, you don’t want to miss this one.
The classes are held at the Garden Center at the San Antonio Botanical Garden on Funston and New Braunfels. Take Broadway to Funston (there is a stop light on that corner), turn left there and proceed to New Braunfels. The Garden Center will be the first building on your left after you cross New Braunfels Ave. Classes start at 12:15 and conclude by 3:30. There is no fee, but a $5 donation is requested to offset the costs of the class. Bring your brown-bag lunch; drinks and snacks are provided by GVST.
Send your comments and/or questions to firstname.lastname@example.org or see the website at www.thehillcountrygardener.com.