Is your diet lacking in essential vitamins and nutrients? Is
your food causing you to be sick and tired?
Did you know sprouts are considered nature’s super food?
There are many reasons to eat them daily. Sprouts contain most
vitamins, fibre and protein. They are hydrating, alkalizing, biogenic,
and regenerative. In addition to all these healthful reasons to
add sprouts to your life, they also contain loads of digestive
enzymes. Enzymes help our body process the food we eat. The older
we get, the tougher it is for our body to produce enzymes. There
are up to 100 times more digestive enzymes in raw sprouts than
in raw vegetables.
Did you know that cooking destroys enzymes in sprouts and vegetables?
If enzymes are not in the food we eat, our body will utilize enzyme
reserves from our body to digest. To slow the aging process, it
is essential that we increase our intake of digestive enzymes.
This is easily achievable by consuming raw sprouts every day.
If enzyme activity gets too low, disease may result. Doctors will
often prescribe enzyme pills for individuals experiencing digestive
issues. Rather than feed the pharmaceutical companies, why not
eat live food? Raw sprouts maintain a healthy body with abundant
Sprouts are biogenic, meaning they are produced by living organisms
or biological processes. When eating sprouts we are eating live
food and the life force is transferred to our body. As a seed
or bean germinates, everything is available to grow that baby
sprout into a full-grown plant. Sprouts are simply baby vegetables
in their prime.
weight and gain energy. Sprouts are great for weight loss as they
contain lots of fiber and are a complete protein. Sprouts are
also zero point foods. So you can eat them guilt-free while getting
Sprouts are alkalizing. Many illnesses including cancer have
been linked to excess acidity in the body. Eating sprouts helps
to balance the pH in the body. Studies have also shown that mung
and other types of sprouts contain exceptionally high levels of
a natural cancer-fighting compound called sulforaphane (20 –
50 times more than in mature broccoli) that helps support antioxidants
such as vitamin C and vitamin E.
Sprouts are regenerative and eating sprouts will keep you feeling
energized. As sprouts are restorative, they will combat degenerative
diseases, such as Alzheimer’s.
Sprouts are also hydrating. Our body requires a vast amount
of water to keep running in topnotch condition. If you are thirsty,
you are already starting to feel the effects of dehydration. Adding
sprouts to your diet will add delicious moisture and will help
keep you hydrated.
are easily digestible. Due to the abundant enzymes, nutrients
are assimilated into our body with ease. Sprouts are food for
long-term health and wellness, as they can help to prevent disease.
Best of all, sprouts are delicious and can be grown on the counter
for pennies a day. Adding sprouts to your life adds life to your
life. Start sprouting today and enjoy increased health and vitality.
2016 is International Year of Pulses. Pulses are part of the
legume family and refer to the dried bean. Lentils, chickpeas,
mung beans fenugreek are examples of pulses. This is the year
to learn more about these nutritious, nuggets of goodness. http://iyp2016.org/
Canada is the 2nd largest producer of lentils in the world and
the number 1 exporter. Canadians are not aware of the nutritional
content of these magic beans. Experiment with your new found knowledge
about pulses and try out a new recipe from www.pulses.org International
Recipes updated daily.
Cathy Nesbitt is a Worm Advocate and Founder of Cathy’s
Crawly Composters (est 2002). Cathy has been sprouting for more
than 14 years and considers sprouts an essential part of her health
plan. For additional information about the benefit of sprouts
and how to grow them on your counter, visit www.cathyssprouters.com.
Back to Articles