Diet Information to Avoid, Stop or Reverse the Biggest Health Epidemic of our Time
- Top Diabetes Diet Tips -
Low Glycemic Foods
Low Glycemic Diet
Diabetes Diet Info
Popular Diabetes Diets
Testing Blood Sugar
What is Diabetes?
Why care about diabetes diet information?
First, diabetes is epidemic with more than 30 million Americans estimated to have diabetes, with 86 million suffering metabolic syndrome, a condition which puts one at serious risk for getting diabetes down the line. Worldwide, diabetes stats show it is on the rise.
For more on the latest diabetic statistics, press here.
| What’s Diabetes? In a nutshell, diabetes is when the sugar circulating in your blood is too high for your own good. Fortunately, diabetes diet information can help lower these levels either alone or with the help of exercise, drugs and insulin.|
Second, diabetes is a risk factor for more than half of the top 15 causes of death according to US government statistics including heart disease, cancer, stroke, Alzheimer's, kidney disease liver disease, hypertension and, of course, diabetes.
No wonder diabetes diet information is important for all of us.
Information – The Profound Effect of Dietary and Lifestyle Changes on Diabetes
Why is Diabetes Diet Information important? Diabetes raises your risk for cardiovascular disease sky high. 68% of diabetics die of heart disease or stroke. Diabetes diet information is essential for those wanting to lower their risk of heart disease. |
The good news is that, with some dietary
and lifestyle measures, you can prevent,
delay and stop, if not reverse, the
progression of diabetic symptoms.
Diet and lifestyle can help with and
without diabetes drugs and supplemental insulin.
that affect blood sugar level other than food – While
carbohydrate foods like starch and sugar can spike blood sugar, other factors
can send it soaring including
- Medications like steroids
- Intense physical activity
Many who have been diagnosed with diabetes
have improved symptoms and reduced, if not nixed, the need for insulin
drugs. Dietary change can
improve symptoms quickly - within weeks,
if not days. For this reason, if you have been diagnosed with diabetes
inform your doctor you are making dietary and lifestyle changes so that she can
calibrate your drug and insulin intake, if needed.
The less often blood sugars strays from the
normal range, the better your prognosis; whether you control your sugar levels by
diet or a combination of drugs, insulin and/or diet and exercise.
Metformin has been used for decades and, as well as effectively
lowering glucose levels, has been found to lower overall mortality.
Apparently it tricks your body into thinking it has exercised. Metformin side effects include gastrointestinal upset and poor Vitamin B12 and folate absorption. If taking Metformin, make sure you get enough B12 and folate through diet or supplements.
The key with diet and food choices is to make ones that prevent or resolve
diabetes or blood sugar problems before these conditions cause irreversible damage.
At whatever stage of the diabetes trip you may be on –
whether in the waiting room with ticket purchased; or rolling down the track
with increasing speed; diet and lifestyle changes can slow, if not halt the
train. The best case is to make sure it doesn’t get out the station.
Diabetes diet information is essential.
Top Diabetes Diet Information Tips for Avoiding Diabetes
- Avoid refined carbohydrate foods
those with added sugars and fiber-depleted grains like white flour.
- Focus on consuming low glycemic foods
that have minimal effect on blood sugar. Press here to read more about
achieving a low glycemic diet and selecting low glycemic foods.
- Eat enough fiber rich foods
found in plants like fruits, vegetables, whole grains, legumes, nuts and
seeds. Beta glucans found in oats are particularly beneficial. Press here for more about the importance of fiber.
- Exercise regularly including
strength training to improve insulin sensitivity and transfer of glucose from
blood into muscle.
- Maintain a healthy weight because obesity and
overweight contribute to metabolic problems like insulin resistance, which can
lead to diabetes. Press here to read more about diet and insulin resistance
and metabolic syndrome.
- Eat regularly but not to excess-
nutrient-rich snack-like meals may be better for controlling blood sugar swings
than one or two large meals per day. Don’t use this as an excuse to consume more
calories than needed or to eat so often your blood sugar remains chronically
- Eat healthy fats and nix unhealthy
fats including trans fats and damaged fats like rancid grains, nuts and seeds; and commercial
oils produced by excess heat and harsh chemical processes. Ensure you get
enough Omega 3 oils from fish, nuts
or seeds. Press here to read more about the benefits of healthy fats
including Omega 3s.
- Avoid beverages with
concentrated natural or added sugars including soda and fruit juice.
Instead eat the whole fruit with fiber and nutrients intact.
- Keep alcohol to a minimum as it may overwhelm
the liver and lead to metabolic dysfunction that can contribute to blood sugar
- Avoid too much cortisol and
epinephrine-spiking stress or stimulants like caffeine - Release of stress
hormones prompt release of glycogen that raise blood sugar, even if you haven’t
eaten. Despite this, coffee is maybe a good thing. Because both caffeinated and decaffeinated versions are associated with lower diabetes risk. Press here to read about how diet and lifestyle can help your stress
response in an article about adrenal health and diet.
- Eat an anti-inflammatory diet chock-a-block with anti-oxidant
rich foods. These are normally low glycemic foods and will support organ systems
routinely damaged by diabetes. Press
here for more on an anti-inflammatory diet and anti-inflammatory supplements as well as inflammatory foods to avoid.
- In short, follow the tips for a healthy balanced diet.
Diabetes Diet Information - 12 Diet and Lifestyle Tips to Control Diabetes
The bottom line is that the typical Western diet fuels rock’n roll blood
sugar, obesity and insulin resistance – the tinder for Type
II Diabetes and its complications. Couple with little or no
exercise and the numbers of those with diabetes and diabetes complications go
through the roof.
The above is why diabetes diet information
is so important and why we should all be aware of diabetes diet information for
our own health and those of our loved ones.
In light of all of the above, here are 12 tips for preventing, halting and reversing diabetes.
- Avoid highly processed fare in favour of whole unprocessed foods
with no added sugars or fiber removed. Especially,
nix refined carbs like white bread and sugar-laden baked goods and sweets.
These are generally nutrient and fiber-depleted. Refined foods containing added
sugars or processed grains stripped of most nutrients and fiber can overwhelm
your metabolism. Stick with carbs from whole veg, fruits and grains, from which
none of the fiber or original nutrients have been removed or destroyed. Beans, vegetables
and whole grains are great choices.
Quality of Carbs and Fats Matters More than The Quantity when it comes to Preventing or Managing Type 2 Diabetes - A review of many studies published in June 2014 issue of The Lancet has concluded that diets rich in whole grains, fruits, vegetables, legumes, and nuts;
moderate in alcohol ; and lower in refined grains, red or
processed meats, and sugar-sweetened beverages reduce
the risk of diabetes and improve glycaemic control and blood lipids in
patients with diabetes.
- Aim for low glycemic foods and a low glycemic diet that don’t rock the blood sugar boat. You can achieve this by consuming
mostly foods containing healthy fats, protein and fiber, all of which have a neutralizing
effect on blood sugar. Press here for more on picking low glycemic foods
and low glycemic diets.
- Consume adequate fiber found in plant foods fruits, veg whole
grains, legumes, nuts and seeds. Remember fiber is
not found in animal products so you’ll have to look to plant foods to get your
quota. Many communities following a pre-industrial diet, in which Type II Diabetes
is unknown, consume up to 100
grams of fiber per day. The US government recommends adult women consume
25 grams of fiber per day and adult
men 38 grams.Studies suggest that the typical American eats a paltry 10 to
15 grams per day!
|Beta Glucans in Oats, Mushrooms and Barley– Good for Diabetes and its Complications - Beta Glucans, polysaccharides found abundantly in oats, mushrooms, barley and yeast, have been found to lower blood glucose levels as well improve complications of diabetes like the HDL-LDL cholesterol profile, hypertension and poor wound healing. Make sure you include beta glucans liberally in your diabetes diet. Press here for more diabetes diet information on beta glucans and diabetes.
- Exercise regularly and often and build muscle. Exercise improves insulin sensitivity as well as shuttles blood sugar
to muscles and other systems where needed and ensures it doesn’t get deposited
as fat, especially around organs like the liver. Among other benefits, exercise
specifically activates the AMP Kinase
enzyme which blocks the conversion of glucose into fat. Some experts advise
exercising in the morning or before meals to increase metabolism
throughout the day. Increased muscle mass also improves insulin sensitivity, so strength train.
Diabetes Diet Information Facts - Strong Muscles Can Lower your Diabetes Risk – Researchers at University of Michigan Medical School have found in a study of more than 1,400 children between ages 10 and 12 that those with the strongest muscles had a statistically lower risk of diabetes than their muscularly weaker peers. The study took into account the long recognized benefits of cardiovascular exercise to prevent diabetes. The study published in the March 2014 issue of Pediatric suggests that muscle building can help prevent diabetes independently of exercise.
- Maintain a healthy weight. Being
overweight or obese is a major risk factor for diabetes. Studies show that
losing 10% of body weight overweight
can reduce substantially diabetes risk. Press here for more on the importance
of calories and their connection to weight gain and metabolism.
- Eat regularly several nutrient-dense snack size meals, instead of one or two large meals with many hours between eating.
This will help maintain energy and avoid hypoglycemic dips in blood sugar that may
provoke cravings and binging. Don’t use this as an excuse to consume more
calories than needed. Leave sufficient
time between eating so your insulin has a chance to lower blood sugar and blood
- Combine some fat and protein whenever you eat carbs. This helps maintain
even blood sugar levels and counteract any glycemic spiking effect of
carbohydrates. Nuts and seeds and beans are good
foods because they contain all three macro-nutrients (fats, proteins and carbs);
cheese or peanut butter with an oat cake; a dollop plain yogurt with your fruit;
hummus with vegetables. Press here for more about low glycemic diets and
low glycemic foods. Press here for more about healthy fats.
- Eat slowly and chew well. This gives your body time to register satiety and
not overeat as well as absorb micronutrients contained in food. Raw or lightly
cooked veg and whole grains require more chewing than highly processed food so
take the time. The act of chewing triggers the digestive process which starts
in the mouth with the release of enzyme-rich saliva. Press here for more on the
importance of digestive enzymes.
- Eat a surfeit of brightly coloured veg each day and don’t forget
your greens. You need the antioxidant vitamins and
minerals, health-giving fiber and the many as yet undiscovered phytochemicals
linked to lower disease risk including complications from diabetes as well as
other inflammatory conditions. In addition to tasting great, fruit and veg have
a strong anti-inflammatory effect important to avoid, halt or reverse the
progression of diabetes and its complications. Press here for more on the
importance of antioxidants as well as following an anti-inflammatory
Diabetes Diet Information – Anti-oxidants Can Fight Inflammation in Diabetes - A 2011 Korean study on diabetic mice showed that a cocktail of antioxidants including combinations of Vitamins C, Vitamin E and/or N-acetylcysteine (NAC) both lowered blood glucose levels and improved inflammatory markers in diabetic mice with kidney problems. This suggests consuming these antioxidants may help humans fight inflammatory kidney disease caused by diabetes. |
- Don’t drink your calories, eat them. Stick to water and modest
intake of red wine with food Avoid sodas and juices and other drinks with
concentrated sugars, whether natural or added. Instead, eat whole fruit that retain all its
original fiber and nutrients. See above about how chewing triggers the
digestive process. Fiber-rich food also
has more volume than liquid and achieves satiety better than drinking your calories
- Avoid trans fats and damaged fats including overheated and rancid
oils and their products. They damage metabolic health.
For more on choosing healthy fats and avoiding unhealthy ones, press on Omega
- In short, the best diabetic
diet information is to follow the tips for a healthy balanced diet.
Information – For more on Diabetes Diet Information, press on the below
Press here to read more about what diabetes is along with more diabetes diet information.
Press here to read more about alarming diabetes statistics.
Press here to read more about blood sugar testing.
Press here to read about the best diets for Type 2 Diabetes along with more diabetes diet information.
Press here to read more about low glycemic diets.
Press here to read more about low glycemic foods and balance blood sugar.
Press here to read more about an anti-inflammatory
Press here to read more about anti-inflammatory supplements.
Press here to read more about top inflammatory foods to avoid.
Press here to read about anti-oxidants and ORAC values and their
importance to your health.
Press here for more about heart healthy diet fundamentals.
Press here for more about heart attack supplements.
Press here for more about high blood pressure supplements.
Press here to read about the benefits of chromium
Press here to read about the benefits of magnesium.
Press here to read about the benefits of vitamin C.
Press here to read about the benefits of vitamin D.
Press her to read about the benefits of omega 3’s and healthy fats.
Press here to read timely news and research about health and nutrition in the healthy diet blog.
Press here to return to Healthy-Diet-Healthy-You