The shadows of the state's Southern regressivism never vanished.
Michael J. Fox's character in "Back to the Future" would feel at home in North Carolina these days. For many years, North Carolina was known as the Rip Van Winkle state because it was so backward. Stingy public officials and business tycoons wanted low wages and low taxes so there was little investment in civic needs. Roads and other public facilities were ignored while education of the state's youth was minimal.
The state was governed by the whims of a plutocracy of landed aristocrats, then tobacco barons, monopoly industrialists and eventually bankers and insurance executives. They had little use for an educated workforce or civic infrastructure. Too often they viewed things through racist or misogynistic prisms.
The constitution of 1898, following the political coup in Wilmington, effectively suppressed African American voting. The state's leadership refused to ratify the 19th Amendment for women's suffrage (symbolically ratified in 1971) and kept Native Americans from voting until the 1950s. Taxes were low and regulation lax.
As late as the 1950s, historian Hugh Lefler noted, North Carolina was not moving in the right direction. Industrial wages stagnated, per capita income was near the basement (46th in 1958), out migration increased, and tax revenues failed to meet critical public service needs.
In the 1960s North Carolina experienced a transformation, melding with the modern world. Govs. Kerr Scott, Luther Hodges and Terry Sanford moved to join the mainstream.
While Scott, Hodges and Sanford initiated the modernization momentum, it was in 1977 when Jim Hunt became governor that the state began the steady climb in education, civic improvements and broader prosperity. Critical to Hunt's success was recruiting the business community and selling it on his agenda of public education, government services and modest environmental protection – critical to industrial and economic advancement. The Research Triangle Park blossomed into a high-tech, high-wage and high-skill business recruiting dynamo. The state's national ranking rose under Democrat Hunt and Republican Jim Martin (28th in per capita income in 2000). It seemed this new course was irreversibly set. However, today that trend is in jeopardy.
The shadows of the state's Southern regressivism had never vanished. Paralleling Hunt's career was Jesse Helms', his hallmark arch-conservatism and race-baiting rhetoric. In the mid-1970s, Helms and other conservative Republicans created think tanks – giving academic rigor to their ideology while recruiting bright lawyers and conservative journalists. In North Carolina one recruit was Art Pope, heir to a discount retailing fortune. Pope turned his energies to establishing the John Locke Foundation and a stable of spinoffs. He joined with out-of-state forces like the Koch brothers.
Ironically, the 2008 election might have sparked the GOP sweep of 2010. The Red State Project headed by Ed Gillespie and Karl Rove determined that to ultimately control the federal government, they needed a number of state legislatures in a census year – thus control of legislative redistricting. With that prize in view, Pope and Americans for Prosperity poured in millions. While the 2010 GOP campaign mantra may have been jobs, jobs, jobs, once in office, it was quickly jettisoned to focus on divisive social issues.
Just as in 1898, they attacked voting rights, taxes, public schools and added on contemporary issues of gays and abortion. The GOP-dominated legislature passed the nation's most restrictive voter ID law and cut taxes on the wealthy – causing a half-billion revenue shortfall while starving schools and infrastructure.
They added mean-spirited cuts in unemployment benefits and Medicaid and eliminated the Earned Income Tax Credit. Forty years of moderate progress was laid to waste.
In 2012 the new Republicans added the governor to their booty. Redistricting was so masterful that they won nine of 13 N.C. congressional seats even though almost 200,000 more votes were cast for Democrats than Republicans in the combined congressional races.
The business community Hunt had so effectively courted abandoned the progressives. The N.C. Chamber imported a director from Kansas who emphasized the old standbys – low taxes, low government spending and weak regulations. North Carolina retreated back to Rip Van Winkle's slumber.
In the off-year 2014 election, the state's direction in education, access to voting, tax and environmental policies along with social issues will be at the forefront of the campaigns. In the already expensive campaign for U.S. Senate, incumbent Democrat Kay Hagan and Republican N.C. House Speaker Thom Tillis will offer strongly contrasting choices. Control of the U.S. Senate hangs in the balance.
James Leutze is chancellor emeritus of the University of North Carolina Wilmington and was a professor of history at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, specializing in military history.