How to Teach Geography with Continent Boxes
Some of you might be wondering what a continent box is…
A continent box is any container filled with information and items that represent a specific region of the world. You’ll want to have one box for each of the seven continents: North America, South America, Europe, Asia, Africa, Australia and Antarctica.
Continent boxes are a part of the Montessori geography curriculum and they are a lot of fun and a great way for children to learn more about the world.
I like to have one box out at a time and leave it out for 2-3 weeks to explore. If they seem done with it or the interest has gone, I switch them out. We always revisit the Continents. In fact we have been adding to our boxes for the past 2 years and will continue to do so. Children love seeing and learning about other places around the world.
Some ideas that you can add to your continent box are:
The Traditional Montessori Continent Colors:
North America – Orange
South America – Pink
Europe – Red
Asia – Yellow
Africa – Green
Australia – Brown
Antarctica – White
I decided to go with these Sterilite 12.7 Qt. Size boxes from Walmart. Personally, I like to have a large enough box that regular sized papers and books can lay flat. You could also use shoe boxes, cloth bags, or anything else you like.
This is definitely a great way to enjoy a multi-sensory experience in learning.
Download your Free Brazil Printables to add to your South America Continent Boxes Below ~ Perfect for an Olympic study too
As time goes on you’ll find more and more to add to your child’s collection. The idea is to have fun while you learn and explore the world around us.
Okay so the secret is out – We are total geography nerds and love exploring new places. Ahhh don’t you just love adventures? I’ll be sharing the contents to our Montessori continent boxes real soon. I can’t wait to swap ideas with you.
You might also like:
We would love for you to join our private group on Facebook: Natural Living and Learning
Original article and pictures take http://www.naturalbeachliving.com/2016/07/how-to-teach-geography-with-continent-boxes.html site