This preview has intentionally blurred sections. Sign up to view the full version.View Full Document
Unformatted text preview: rawing features In this exercise, you will create water lines for the feature class you made in the CityData geodatabase in exercise 14b. New features are often connected to existing features. For example, the boundaries of new land parcels may be adjacent to boundaries that have already been digitized. New streets in- tersect or extend to existing ones. New power lines run to and from poles. Making sure that features are connected would be difficult if it depended entirely on your eyesight. ArcMap can automatically connect (or snap) features placed within a certain distance of each other. The rules specifying which features, and which feature parts, snap to others make up the snapping environment. Ihe distance at which snapping occurs is called the snapping tolerance. Exercise 15a In a subdivision of your growing city, a contractor has laid new water lines, including an extension to a main and a line connecting a main to a fire hydrant. During construc- tion, the city's project inspector recorded the locations of water valves and hydrants with a Global Positioning System (GPS) device. These locations have been imported as point feature classes in your geodatabase. As the city's GIS technician, you will use this point data and the ArcMap editing tools to digitize the new water lines. Start ArcMap. In the ArcMap dialog box, click the option to use an existing map. In the list of existing maps, double-click Browse for maps. (If ArcMap is already running, click the File menu and click Open.) Navigate to C:\ESRIPress\GTKArcGIS\Chapter15. Click ex15a.mxd and click Open. ~"e)(lSam>ld'ArcMap ArcYtew 1I!Il!J13 1Eib ~cfiJ; ,~I'i.e.~IdMrl<5. ,irisert '~'~i¥s 'K~OW 'ti¥ ~" ]D~iii-:-el:h ~~x.I'-'''/I<!>.111,J~-,·-- ' A I IS! Loyer., 13 6!1 weterveves e 80 F u.",drants I I FJ~ Waterlines [30 Parcels o The map shows a subdivision under construction. Layers for water valves, fire hydrants, water lines, and parcels are listed in the table of contents. The WaterLines feature class you created in exercise 14b has no features in it yet. Before starting the edit session, you will zoom to the area where you are going to digitize water lines. 2 Click the Bookmarks menu and click New Water Lines. 763 (l) The display zooms to an area where there are several water valves and a fire hydrant. The field crew has laid three new water lines: from valve 763 to valve 8l3, from 813 to 831, and from 813 to the nearest fire hydrant. You will digitize these three lines. First, you'll add the Editor toolbar and start an edit session. 3 On the Standard tool bar, click the Editor Toolbar button. The Editor tool bar opens. The tools are disabled.-4 If necessary, move the Editor toolbar away from the map display. On the Editor toolbar, click the Editor menu and click Start Editing....
View Full Document
This note was uploaded on 09/18/2011 for the course GIS 4043 taught by Professor Cshaw during the Spring '11 term at FAU.
- Spring '11