That’s the challenge being set by the Wildlife Trusts this June, encouraging us to find time for nature and help wildlife.
We have locked ourselves off from the natural world and in doing so have become more unhealthy as a result
Because, according to the Trusts, only one in ten children ever play in wild places. However, being disconnected from nature is a problem that can affect all of us, both young and old.
Reasons we tend to leave mother nature behind include: busier roads, parents being more cautious of letting children play outside, fewer wild places to explore and an increase in indoor attractions such as television and computer games.
“The association of the outdoors as being a place for fun, enjoyment and socialising has diminished,” said Lucy McRobert, Nature Matters campaign manager for the Wildlife Trusts.
Lucy goes on to say that: “Children who have regular access to green spaces near to their homes tend be healthier, happier, have more confidence and a better ability to concentrate.”
30 Days Wild
This is the UK’s first ever month-long nature challenge and it’s easier to take part in than you might think.
People who have regular experiences with nature should find themselves feeling happier and healthier
The Wildlife Trusts are asking people, both young and old, to be creative and invent their own ‘random acts of wildness’. They could be as simple as following a bee to see where it leads you, smell a wildflower or make a wild work of art for others to enjoy.
The possibilities are endless.
However, if you are looking for a little inspiration then you’ll find tips on the Wildlife Trusts website or hit play on the video below to get you started.
“The key thing is finding nature nearby – this can be on your street, in your garden, on your way to work – and making it fit with your life,” McRobert told BBC Earth.
It’s also true that 93% of people living in England live within six miles of one of the Trusts’ nature reserves and 90% of people in Scotland live within 10 miles of a reserve.
“People who have regular experiences with nature should find themselves feeling happier and healthier,” she said.
You can sign up for the '30 Days Wild challenge' on the Wildlife Trusts website and share your progress and ideas across many social media platforms using #30DaysWild.