A thing that motivates or encourages one to do something
there is no incentive for customers to conserve water
A payment or concession to stimulate greater output or investment
tax incentives for investing in depressed areas
a positive motivational influence
bonus: an additional payment (or other remuneration) to employees as a means of increasing output
In economics and sociology, an incentive is any factor (financial or non-financial) that enables or motivates a particular course of action, or counts as a reason for preferring one choice to the alternatives. It is an expectation that encourages people to behave in a certain way. ...
Something that motivates, rouses, or encourages; A bonus or reward, often monetary, to work harder
(Incentives) Profit sharing arrangements offered by HMOs and managed care plans that permit subcontractors and physicians to share in amounts earned from plan savings through reduced hospital and specialty referral usage. ...
(Incentives) Amounts rebated or credited, or special programs offered to encourage the lease of certain vehicles.
(Incentives) Extras designed to increase response rates to a marketing message, e.g. a prize draw.
((Leasing) Incentives) Inducements offered by landlords to attract tenants to lease space. Incentives increase when supply exceeds demand.
(Incentives) A term use to describe the prize or "free" giveaway offered to consumers to enter a promotion.
(Incentives) Any form of compensation or reward made to a salesperson or sales team to influence sales results: bonuses, commissions, trips, catalog award points, etc.
(Incentives) Anything that influences the choices people make. There are both monetary and non monetary influences.
(Incentives) Bribes out of desperation.
(Incentives) Cash rewards, sometimes called rebates, to encourage businesses and other organizations to try energy efficient products.
(Incentives) Economic benefits given to providers to motivate efficiency in-patient care management.
(Incentives) Financial or other offerings that are designed to increase participation in a survey.
(Incentives) Globalization has led to competition between nations, regions, and communities to attract and retain businesses that are moving or expanding.
(Incentives) Parcel carriers have optimized their operations around parcel sizes that represent the bulk of their carriage. Two weight ranges that are incentivized are small packages at or below five pounds and packages of 20 to 30 pounds. ...
(Incentives) Special offers or promotional deals to encourage purchase or renewal of a subscription.
(Incentives) Subsidies, tax breaks and other Government actions, in which indirect money is given to consumers under certain conditions.
(Incentives) These are links to pages dedicated to this sort of games, by voting for War of Empires you both get more attack and spy turns and make the game better known so more players join us.
(Incentives) Unsurprisingly any potential incentives are being couched within “current fiscal constraints”, with no reference to funding of infrastructure
(Incentives) tax credits, financial rebates/discounts, or non-monetary conveniences offered to encourage further use of advanced technology vehicles and alternative fuels.
(Incentives) the use of economic reward by some formularies to promote the use of preferred products.
(incentives) benefits, or reduced costs, that motivate a decision maker in favor of a particular choice
An allowance or benefit concession that is offered by the landlord to encourage the tenant to renew a lease or to sign a lease.