Theory of Transactions as the Fabric of our Society.
Transactions are threads that when woven together make up a society, its culture. Or in the case of a person they weave together his/her character. If you want to know the strength of a cloth, you inspect the quality of its weave. If you want to understand a person's character, look closely at his interpersonal behaviour or his transactions.
Transactions are interactions between two individuals. It could be trading goods like grain for money or it could also be beyond material concerns like offering protection in return for power. Transactions are about give and take. If you want to take something from someone, you need to give something to that person. What you need to know is "what does the other person want"?
You always do have the power to rebel. Us, humans do have the spirit to fight so rebelling or fighting is never difficult. What we need to watch out for is "are we becoming a rebel without a cause"? We fight for what we think is right. But then what is essential is that you do not question the system so vocally and make your presence felt for all the wrong reasons.
Having said that, you do not have to live life in anonimity either. The ideal situation would have you follow the commandments but not whine and complain about doing so. No matter how unfairly life might treat you, if you still conduct your life with dignity that would make you a righteous person.
Remember, in a transaction you give something because you want something in return. You accept an unfair law without trying to make anyone feel guilty about it. Use your talents to contribute to the good of the society whenever you can and however you can.
What do you think a person who is giving all this in their transactions with society want in return?
What do you think you do when you try to protect that person?
It comes naturally to you to want to protect any good person who appears to be in need. But control that feeling. What a person really wants is not protection but RESPECT.