Many of us have great interest in Indian mythology and if we get to know more about them, then it would be like some extra cream on a cake. So, here are some of the hidden facts about Indian mythology:
11 Interesting, Weird, and Hidden Facts About Indian Mythology
1. Epics like Mahabharata, Puranas, Ramayana and the Vedas are written in Sanskrit and are related to Hinduism. The interesting fact about Indian mythology is that Bhagavada Purana has claimed to be the Fifth Veda of South Asia and is considered as the worshipped holy book of the Hindus.
2. Classical Hinduism, which gave birth to the roots of mythology, comes from the ancient times of Vedic civilazation. The four Vedas, naming, Yajur Veda, Atharva Veda, Rig Veda and Sama Veda, wherein in some of the texts, concepts of mythology and machines are mentioned, which are almost a replica of modern days machines and scientific theories.
3. Three Lords, Brahma, Vishnu and Maheshwara are parts of God Parabrahman, who are known to be the creator, preserver and destruction of the world.
4. The word ‘Aum’ which is a holy sound represents the three Lords, Brahma, Vishnu and Maheshwara.
5. Hindu mythology defines 7 higher and 7 lower worlds, and in total it contains 14 worlds. Higher world which is the ‘heaven’ ruled by Lord Brahma are the 7 vyahrtis, bhu, mahas, bhuvas, svar, janas, satya , and tapas. Lower world which is the ‘paatalas’ are sutala, rasaataala, mahaatala, atala, vitala, paatala and talatala.
6. Mahabharata and Ramayana are the documentation of Indian history, which were written in the times of Krishna and Rama respectively.
7. Stunning fact about Indian mythology states that the book of Mahabharata is 10 times larger and elaborated than the books, Odyssey and Illiad together.
8. Satchidananda is the name given to God, which means ever cognisant, ever existing and ever new ecstasy.
9. Although Hinduism is not considered as the oldest religion of this existing world, but the epic Rig Veda was written about 3800 years back.
10. 108 is considered to be an auspicious number, which is actually derived from the ratio of total distance of the sun and moon from the earth. That’s the reason why garlands and malas consist of 108 beads.
11. An Indian mythology state that time has 4 yugas, Tretha yuga, Satya yuga, Kal yuga and Dwapara yuga, which is a circular concept of time.
I believe that these unknown facts about Indian mythology interested you to a great extent.
Read Also: Fun Facts About Indian Culture
Article Title: 11 Interesting, Weird, and Hidden Facts About Indian Mythology
Article first published on February 22, 2017.