If you are interested in Jim Noble, Oliver Bowles & Richard Wade visiting your school to work with teachers and/or students, please contact us.
The vacation home exchange service for the IB community.
Feel at home when you travel the world.
Algebra Movies Libraryfree28 June 2017
Click on Show in the Page Contents panel: at the top right of this page to navigate to the appropriate section.Below is a catalogue of videos for students to watch on their mobile phones or any other... more
Cones - TNfree14 June 2017
The great thing about this activity is how it seems as though it is going to be easy and then isn't at all. This combined with its practical nature offers a good and engaging starting point that means... more
Student Surveyfree25 April 2017
This page is dedicated to a collaborative project involving a worldwide student (and teacher) survey. Below you will find a questionnaire that will take 15-20 minutes for students to complete. Teachers... more
Dividing Fractionsfree24 April 2017
Divisions are just a different way of doing multiplications: can be written as the multiplication . You can do exactly the same with fractions, so if you know how to multiply fractions you will be able... more
Parking Rotations13 April 2017
'Park the car!'Reverse parking is one of the hardest things you have to do when driving a car. Here’s your chance to hone your skills in this area so that you’ll pass your driving test with flying... more
Volume of Pyramidfree13 April 2017
If you discover rules and formula for yourself then you’ll understand that mathematics is real and not abstract. If you take ownership of these formulae then they should have more meaning to you, and... more
Volume of Pyramid TN13 April 2017
Teacher NotesThis is a lovely practical activity to help students visualise and derive the formula for the volume of a pyramid. By constructing square based pyramids (10cm by 10cm) with height 5cm then... more
Activitiesfree13 April 2017
Age 10+ Time 1-2 hrs: This activity is about understanding the properties of quadrilaterals. A far deeper understanding is gained if we can use them to construct the shapes themselves. This is a real... more
Constructing Quadrilateralsfree27 March 2017
Construct quadrilaterals using dynamic geometryIn the following practical activity, you will use your knowledge of the properties of quadrilaterals to construct your own shapes on a computer. You will... more