BC: Liam Nicholls is a 7th grader that likes to play basketball and chill. His favorite NBA team is the Miami Heat. His favorite basketball brand is Nike. | Alex Beasley is a 7th grader that likes to skate and hang with friends. His favorite skater is P. Rod. His favorite skating brand is element.
FC: Weapons of Foot Soldiers | Author and illustrations by Alex Beasley and Liam Nicholls
1: We dedicate this book to Miss Torpey for helping us with a lot of the project.
2: Most people think of knights when you say foot soldiers for the middle ages, well they are wrong. | vs. | foot soldier | knight
3: The Most Popular Foot Soldier Weapons | The three most popular weapons of the foot soldiers are the rapier, the sabre, and the gladius. | The rapier | The sabre | The gladius
4: The Rapier | The rapier was designed for stabbing with a thrusting motion. The rapier is long, thin and light in weight. This sword is also special because they made it heavy at the hilt. They make it heavy at the hilt so the swordsman can hold the tip of the weapon high and maneuver it around quickly during the sword fight. It is made with a sharp point for peircing through the skin.
5: The Sabre | The sabre was designed for slashing with a striking motion. The sabre has a thick, heavy blade, with a sharp cutting edge, and it is heaviest not at the hilt but down near the tip of the blade, adding extra weight to force the blow.
6: The Gladius | The Gladius was a very effective Spanish sword. This sword was much like the rapier. It was almost the exact same in weight the only difference is the rapier as we mentioned before is heavier at the hilt for quick mauneuvering during battle.
7: The Crossbow | The most common medieval type of Crossbow arrow, here seen from the side and from the above, was of yew or ash had a quadrangular head. The three fleetchings would he of griff feathers, wood, or metal. How they would attack and defensive strategy.
8: Armor | The armor of the foot soldiers was very good but still not as good as the knights. The foot soldier while the armor still covering his whole body their was some weak spots. The knights however their was no weak spots on their armor and it was all the same grade.
9: All About the Foot Soldiers | Almost all of the foot soldiers were made up of the peasants. If the foot soldiers went into battle with a knight the foot soldier would most likely win but if it was one on one they knight would win.
10: What made a foot soldier different from a knight | The knight was very skilled and more armored and from the upper class and the foot soldiers were less armored and were from the lower class. | The Knights of the Middle Ages | The Foot Soldiers of the Middle Ages
11: Morning Star Mace | The Morning Star Mace was used in battle very much in the Middle Ages. This weapon was very heavy but very effective in battle. This weapon would be used for not only battle but execution too.
12: Battle Axe | The Battle Axe was most commonly used by the foot soldiers. The Battle Axe was useless once the sword was invented because of its weight. This weapon was very powerful with a striking blow it can break through knight armor.
13: Questions??? | Q:What made a foot soldier different from a knight? A:Question is answered on page 10. Q:What was the most popular foot soldier weapon? A: The favorite weapon was the Rapier.
14: All Weapons
15: Crossbow- An advanced bow and arrow that shoots in a gun like fashion. Mace- An upgraded club with dagger like spikes on the tip of a metal ball that is meant for execution purposes. Swords- A two sided blade that is used for hand to hand combat usually made by a blacksmith. | Vocabulary Terms
17: Bibliography | Gonen, Rivka. "Weapons and Warfare of Ancient times." 1976. Web. Medieval World ;Tools and Technology: Volume 10. Danbury, CT: Grolier Educational, 2001. Print. Medieval World ;Tools and Technology: Volume 10. Danbury, CT: Grolier Educational, 2001. Print.