Many teachers ask their students to discuss the problem of the paradox of inquiry represented in Plato’s Meno. On one side, they have Meno who argues for the vanity and impossibility of inquiry. On the other hand, they have Socrates who responses Meno and recounts the myth that equates people’s concept of learning with their recollection. Readers often see Meno as a certain dialogue about the virtue.
Besides, it can be easily viewed as some attempt to sum up a few basic and interesting notions, such as ignorance, the concept of virtue, and others. This is where Socrates confronts Meno, a power hungry friend of Aristippus. One of the most important subjects that concern the audience is the problem of knowledge.
Meno complains about his opponent being a cause more of certain perplexity than of any knowledge. He also links Socrates to a sea fish because whenever he wants to explain something, each argument turns into ignorance. It may seem as if his attack of Socrates is his last chance to regain his lost ground. When it comes to Socrates, he doesn’t want to pursue this argument because he is full of ignorance. The main theme is human excellent, and Socrates wants to take up his lost threat once again, while Meno does everything possible to suggest the futility of inquiry.
There are certain questions asked by Meno to make the whole dialogue depart from the main subject of virtue. Socrates puts his energy to refute his indirect assertion because it’s impossible to progress and there’s no way for people to gain their knowledge of what they already know. The main reason is that people aren’t interested in learning something again, so he makes a conclusion that any inquiry is just impossibility.
Moreover, Socrates doesn’t seem to be interested in accepting this reasoning, so he decides to apply an effective mathematical technique. This is how he proceeds by invoking the existence of divinity. According to Socrates, wise men speak about the immortality of their souls, and how they experience everything. They claim that souls become omniscient by experiencing everything possible and they have a possibility to recollect everything. In addition, Socrates doesn’t have any mercy for different sophistical arguments about the inquiry impossibility. This interesting and ancient argument should be analyzed to come up with personal conclusions.
Many teachers ask their students to discuss the problem of the paradox of inquiry represented in Plato’s Meno. On one side, they have Meno who argues for the vanity and impossibility of inquiry. On the other hand, they have Socrates who responses Meno and recounts the myth that equates people’s concept of learning with their recollection.