Batik is two-dimensional decorative
art on cloth. This hand-made textile art
uses wax to draw pattern in the beginning.
Fluid of melting wax is painted on the cloth
to cover parts that will resist the dye.
Batik primarily is used as kebaya and sarung
(women and men underskirt). Nowadays its
function varies like used as shirt,
accessories such as woman's handbags, scarfs
even as decorative icons such tablecloths,
paintings and lampshades.
The center of batik crafts sits in Central
Java Tengah in the cities of Solo, Pekalongan
and Yogyakarta, although in other area like
Lasem and Cirebon batik can also be found.
The Indonesian painter who has able
to gain international reputation is realist
Raden Saleh that lived in the 19th century.
And 20th century painter who could reach
the same achievement is Affandi.
Traditional painting flourishes in Klungkung,
Bali in the form of cloth paintings.
Then in the thirty, two European painters
Walter Spies (Germany) and Rudolf Bonnet
(Dutch) came to Bali bringing the influence
of European style and concepts of art.
Since then Balinese Paintings far more widely
developed in theme and style.
Painting above is one of Spies' painting
called Morning in Iseh, which render a beautiful
morning landscape in Iseh. Romantic-decorative
shapes show us the influence of Balinese
traditional art of painting, and the influence
of European art can be seen on the existence
Wayang is a form of traditional Javanese
theatrical performance. Known as world of
shadows, wayang which refers to wayang kulit,
is a theater performed by a dalang/puppeteer
with plays puppets behind a wide white screen
illuminated by an oil lamp. The shadows
of puppets on the screen caused by flickering
create lively atmosphere for the performance.
Puppets played (called wayang,too) are made
from cows or goats skin which is carved
Wayang kulit is performed in the important
ceremonies which mark a stepping stone in
one's life such as wedding or selamatan.
The plays performed are stories from Mahabarata
and Ramayana. Wayang itself keeps so much
philosphy from all aspects of life of Javanese
Other kinds of wayang are wayang golek ;
wayang in three-dimensional shape, wayang
orang which performed by people and wayang
topeng peformed by poeple with masks.
Madura Island lies in the northeast directions
of Java. Due to its hard geographical conditions,
Madura Island has one unique tradition,
Kerapan Sapi. Kerapan Sapi or Bullrace is
a blend of traditional art and sport.
This race is held between two pairs of human-driven
bulls which then will make a kind of drag-race
in a 120 meters race track. During a week
traditional games and fair are held there,
Almost every part of Indonesia has traditional
dancing. The number of dancing types is
known more than 200. Its functions diverse
from performance in the palace, for pay
homage to God, entertainment, ritual ceremonies
to dance for the death in funeral ceremonies.
Gesture of Javanese dancing is generally
slow and calm, emphasizing graceful movement.
In Central Java, dance firstly was a sacred
part of palace life, where dance was only
performed for the king. Javanese Dance can
still be found at performance in the kraton
Whereas in Bali island dance movements tend
to be jerk and faster, stress expressive
nature. Dance is functioning in a wider
sense and touch every pore of society's
life. The most well-known Balinese dancing
is Legong Dance, which usually
performed by Balinese girls (picture above).
Mask is a ethnic art which is previously
used in the ritual as camouflage between
ordinary poeple who face spritual world
(world between heaven and earth).
Its use continues for performance with still
keep the magical and mystical value.
Mask spreads widely in Indonesia. Masks
shown here is example of Javanese mask.
Mask is also used intensively in Bali such
as used in Barong performance.
Java mask is worn in theatrical show called
wayang topeng which performs plays like
Panji stories, Mahabarata and Ramayana epics