With the global population expected to rise from today's seven billion to more than 10 billion by 2050 and possibly 15 billion by the turn of the next century, the Rio Summit
was trying to find a way to reduce poverty without further damaging the planet, driving a worldwide shift to a "green economy" powered by renewable energy rather than fossil fuels and transforming the way we produce and consume.
As well as securing more funding for UNEP, the Rio summit
also is expected to back wider representation.
Since the first Rio summit
the UAE's economy has grown by over 400 per cent.
The Rio Summit
this week must not be a mere international talking shop; it must be an opportunity to take significant action and save lives - and the future of the planet.
It is wrong that some of the world's most important leaders refused to go to this week's Rio summit
on sustainable development.
Yet the Rio summit
literature claims that it will boost economic growth and eradicate poverty.
How to achieve global food security is one of the most contentious issues at the upcoming Rio Summit
on the environment, where activists are expected to sound the alarm over 'land grabs' in Africa.
A trip to the Rio summit
awaits the player with the highest score and additional prizes will go to weekly champions.
The scheme also coincides with the upcoming Rio Summit
held in Brazil in June.
She also said that the next six months will see lots of UN activity in preparation for the 2012 Rio summit
, held 20 years after the previous one to review what had been accomplished.
At the start of the conference, Oxfam issued a report that gathers 194 countries under a process launched under the 1992 Rio Summit
, Oxfam said that storms and droughts that have unleashed dangerous surges in food prices could be a "grim foretaste" of what lies ahead when climate change bites more deeply.
Kakakhel would work on stock taking report on the policies adopted and actions taken by Pakistan since the Rio Summit
in 1992 to promote sustainable development, based on desk research and interviews with key stakeholders, including government and major groups, the UN entities and other multilateral partners in Pakistan In this connection SDPI orientation session for Media on Pakistan National Preparation for UN Conference for Sustainable Development was organized here on Tuesday.