1The sons of Yehuḏah: Perets, Ḥetsron, and Karmi, and Ḥur, and Shoḇal.
2And Re’ayah son of Shoḇal brought forth Yaḥath, and Yaḥath brought forth Aḥumai and Lahaḏ. These were the clans of the Tsor‛athites.
3And these were of the father of Ěytam: Yizre‛ĕl, and Yishma, and Yiḏbash. And the name of their sister was Hatselelponi;
4and Penu’ĕl was the father of Geḏor, and Ězer was the father of Ḥushah. These were the sons of Ḥur, the first-born of Ephrathah the father of Bĕyth Leḥem.
5And Ashḥur the father of Teqowa had two wives, Ḥelah and Na‛arah.
6And Na‛arah bore him Ahuzzam, and Ḥĕpher, and Tĕmeni, and Ha’aḥashtari. These were the sons of Na‛arah.
7And the sons of Ḥelah: Tsereth, and Tsoḥar, and Ethnan;
8and Qots brought forth Anuḇ, and Tsoḇĕḇah, and the clans of Aḥarḥĕl son of Harum.
9And Yaḇĕts was more esteemed than his brothers, and his mother called his name Yaḇĕts, saying, “Because I bore him in pain.”
10And Yaḇĕts called on the Elohim of Yisra’ĕl saying, “Oh, that You would bless me indeed, and enlarge my border, and that Your hand would be with me, and that You would keep me from evil, not to be my pain!” And Elohim gave him what he asked.
11And Keluḇ the brother of Shuḥah brought forth Meḥir, who was the father of Eshton.
12And Eshton brought forth Bĕyth-Rapha, and Pasĕaḥ, and Teḥinnah the father of Ir-Naḥash. These were the men of Rĕḵah.
13And the sons of Qenaz: Othni’ĕl and Serayah. And sons of Othni’ĕl: Ḥathath,
14and Me‛onothai, who brought forth Ophrah. And Serayah brought forth Yo’aḇ the father of Gĕ-Ḥarashim, for they were craftsmen.
15And the sons of Kalĕḇ the son of Yephunneh: Iru, Ělah, and Na‛am. And the son of Ělah was Qenaz.
16And the sons of Yehallel’ĕl: Ziph, and Ziphah, Tireya, and Asar’ĕl.
17And the sons of Ezrah: Yether, and Mereḏ, and Ěpher, and Yalon. And she bore Miryam, and Shammai, and Yishbaḥ the father of Eshtemoa.
18And his wife Yehuḏiyah bore Yereḏ the father of Geḏor, and Ḥeḇer the father of Soḵo, and Yequthi’ĕl the father of Zanowaḥ. And these were the sons of Bithyah the daughter of Pharaoh, whom Mereḏ took.
19And the sons of Hoḏiyah’s wife, the sister of Naḥam, were the fathers of Qe‛ilah the Garmite and of Eshtemoa the Ma‛aḵathite.
20And the sons of Shimon: Amnon, and Rinnah, Ben-Ḥanan, and Tulon. And the sons of Yishi: Zoḥĕth and Ben-Zoḥĕth.
21The sons of Shĕlah the son of Yehuḏah: Ěr the father of Lĕḵah, and La‛dah the father of Marĕshah, and the clans of the house of the linen workers of the house of Ashbĕa;
22and Yoqim, and the men of Kozĕḇa, and Yo’ash, and Saraph who ruled in Mo’aḇ, and Yashuḇi-Leḥem. But the records were ancient.
23These were the potters and those who dwell at Neta‛im and Geḏĕrah; there they dwelt with the sovereign for his work.
24The sons of Shim‛on: Nemu’ĕl, and Yamin, Yariḇ, Zeraḥ, Sha’ul,
25Shallum his son, Miḇsam his son, Mishma his son.
26And the sons of Mishma: Ḥammu’ĕl his son, Zakkur his son, Shim‛i his son.
27And Shim‛i had sixteen sons and six daughters, but his brothers did not have many children, nor did any of their clans increase as much as the children of Yehuḏah.
28And they dwelt at Be’ĕrsheḇa, and Molaḏah, and Ḥatsar Shu‛al,
29and at Bilhah, and at Etsem, and at Tolaḏ,
30and at Bethu’ĕl, and at Ḥormah, and at Tsiqlaḡ,
31and at Bĕyth Markaḇoth, and at Ḥatsar Susim, and at Bĕyth Bir‛i, and at Sha‛arayim. These were their cities until the reign of Dawiḏ.
32And their villages were Ěytam, and Ayin, and Rimmon, and Toḵen, and Ashan, five cities,
33and all the villages that were around these cities as far as Ba‛al. These were their dwelling places, and they kept their genealogy.
34And Meshoḇaḇ, and Yamlĕḵ, and Yoshah son of Amatsyah;
35and Yo’ĕl, and Yĕhu son of Yoshiḇyah, son of Serayah, son of Asi’ĕl;
36and Elyo‛ĕynai, and Ya‛aqoḇah, and Yeshoḥayah, and Asayah, and Aḏi’ĕl, and Yesimi’ĕl, and Benayah;
37and Ziza son of Shiphi, son of Allon, son of Yeḏayah, son of Shimri, son of Shemayah.
38These mentioned by name were leaders in their clans, and their father’s house increased greatly.
39And they went to the entrance of Geḏor, as far as the east side of the valley, to look for pasture for their flocks,
40and they found rich, good pasture, and the land was broad, undisturbed and safe, for some Ḥamites had dwelt there formerly.
41And these written by name came in the days of Ḥizqiyahu sovereign of Yehuḏah, and struck their tents, and the homes that were found there, and put them under the ban, as it is to this day, and dwelt in their place, because there was pasture for their flocks there.
42And some of them, five hundred men of the sons of Shim‛on, went to Mount Sĕ‛ir, having as their chiefs Pelatyah, and Ne‛aryah, and Rephayah, and Uzzi’ĕl, the sons of Yishi.
43And they struck the rest of the Amalĕqites who had escaped, and dwelt there to this day.