Discovered by accident in 1966, the principal attraction of Ban Chiang is its archeological sites with evidence that indicate Northeastern Thailand may have been one of the world's earliest centers of spear production. Findings include spearheads dating from 3,600 BC and ceramics dating from the period between 3,000 BC and 500 AD. A collection of these artifacts and other ornamental items (bangles, rings) are on display at the Ban Chiang National Museum. Based on these findings, Ban Chiang has been recognized as an UNESCO Heritage Site.
A short distance away are 2 covered excavation sites on the grounds of the Wat Pho Si Nai , featuring graves containing skeletal remains and symbolic burial ceramics pots arranged along the edge of the grave and over the bodies themselves. Other findings at the burial site include jewelry, tools, weapons, and river pebbles.
A depressed Buddha's Footprint, sunken 60-cm into the concrete ground, with a length of 193 m and width of 90 cm, can be seen at Phra Buddha Bat Bua Bok. The temple ground also contains a lotus-shaped chedi , similar to the Phra That Phanom, housing holy Buddhist relics. The early 20 th century pagoda is the focal point of the Phu Phra Bat Historical Park.
The extensive Phu Phra Bat Historical Park , located at the foot of the Phu Pan Mountains, features the exhibition of the evolution of man and geographical changes that took place displayed on sandstones refined naturally over time, producing various shapes and sizes of limestone structures. These serve as interesting evidence of ancient civilizations from many sites.
The Naka Village and Men Village produce woven fabric of cotton, silk, and kit (a traditional design) material at very affordable prices.
The Chinese God and Goddess of Mercy, the Pu-Ya Shrine is highly revered by all those seeking favors to alleviate economical and personal problems. Kept inside the large and attractive lakeside shrine is a lone 99-m golden dragon that is used in performing the annual Thung Sri Muang Fair in December.
After nearly 10 years of cultivation, the Udon Sunshine Orchid Farm features the aromatic flower whose extracts are used in making perfumes. The orchids produce a fragrant smell from morning until two in the afternoon.
The complex of Wat Ban Tat is situated on a densely forested, hilly area surrounded by rice paddies, an ideal setting for meditation. The temple's boundaries are clearly defined by a concrete wall, which prevents encroachment by the abundant wildlife. The monastery is under the strict guidance of a disciple of Phra Acharn Man Phurithatto, a widely respected northeastern Buddhist ecclesiastic.
Locals flock to the midsize Than Ngam Waterfall for an afternoon of relaxation and fun.
The scenic Huay Luang Reservoir is ideal for fishing, rafting and boat cruising.