ASP.NET MVC- Application Folders
ASP.NET MVC Folders:
MVC framework is based on default naming convention. All Controllers are in the
Controllers folder, All Views are in the Views folder, and All Models are in
the Models folder. We have not additionally add the any bad naming convention
in our MVC application. Everything is a much optimized and systematically
defined. In every MVC application, we have finding a same folder.
of standard naming convention gives developer too much understandable and
reduced code of line for development scenario.
is a brief explanation of each folder:
Folder are storing all file-based data in the prescribed format.
App_Data is also use for
content stored as XML, typically where someone are not want to give hosting
charges i.e. expensive for.
It is also
called a local database. By default it is not accessible on web. We have also
stored some other info such as contact (.csv file), SQLite file and many more.
The App_Start Folder:
The App_Start folder has been
introduced in ASP.NET MVC 4. In
previous version we have configuration file is a Global.asax but ASP.NET MVC 4 introduced another folder is an App_Start.
It contains various configurations files.
BundleConfig are used to creating and registering bundles for CSS
and JS files. By Default, It will include various CSS and JS file, these
FilterConfig is used to create and register global filter action, filters
error or filter etc. By default it contains HandleErrorAttribute filter.
RouteConfig is used to
register various route patterns for our ASP.NET MVC application. By default, Default Route is registered. We can
modified as our requirement.
For more details: : Attribute
Routing in ASP.NET MVC
WebApiConfig is used for any
Web API related configuration, including Web-API-specific routes, Web API
services, and other Web API settings.
The Content Folder:
This folder is used
for static file such like: css, icon and Images. In Content, there is a one
another folder i.e. Theme folder i.e. automatically created by Visual Studio
IDE and It is stored a JQuery images and style etc.
In Content folder, we have a one standard css file i.e. site.css. Site.css is used to set style color & alignment of our
application. We have changes according our requirement.
The Controllers Folder:
This folder contains the controller classes responsible for accept
user request handling user input and their respective responses. In every
ASP.NET MVC Controller naming convention is a first one is a name and last one
the add “Controller”. For example, I want to create controller for “Home”. Then
I have must give the name “HomeController”
For more details: Working
The Models Folder:
This folder contains
the all classes that representing application model.
For more details: Working
The Scripts Folder:
In Script folder
like: Ajax, and jQuery files. We have also additionally create our own JS file.
By default, Visual Studio are created
a JS file "modernizr" ,It
is used for supporting HTML5 and CSS3
features in the our application.
Views is the user interface and it will stored sep/arate folder
for each controller.
For example, in above, we have various views such
like: Account, Course, Home, Shared etc.
Shared folder is used to store views shared between
controllers (master pages and layout pages, _ViewStart pages).
For more details: Working With View
The Global.asax file, also known as the ASP.NET application file, is an optional file that contains code for
responding to application-level events raised by ASP.NET or by HttpModules. The Global.asax file
resides in the root directory of an ASP.NET-based application. At run time,
Global.asax is parsed and compiled into a dynamically generated .NET Framework
class derived from the HttpApplication base class.
Mostly used for application and
session start/end events and for global error handling.
For more details: Introduction to Global.asax in ASP.NET
The packages.config file:
The packages.config file is managed by the NuGet infrastructure. It is used to
track installed packages with their respective versions. If we want to update our
MVC 4 to MVC 5 then NuGet checked
here of the previous version to replace by new one by creating their object.
The Web.config file:
ASP.NET MVC configuration is stored in Web.config files i.e. a XML file.
These files can appear in many
directories in an ASP.NET MVC application. They help to configure application behavior
even before after deploying, based on the fact that we can edit them with any
The web.config file exists in the Views
folders to prevent access to your views by any means other than your
For more details: Web Config