Scientists have recently reported hearing strange messages from deep space that they theorize are coming from aliens. They have discovered approximately 234 stars out of 2.5 million are behaving strangely, emitting unusual signals.
Strange modulations in a tiny set of stars that appear to be coming from “extraterrestrial intelligence” who possibly want to alert the Earth of their existence, according to their analysis.
Since only a small amount of data has been gathered as evidence, for now, it is probably too soon to establish that aliens are trying to contact humans.
EF Borra and E Trottier, two scientists from Laval University in Quebec, Canada, headed the research paper titled “Signals probably from Extraterrestrial Intelligence,” which is going to be published in the journal Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific.
“We find that the detected signals have exactly the shape of an [extraterrestrial intelligence] signal predicted in the previous publication and are therefore in agreement with this hypothesis,” the authors wrote.
“The fact that they are only found in a very small fraction of stars within a narrow spectral range centered near the spectral type of the sun is also in agreement with the ETI hypothesis.”
However they have made it clear that a lot of work has to be done to confirm the source of these messages. The study caught the attention of many researchers; including those from the Breakthrough Listen Initiative.
“It is too early to unequivocally attribute these purported signals to the activities of extraterrestrial civilizations. Internationally agreed-upon protocols for searches for evidence of advanced life beyond Earth (SETI) require candidates to be confirmed by independent groups using their own telescopes, and for all natural explanations to be exhausted before invoking extraterrestrial agents as an explanation,” the team said in a statement.
This is not the first time scientists have claimed to have established contact with aliens. Earlier this year, scientists reported hearing a strong message from outer space. Unfortunately, further investigation proved it to be a mere false alarm. What they thought was a telegram from a distant alien civilization, turned out to be just terrestrial disturbance.