Explore the mystery of life along San Diego’s coastline during tidepooling excursions beginning in November with Birch Aquarium at Scripps Institution of Oceanography, UC San Diego. Late fall through early spring is an excellent time to explore tide pools, as low daytime tides reveal wider beaches and pools teeming with native marine life such as hermit crabs, sea hares, and sea anemones.
Aquarium naturalists will show participants how to tread lightly through these fragile ecosystems and help them discover the wonderful world of tide pools. Ages 2 and older. Ages 2-13 must be accompanied by a paid adult. Directions to meeting place will be provided at time of RSVP.
Members: $12, Public: $15
RSVP REQUIRED: 858-534-7336 or online
Nov. 3, 2-4 p.m., False Point
Nov. 16: 1:30-3:30 p.m., Dike Rock
Nov. 30: 12:30-2:30 p.m., False Point
Dec. 1: 1-3 p.m., Dike Rock
Dec. 29: 12-2 p.m., False Point
Dec. 31: 1:30-3:30 p.m., Dike Rock
Jan. 12: 1-3 p.m., False Point
Feb. 1: 3-5 p.m., Dike Rock
March 1: 2-4 p.m., False Point
March 2: 3-5 p.m., Dike Rock
About Birch Aquarium at Scripps
Birch Aquarium at Scripps is the public exploration center for the world-renowned Scripps Institution of Oceanography at UC San Diego. Perched on a bluff overlooking the Pacific Ocean, the aquarium features more than 60 habitats of fish and invertebrates from the cold waters of the Pacific Northwest to the tropical waters of Mexico and beyond. An interactive museum showcases research discoveries by Scripps scientists on climate, earth and ocean science and features five dozen interactive elements. Accredited by the Association of Zoos and Aquariums, Birch Aquarium has an annual attendance of more than 436,000, including 40,000 school children.
Scripps Institution of Oceanography at the University of California San Diego, is one of the oldest, largest, and most important centers for global science research and education in the world. Now in its second century of discovery, the scientific scope of the institution has grown to include biological, physical, chemical, geological, geophysical, and atmospheric studies of the earth as a system. Hundreds of research programs covering a wide range of scientific areas are under way today on every continent and in every ocean. The institution has a staff of more than 1,400 and annual expenditures of approximately $195 million from federal, state, and private sources. Scripps operates oceanographic research vessels recognized worldwide for their outstanding capabilities. Equipped with innovative instruments for ocean exploration, these ships constitute mobile laboratories and observatories that serve students and researchers from institutions throughout the world. Birch Aquarium at Scripps serves as the interpretive center of the institution and showcases Scripps research and a diverse array of marine life through exhibits and programming for more than 430,000 visitors each year. Learn more at scripps.ucsd.edu and follow us at Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram.
About UC San Diego
At the University of California San Diego, we constantly push boundaries and challenge expectations. Established in 1960, UC San Diego has been shaped by exceptional scholars who aren’t afraid to take risks and redefine conventional wisdom. Today, as one of the top 15 research universities in the world, we are driving innovation and change to advance society, propel economic growth, and make our world a better place. Learn more at www.ucsd.edu.