January 19, 2017
It's been an amazing week of learning. As we begin to settle in to a new year many of us have set goals and made new year resolutions in which we hope to keep. This week I had the opportunity to talk with many of you about the joys and challenges of your students.
How can we help them do better, build confidence and feel successful? By setting goals of course! By resolving to impact, touch and make a difference in the lives of the children we serve.
So I asked, "What is your New Year's goal for your students this year?" Here are a few of your responses...
My New Year's Goal For My Students Is To...
- "learn their multiplication facts and improve their journal writing skills"- Karen & Susan
"be more responsible , have a positive attitude"- Harriett Swennes
"learn multiplication & division facts, concentrate and work, be more respectful."- Marlene Oddo
"make them excited about learning and help them improve in reading and math"- Ms. Ellen
"instill a desire to continue to learn throughout their lives"- Mike Joiner
-"add more vivid details to their journal writing."- Lee Bradway
"be able to read on grade level by the end of the school year"- Cecile Prager
"Help them with their reading comprehension, by asking lots of questions about their material"-Carroll O'Brian
"go over the basics every day while making sure they understand the material."- Mr. Jack
"write perfect letters in their journals and to read on their very best level."-Tricia Williamson
"help them develop personal responsibility and accountability." - Mr. Andrew
"nurture, love and encourage them to be the best them that they can be." -Vera Woods
Isn't it wonderful to know that we are all working on the same goals of success? Yes, it most certainly is!
Thank you for your commitment. Thank you for nurturing and sowing seeds of knowledge, wisdom and compassion. Thank you for being a part of the LaAmistad at Peachtree Team.
Dates to Remember
- January 22nd and 29th- Sunday Study Hall 2:00-4:00 p.m. (Please sign up with our volunteer coordinator Carla Phillips)
- January 24th- New Volunteer Training 4:00-5:00 p.m. in the library
- January 24th & 30th- Knit Wit Tuesdays in the Zone- 4:30-5:30 p.m.