AUSTRALIAN doctors have set up a system that dramatically improves the chance country people have of surviving a heart attack.
It has reduced the heart attack death rate in country areas of South Australia by 22 per cent, according to a nine-year study published in the Medical Journal of Australia.
Before the system was introduced country patients in the state were twice more likely than city patients to die within 30 days of a heart attack.
"We are getting close to eliminating the gap," said Dr Philip Tideman, the main driver of the project.
He and his team have introduced their integrated cardiac support network to 66 rural hospitals in South Australia.
The main benefits include rapid bedside blood test results and on-call cardiologists who can guide country doctors by telephone.
The system also enables quick decisions on which patients should be flown to a metropolitan hospital.
It gives doctors and nurses tools and systems to ensure people get the best treatment, said Dr Tideman, cardiology director at Country Health SA
"We have set up processes so doctors in the country hospitals know exactly what to do. They know who to talk to, what treatments to give.
"Just because you live in a country area your risk of dying from a heart attack shouldn't by rights be higher than in a city."
He said it had taken a long time to convince the South Australia health bureaucracy that he was on the right track.
"But once the department came on board they were fantastic.
"This is one of the first papers in the world to show this level of outcomes for clinical networks. It's incredibly pleasing to see the results and have the paper published," said Dr Tideman.
The success reported in the paper factored out other influences, such as an overall improvement in the survival rate of heart attack patients, he said.
The Heart Foundation has welcomed the report.
"This is a landmark momentous research paper that shows we can improve the heart attack survival rates of rural patients through a co-ordinated network," said Dr Robert Grenfell, its director of cardiovascular health.
"It has shown for the first time that it is possible to reduce the difference in care between rural and urban hospitals.
"This approach should be adapted across the whole of rural Australia. It saves lives."
Originally published as Medics boost rural heart-attack survival