Invented by the founder of KOHILO, the “VORTEX” wind turbine yields the lowest Levelized Cost of Electricity (LCOE) and highest Capacity Factor in the wind energy market. This increase in power production is made possible by a diffuser system that stabilizes turbulent airflow. These precision diffusers channel wind into the core of the “VORTEX” turbine thereby increasing the velocity of this harvested wind by compressing a large volume of flow into a small channel; this channel directs airflow perfectly into the blades of the turbine.
Efficiency and Levelized Cost of Energy are critical determinants for project viability within the renewable energy arena. A key driver in determining efficiency is Capacity Factor: how much electricity a power plant actually produces compared to how much it would produce if it operated at full nameplate capacity 100% of the time. An estimate of total electricity cost including payback of initial investment and operating costs, known as Levelized Cost of Energy, is also important to consider when choosing a clean energy system. These two penetrating analytics, perhaps more than any other, illustrate why KOHILO is changing the rules of the game.
Wind energy developers and financiers have traditionally utilized horizontal axis wind turbines for mid-size and large wind projects because generating as much power as possible and, in turn, yielding the highest return on investment has always been paramount. When wind blows on the blades of a horizontal axis wind turbine, all of the blades contribute to energy production compared to previously conceived designs of vertical axis wind turbines which allowed only a fraction of the blades to contribute to energy production with the other blades merely “going along for the ride,” creating back-side drag. Simply put, because power efficiency was not as good, vertical axis wind turbines were not considered good long-term investments. KOHILO has shattered this notion.
Further enhancing KOHILO’s “Vortex” design is its cut-in speed – the minimum wind speed at which the turbine blades overcome friction and begin to generate electricity. The “Vortex” will begin to spin at 0.9 MPH and commence electricity production at 2 MPH, considerably less than the cut-in speed of 7-9 MPH of traditional wind turbines. This reduced cut-in speed further diminishes the siting constraints and installation limitations plaguing horizontal axis turbines. The “Vortex” can be installed in any location and does not need to be situated on 50-300 foot towers for optimization. KOHILO’s technology does not need to scale these barriers for optimum performance.
The “Vortex” is a hybrid vertical axis wind turbine incorporating the most dynamic characteristics from the three turbine designs thus creating a system of unparalleled efficiency and performance.
There were a number of commercial wind farms built in the U.S. that proved to be reliable and efficient. However, there was a problem with fatigue on the blades.
The “Vortex’s” blades: