In Kenya, 12 of 18 American students come down with a debilitating disease after bathing in a river. Two are left paralyzed. In Tunisia, 28 sun- baked tourists on a Sahara excursion jump into an inviting pond at an oasis named El Mamoun. Nine of them contract the same disease--schistosomiasis.
In Venezuela, an Italian visitor is forced by circumstance to spend a night in the dwelling of a poor campesino. Three months later, he is dead, the victim of Chagas` disease, brought on by the bite of an insect.
Travel is fun, but it can turn into something else if you are not careful.
With more Americans traveling abroad in these days of the strong dollar, health risks are rising, Dr. Vincenzo Marcolongo of the International Association for Medical Assistance to Travelers (IAMAT) said recently. This is particularly true for those who travel to Third World countries, where sanitation conditions are poor and where travelers may be exposed to diseases rarely encountered in this country. Malaria is one of them. In the 1950s, there was hope that the disease could be eradicated completely. Today, the situation is as bad as it was in the 19th Century, says Marcolongo, and it`s getting worse.
``Several Americans die from malaria every year now,`` Marcolongo said.
``There are 60 species of the Anopheles mosquito that carries malaria, and 40 of them are resistant to insecticides like DDT. And the disease itself is becoming resistant to drugs that used to be effective.``
Chloroquin protected travelers in Africa (and elsewhere in the world)
from malaria until five years ago. Now some strains of the disease have become resistant to chloroquin, so tourists have to take a newer sulfa drug, Fansidar, for protection. Fansidar, however, sometimes produces undesirable side effects. Malaria is found in Central and South America, the Caribbean, Africa, Asia and the Pacific; chloroquin-resistant strains are on the increase in many regions.
Schistosomiasis, which has been striking more travelers in recent years, is contracted when a human is exposed to the fresh-water snails that are hosts to the schistosoma flatworm. The worm larva is attracted to the human, enters his body and reproduces in body organs, damaging them and inducing long-term problems. Travelers should avoid contact with fresh water (or even the banks of rivers) in countries where the disease is found, including parts of South America, the Caribbean, Africa and the Orient. A new drug, Praziquantel, is proving successful in combating the disease, but there is no preventive drug. The Italian who died after spending a night in a campesino`s hut in the Venezuelan countryside was bitten by an insect called the vinchuca and infected by a parasite, trypanosoma cruzi. The insect is found mainly in rural areas and sometimes in suburban districts of Central and South America. Trekkers, birdwatchers and orchid hunters who spend time in the countryside should be on the alert. The disease can produce chronic heart problems many years after exposure. There are no preventive drugs.
Other diseases that more travelers are being exposed to include dengue fever, found in the Caribbean; viral hepatitis, which is fairly widespread in the world; and typhoid, found where unsanitary conditions exist.
But of all medical problems that affect the traveler, the chief one is that old bugaboo, diarrhea, usually contracted from unsanitary water, food or both. It affects half of those who visit the mainland tropics and 30 percent of the visitors in Mediterranean countries. Mostly this is a self-limiting disease that winds its course in a day or two.
Marcolongo advises travelers who want to avoid this problem not to overeat. If blood or mucus is found in the stool, more serious conditions may be present, and the traveler should consult a physician.
Marcolongo`s nonprofit organization, IAMAT, is celebrating its 25th year. Membership entitles one to a directory of IAMAT English-speaking physicians in 125 countries. IAMAT physicians agree to a set payment schedule ($20-30 per visit) and are on call to members 24 hours a day.
Members also receive a world immunization chart advising on prevalence of diseases and preventive measures, a world malaria-risk chart and protection guide, and a world schistosomiasis-risk chart and information brochure. Although there is no charge for membership, a donation is requested to support the organization`s work; the average is $25. Those who make additional donations can receive 24 world climate charts that detail temperatures in various locales and seasons, sanitary conditions of water, milk and food, and a seasonal clothing guide.
For information, write to IAMAT at 736 Center St., Lewiston, N.Y. 14092