Nasal polyps are benign growths or tumors that grow from the membranes of the sinuses or nose. It is theorized that polyps are caused by infection. It appears that under the polyp is infected bone. It is unclear whether the polyp stems from an original infection in the bone
or the polyp infects the underlying bone. I believe that the infection starts in the membrane and spreads to the bone, causing a vicious cycle between the bone and the overlying tissue. The inflammation caused by the infection in the mucus and the bone causes the tissues of the nasal membranes to swell and welt. This swelling is called polypoid change. As the inflammation and swelling worsens, a polyp forms. When there are many polyps, the tissue looks like a bunch of grapes.
The only way to truly know that you have nasal polyps is from an examination of the membranes. However, most physicians are not able to tell the difference between polyps and swollen turbinates. It is best to go to an otolaryngologist, who will not only examine you directly but may order a computed tomography (CT) scan.
Now that you recognize and understand your symptoms, you should realize that you are not alone. Many people suffer from CAID, most of whom never seek proper medical treatment. Othe
I believe that children develop CAID symptoms just the same as adults, but they often go undetected by pediatricians, who are not adequately trained in this condition. Most parents
The symptoms of GERD include heartburn, indigestion, reflux, and belching. If you experience these symptoms along with any of the sinusinfection symptoms just described, it is impo
Meningitis, encephalitis, and brain abscess are rare complications of sinus infection. However, they can be life threatening and need to be treated immediately. Each of these infec
Sinus problems can prevent you from sleeping well, which can lead to fatigue. Combined with an overall feeling of sickness, fatigue can actually lead to depression. Many major cond
Stress can certainly result from dealing with many of the symptoms caused by sinus disease, allergies, and asthma. For example, constant throat clearing is stressful for both suffe