Annenberg/CPB Channel – Online, streaming professional development programs for educators as well as links to additional resources. Programs are scheduled throughout the month and are easily viewed on a computer.
Video on Demand: Digital Curriculum
About.com Guide to Geography
Akhet Internet: ( Egypt)
American Cultural History: the Twentieth Century – A fact-filled look at the culture of the 20th century with links to support the research process.
American President – The History section includes information on the Presidents themselves; biographies of each first lady; biographies of each cabinet member; listings of presidential staff and advisers; and timelines detailing significant events in the lives of each administration.
Ancient History (BBC) – On this site you’ll find in-depth articles, multimedia (like games, virtual tours and animations) as well as bite-size material like timelines and short biographies of historic figures.
Anne Frank Online *
Anne Frank the Writer
Archiving Early America
The Avalon Project
Biography Online *
Best of History Web Sites
Biographical Dictionary *
Reporting Civil Rights (Library of America)
Community in History – This site provides resources for teachers and students, as well as completed examples, for the use of local history and community studies as “the best way for students to gain a holistic sense of the role of history in understanding the world around them.”
Congress Link – CongressLink provides information about the U.S. Congress — how it works, its members and leaders, and the public policies it produces.
C-SPAN Current Events
American Currency Exhibit
The Christian Catacombs of Rome
Daily Life in Ancient Civilizations
Decisions, Decisions Online
Discovery of Gold in California
Don’t Buy It (PBS) *- Don’t Buy It attempts to engage students in media literacy the ability to access, evaluate, analyze and produce both electronic and print media by dissecting pop culture and advertisements.
EDSITEment – An online humanities resources (and supporting lesson plans) from some of the world’s great museums, libraries, cultural institutions, and universities.
Secrets of Egypt
Exploring Ancient World Cultures
Flights of Inspiration *
Geosense – An online geography game that tests your knowledge of world geography
The History Channel
The History Place
Historical Treasure Chests
The Hunger Site
Island Colonization *(WebQuest) – Groups of four to five students will work together to create a persuasive argument for or against colonization of a newly discovered island.
Internet For Teachers
The Jamestown Online Adventure *
Thomas Jefferson Center
K-3 Map Adventures *
Lewis and Clark
Library of Congress
Library of Congress Country Studies
Listening to the Walls Talk
Make Your Own Map*
Maps of the World *
Mayflower Web *
Mexico: Splendor of Thirty Centuries
Mount Rushmore: American Experience
Multicultural American West
National Archives/ Records
National Geographic Expeditions *
National Park Service
Nations of the World *
The New Deal Network
News Hour Extra
One World Net
The Oregon Trail *
Our Gold Rush Community *
Our Documents – This site links to 100+ important US documents in their original, hand-written form.
Our Timelines *- This web site generates truly fascinating personalized web pages for you. They show how your life (or the life of anyone else you choose – for instance, your descendants and ancestors) fits into history as we know it.
National Geographic Map Machine *
The PBS Kids Democracy Project *
Peace Corps: Kids World *
Portals of the World
Private See Dispute: From the NY Times Daily Lesson Plans, this lesson gets students to define “reasonable expectations” of privacy with regard to camera cellphones and digital cameras.
Professional Cartoonist Index
Russia Interactive Learning Exhibit
September 11 Digital Archive
Special Collections-Library of Congress
The State Report *
State of the World’s Children
State Web Games *
Government of Tibet in Exile
Sinking of the Titanic
Teaching American History
Teacher’s Guide to the Holocaust
Time´s 100 Most Important People
Today in History
U.S. Bureau of the Census
Views from New England
Violence Policy Center
Welcome to the White House
Which Way is North? *
World Almanac for Kids *
Words/Deeds in American History
You Are the Historian (Plimoth Plantation) *