Penelusuran Referensi Pangan dan Gizi
Calcium is the most abundant mineral in the body. Almost 99% of the body’s calcium is in the skeletal structure and the teeth . It is essential for the proper development of bones and teeth, normal action of the heart and all muscle activity. It aids the clotting process of the blood and stimulates enzymes in the digestive process and also control the passage of fluids through the cell walls Calcium is required for proper foetal growth, for normal health of the mother during pregnancy and lactation and for the secretion of breast milk. It speeds all healing processes.
Chloride is essential for the proper distribution of carbon dioxide and the maintenance of osmotic pressure in the tissues. It prevents the building of excessive fat and autointoxication. It maintains proper fluid and electrolyte balance in the body.
Magnesium helps to keep the nerves relaxed. It is necessary for all muscular activity. It is an activator of most of the enzyme systems involved in the metabolism of carbohydrate, fat, and protein. It is necessary for the activation of alkaline phosphatase, an enzyme involved in calcium and phosphorus metabolism. Magnesium is necessary for strengthening the nerves and muscles and in conditioning the liver and glands. This mineral is also involved in the production of lecithin which prevents the building up of cholesterol and consequent artherosclerosis. Magnesium prevents heart attacks, aids in fighting depression also prevents calcium deposits in kidneys and gallstones.
Phosphorus is essential for the proper utilization of not only calcium but also other minerals like iron, magnesium, potassium, and sodium. Phosphorus is indispensable for all active tissues. In combination with calcium, it feeds the nerves. It aids the growth of hair and helps counteract fatigue. This mineral is important for the regular functioning of the heart and for normal kidney functioning. Phosphorus is essential in the chemical processed involved in the utilization of carbohydrates and fats. It liberates their energy at the rate demanded by the body. It also helps in regulating the acid-alkaline balance of the blood, which is vital for the maintenance of health and prevention of disease. Phosphorus is also necessary for the formation of the phospholipids – lecithin and cephalin – which are integral parts of a cell structure and also act as intermediates in fat transport and metabolism. This mineral is also an essential constituent of the nucleic acid and nucleo-proteins of body cells.
Potassium maintains a proper acid-alkaline balance in the blood and tissues. It prevents hyperacidity. This mineral is essential for muscle contraction and is, therefore, important for the proper functioning of the heart, especially for maintaining a normal heartbeat. It promotes the secretion of hormones and helps the kidneys in detoxification of blood. Potassium prevents female hormonal disorders by stimulating the hormone production. It is important for proper functioning of the nervous system and helps to overcome fatigue and also assists in reducing blood pressure.
Silicon is essential for the proper functioning of nerve cells and tissues. It controls the transmission of nerve impulses and strength of bones everywhere in the body. It is also essential for growth of hair, nails, and teeth. It is used to keep bones, cartilage, tendons and artery walls healthy and may be beneficial in the treatment of allergies, heartburn and gum disease, as well as assisting the immune system. It also makes the eyes bright, protects the skin from becoming flabby and helps in healing processes.. It also helps to prevent many diseases, such as tuberculosis, irritations in the mucous membranes and skin disorders.
Sodium regulates the osmotic pressure and maintain proper water balance within the body. It is a major factor in maintaining the acid-base equilibrium, in transmitting nerve impulses, and in relaxing muscles. Sodium is utilized in the formation of digestive juices and in the elimination of carbon dioxide It is also required for glucose absorption and for the transportation of other nutrients across cell membranes.
Sulphur helps in the digestion of fats and controls the metabolism of carbohydrates. It is essential for healthy hair, skin, and nails. Along with B complex vitamins, it aids the liver in bile secretion. Sulphur likely ejects some of the waste and poisonous matter from the system. It helps to keep the skin clear of blemishes and makes it glossy. Sulphur creams and ointments have been remarkably successful in treating a variety of skin problems.
Copper is found in the liver, gallbladder, lungs and heart. It is essential primarily for the absorption and metabolism of iron.. Copper helps the conversion of iron into haemoglobin. It stimulates the growth of red blood cells. It is also an integral part of certain digestive enzymes.
Iodine is found mainly in the thyroid gland. Thyroxine, which is secreted by this gland, contains iodine. Thyroxine, the thyroid hormone, controls the basic metabolism and oxygen consumption of tissues. It controls the utilisation of sugars. It regulates the rate of energy production and body weight and promotes proper growth. It increases the heart rate as well as urinary calcium excretion. It also improves mental alacrity and promotes healthy hair, nails, skin, and teeth. Iodine doses helps in prevention of goitre in areas where it is endemic, and are of value in treatment in the early stages.
Iron is required for the production of haemoglobin and it is used in the building of bones, brain and muscle and in the carrying of oxygen throughout the body. Iron is also needed for the oxygenation of red blood cells, a healthy immune system and for energy production.and it helps to remove carbon dioxide from the tissues. Iron prevents fatigue and increases resistance to stress and disease. Different types of anaemias may be due to different causes. However only iron-deficiency anaemia responds to the supplementary intake of iron
Manganese involved in the metabolism of carbohydrates, fats and proteins. In combination with choline, it helps in the digestion and utilization of fat. Manganese helps to nourish the nerves and brain and assists in the proper coordinative action between the brain, nerves and muscles in every part of the body. It is also involved in normal reproduction and the function of mammary glands. It is also used in the manufacture of sex hormones and breast milk in females.
Zinc is found in the brain, genital organs, thyroid, liver and kidneys. It is needed in the healing of wounds and in the transfer of carbon dioxide from the tissue to the lungs. Zinc is also required in the manufacture of insulin and in the regulation of blood sugar. It is needed for a healthy skin and hair, successful pregnancies, and male virility. It helps in guarding against disease and infection. It is needed to transport vitamin A to the retina. Zinc The Oral doses of zinc sulphate may be use for treatment of Acne, Eczema & Prostate Disorders.