There's a problem no one's talking about
There’s a problem that affects almost 2.4 billion people, or 1 in 3 people worldwide. It’s one of the world’s greatest obstacles to public health and environmental sustainability, and it costs the world’s poorest countries 260 billion dollars every year. It's the lack of a basic human right.
It’s the lack of access to water and toilets.
Honestly, it's a pretty shitty situation.
Women pay the heaviest price for poor sanitation
Lack of sanitation doesn't just cause discomfort—it’s a safety issue that women and girls are forced to face every day.
In many countries, women are expected to wait until nightfall to relieve themselves, putting them at serious risk of harassment and assault.
About half of all girls worldwide attend schools without toilets, forcing many of them to drop out when they reach puberty.
Photo: WaterAid/ Ernest Randriarimalala
What we do
Last year we helped over 3.1 million people gain access to a safe, clean and private toilet – that’s over 350 people an hour!
We work with our local partners using local materials, low-cost solutions, and are always exploring new ways to deal with human waste.
We also campaign tirelessly to demand that governments target their development efforts and spending on sanitation. It might not be sexy or nice to talk about, but we know that toilets save lives.
What can you do?
You can download our Emoji Creator mobile app. Customize and share poop emojis with your friends and family to show that you #GiveAShit and help us spread the word about the global sanitation crisis.
You can donate. Donations from people like you are critical to helping us reach poor communities with safe, private toilets. Would you consider becoming one of our monthly supporters? Just $5 or $10 a month can make a world of difference.
Photo: WaterAid / Tom Greenwood
Sign up for newsletters
The problem is huge and the number of people affected is staggering, but we are making progress. Find out how we are tackling the sanitation crisis around the world. The situation is a bit sh!t, but the newsletter isn't!
Toilets in pop culture (YouTube playlist)
You may not realize it, but toilets play a major part in many of your favorite movies.