Nomenclature of inorganic compounds should be concise and precise to show the composition and structure of the named substance.This requires the use of the name of the element, root or base to express the various components of the substance; with the chemical preposition (plays the role of connecting nouns) to express the substance of the connection of the components.
Rules for nomenclature of inorganic compounds：
Nomenclature of inorganic compounds---chemical compounds:nomenclature of inorganic compounds is made up of the name of the basic part.In grammar, the preposition is a basic part of "chemical name to form the name of the compound word". Listed as follows.
Such as chlorine atoms (CL) and kalium atom (k) combination of KCl called potassium chloride; and as atoms of the hydroxyl (OH -) with sodium (NA) combination of NaOH is called sodium hydroxide.Such as CaCl H O called calcium chloride hydrate, H O called hydronium ion.It is said to replace the hydrogen atoms in the parent compounds, such as NH Cl called chloride ammonia; NHCl called two ammonia chloride;ClCH2COOH is called chlorinated acetic acid. It is indicated that sulfur (or selenium, TE) replaces oxygen, such as H2S2O3,, and HSeCN, which is called selenium substituted acid.Poly said two or more kinds of molecular aggregate with each other, such as (HF) called dimer hydrogen fluoride, (hocn) called cyanuric acid, (KPO) 6 called hexametaphosphate potassium.
Nomenclature of inorganic compounds---Base and root
Base and root: the base and is atomic groups present in the compound, by covalent bonds and other groups with who is called the base, by electrovalent bond and other groups of people is called the root. The base and root are generally named after their parent compound, called a base or root. The base and can also be named with the clusters including the element name, price is full of the element name is placed in front, not full put behind.
Nomenclature of inorganic compounds---Ion
According to the elements of the ion, the element name and valence to name. For example: Cl chloride, Na sodium ions charged atomic group, as described above, called a root; if it is necessary to specify the ion, it is called an ion or a root.
Nomenclature of inorganic compounds---A commonly used chemical word crown
A crown of commonly used chemical words (as a function of modification to express a particular feature of this substance).