Alaska is bear and moose country. When hiking on the Nature Center trails you should always be prepared for a wildlife encounter. Brown/grizzly
bears, black bears, and moose are all commonly seen on our trails, but that doesn't mean you can't enjoy a hike! Follow the tips below
and you'll make our trails safer for both humans and wildlife.
To learn more about bear behavior and what to do for a bear encounter, visit the Alaska Department of Fish and Game Bear Safety page.
Check out this brochure: Know Your Bear Facts Brochure
Moose are not normally aggressive, however, there are certain times of the year to be more aware of moose behavior. During the fall mating
season in late September and October, termed the rut, bull moose may be aggressive toward humans. In late spring and summer, cow moose with
young calves are very protective and will attack humans who come too close.
Do you know what to do when a moose charges? Fortunately most moose charges are bluffs – warnings for you to get back. But if a moose does
charge, don’t wait to find out if it’s bluffing. Run or walk quickly and get behind something solid, like a tree, or retreat to a safe place,
like inside a building or car.
To learn more about moose behavior and what to do for a moose encounter, visit the Alaska Department of Fish and Game Moose Safety Page.
The Nature Center offers several Bear and Moose safety programs throughout the spring/summer/fall months. Please see our program schedule for more info.
Have a school/private group/or other group wanting some more info and hands-on training in bear/moose country? Visit our School Programs page.
Additionally, anyone that walks into the log cabin visitor center has the opportunity to talk and ask questions of our volunteers. Our front
desk staff is trained in bear and moose safety (either by Nature Center staff and/or Chugach State Park Rangers), and do a great deal of interacting
with individual visitors regarding hiking the trails. When giving out trail information, they are frequently asked about bear and moose sightings,
and they engage the visitor in a dialogue that includes determining their knowledge of hiking the backcountry. Visitors vary from casual out-of-town
tourists that are not going more than ½ mile to the viewing deck, to hikers preparing to cross the Crow Pass.
they've all been trained in bear/moose safety!