Study Shows That Vitamin D is Critical to Brain Health
It is a common misconception that loss of cognitive abilities is a normal part of the aging process. Fortunately a steady decline in one`s ability to learn, comprehend and develop and retain new memories is not inevitable and is well within our control. The results of a study published in the journal Neurology show that vitamin D intake is associated with a decreased incidence of cognitive impairment.
Vitamin D is shown to bond with neuronal receptors in the brain and prevents neurodegeneration. The vitamin is a powerful antioxidant and anti-inflammatory that protects cellular damage that leads to brain cell death and loss of vital cognitive abilities. The study authors concluded: “our findings showed an association between vitamin D deficiency and global cognitive impairment. These results are congruent with fundamental research and add to the growing body of evidence in favor of the neurological action of vitamin D”.
Ensure Proper Vitamin D Levels Through Supplementation
Researchers conducting this study found that the degree of cognitive impairment increased dramatically in those subjects consuming less than 35 micrograms of vitamin D daily from diet. This minimal level is equivalent to 1,400 IU of the vitamin, a level that is very difficult to obtain through diet alone. Vitamin D blood levels typically decrease with age and many aging adults have been shown to be severely deficient; this deficiency leads to increased oxidative stress in the brain and is implicated in cognitive decline and dementia.
To achieve optimal protection, the vast majority of people will need to supplement with vitamin D. As we age our ability to produce vitamin D from sun exposure becomes limited and is an unreliable source. It is also very difficult to consume enough of the vitamin from food, despite our best dietary efforts. The best way to ensure you receive enough vitamin D is to supplement with an oil-based form of the vitamin to attain a blood level between 50 and 70 ng/ml.
Grape Seed Extract Works in Harmony with Vitamin D
Vitamin D has been shown to be essential to human health and provides a protective shield against cognitive decline. Research published in the Journal of Neuroscience demonstrates that nutrients such as grape seed extract may work in synergy with vitamin D to prevent neuronal damage and lower risk of Alzheimer`s disease. Grape seed extract blocks beta amyloid accumulation and the formation of damaging protein plaques and tangles. You can benefit from the combination of vitamin D and grape seed extract to provide multi-modal protection against cognitive decline and dementia.
About the author
John Phillip is a Health Researcher and Author who writes regularly on the cutting edge use of diet, lifestyle modifications and targeted supplementation to enhance and improve the quality and length of life. John is the author of ‘Your Healthy Weight Loss Plan’, a comprehensive EBook explaining how to use Diet, Exercise, Mind and Targeted Supplementation to achieve your weight loss goal. Visit My Optimal Health Resource to continue reading the latest health news updates, and to download your Free 48 page copy of ‘Your Healthy Weight Loss Plan’.