Learn English Vocabulary
and Easy English Grammar
This site will
help you learn or teach
Click Here for Step-by-Step Rules, Stories and Exercises to Practice All English Tenses
Have you been looking for effective teaching materials?
Then it's good you found this site.
Here you will find a great deal of useful and unique resources.
These are all designed to help you successfully teach your students!
Most Popular Products for Teachers: English
Short Stories Book and Workbook (ESL Short Stories and Exercises)
pages of high interest/low vocabulary stories, as well as many types of
exercises for your students. The exercises include vocabulary,
sentence structure, grammar, comprehension and writing.
Short Stories for Complete Beginners
pages of fully illustrated stories for complete beginners or kids
learning English. It is useful for teaching reading, basic sentence
structure, and practicing basic sounds of letters.
English Grammar Test for Download
comprehensive grammar test for intermediate students. It covers the
most important aspect of grammar: parts of speech, verb tenses and
Tense, a Step-by-Step Guide
complete tutorial on the simple past tense. Includes easy to understand
explanations, dozens of different exercises, a story in the simple past
tense and a final test.
Plural Nouns, a Step-by-Step Guide
complete tutorial on English plural nouns. Rules and practice for the
spelling rules, irregular plural nouns, countable and uncountable nouns
and much more. Includes easy to understand explanations, dozens of
different exercises, a story in the simple past tense and a final test.
Do you want to pass the English exams?
Get a better job? Go abroad?
Communicate with people?
Get more knowledge?
In other words, you want to be able to USE English.
English, yet still have difficulties in
is really the key thing.
let's start improving your English!
Why learn English?
Read about the reasons to learn English
the English Short Stories book
English Short Stories for Complete
English online – sign up for online
English videos – watch
videos and improve your English
the English Writing
section to learn to write English
the English Speaking
section to learn to speak English
the English Vocabulary
Activities to improve your vocabulary
Short Stories section to practice reading
English Grammar section to improve your grammar
Word Pronunciation: Improve that Accent!
Improve your English word pronunciation and accent for FREE with these
explanations, videos and exercises.
Building Vocabulary and Some
What is the right way to build vocabulary, and what are the common
mistakes? Find out in this important article.
Cool English vocabulary flashcards. Practice online.
Teachers Games for Vocabulary
Teachers games for vocabulary can be both fun and educating. Click here
to find out about popular game collections.
Use these English vocabulary quizzes to test yourself and correct
The Best English Dictionary
improve your English you really must use a good basic English
dictionary. How do you choose a dictionary? What free options do you
English Spelling Rules
English spelling rules for the following subjects:
How to add S at the end of the verb,
how to add ED at the end of a verb,
how to add ING at the end of a verb.
English Grammar Exercises
you will find simple and easy English grammar exercises for even the
hardest subjects! Step by step, you can improve your grammar!
Here you will find simple and easy explanations and many exercises on
English verb tenses.
Learn English Parts of Speech -
Explanations, Examples and Exercises
thorough overview of the English parts of speech: nouns, pronouns,
adjectives, verbs, adverbs, prepositions, conjunctions and
Gerunds and Infinitives: Rules,
Exercises and Quizzes
A "gerunds or infinitives" tutorial – full of explanations, example
sentences, exercises and a final test.
A quick and easy "English modal verbs tutorial" – explanations, tables,
example sentences and exercises.
English Vocabulary and Grammar
Tips – Really Learn English Newsletter
English vocabulary and grammar tips regularly to your mailbox. A great
way to improve your English step by step, e-mail after e-mail.
Really Learn English Blog
this blog you can find the latest additions to the site: articles,
illustrations, exercises, flashcards and stories - all about learning
A list of useful links on subjects such as:
Dictionaries, English resources, English directories and more.
free to ask any questions or make requests.
This site is here for you!