Tips To Improve Cholesterol
Cholesterol is something that joins with fats and other substances in your blood to build up in the inner walls of your arteries. So that the arteries become blocked and narrowed and thus resulting in less blood flow. There are many lifestyle changes that you can make which will definitely improve cholesterol level in your body. Majority of heart problems is caused by a buildup of cholesterol and fatty deposits in artery walls. The blood flow is so reduced causing chest pain and other serious health problems.
So how can you improve cholesterol to keep yourself healthy and strong? The answer is simple, choose a healthy diet plan. Have a look at these 5 tips to improve your cholesterol.
1 – Fish
Fish and fish oil are very good sources of cholesterol-lowering fatty acids, which are helpful in maintaining healthy cholesterol levels. Try to eat fish at least 2 to 4 times a week. So by replacing red meat with fish you can lower cholesterol as you are reducing your exposure to saturated fats. It is also recommended to eat wild salmon, sardines and bluefin tuna. Why? because some other types like shark, swordfish and king mackerel etc are high in mercury.
2 – Nuts
Vast research has demonstrated that if you eat nuts on a regular basis it can cut cholesterol to some extent. They contain sterols which is like fiber that keeps the body from absorbing cholesterol. Similarly, walnuts and almonds are helpful as well but still nuts are high in calories.
3 – Fruits and Vegetables
Fruits and vegetables like whole grains are not heart healthy but also good sources of dietary fibre. The British Dietetic Association also recommends eating more whole grains and foods that are high in soluble fibre such as oats, pulses, peas, chickpeas, fruits and vegetables. Dried beans, barley and oats are some great sources of soluble fibre.
4 – Get Active
If you have an active lifestyle it can really help you to improve your cholesterol levels. There are a range of activities which range from cycling, walking, running and dancing etc. A study shows that doing aerobic activity every week can also improve your cholesterol levels.
5 – Stop Smoking
Smoking lowers “good” cholesterol levels in your body and it can result in a major risk of heart disease. In one study, people who stopped smoking saw their “good” cholesterol rise by 5% in a year. Quitting smoking isn’t easy but even if you lower it down you will definitely see improvement.