How many times has your mom told you to drink coffee so that you don’t sleep off midway while studying in the night? How many times have you felt fresh after having a cup of coffee? Ever wondered why? This is because coffee contains caffeine, which helps you to keep your mind alert and energetic, especially when you are studying. After having a cup of hot coffee, you will find a drastic improvement in your overall mood levels, which gives increased motivation for your body to study harder. Here are five facts that will help you understand the effects of coffee in studies, in a better way.
Table of Content
Fact 1: Caffeine improves short-term memory to a great extent
When you sit for your exams, you want to ensure that you don’t forget anything and are able to produce everything that you stored in your memory from the previous night. When you are learning new stuff and you want to reproduce or recall it within a short while, it is your short term memory that will come to rescue. When your STM is strong, it means your brain is on high alert always. A cup of freshly brewed hot coffee contains enough caffeine to provide a huge impetus to your STM.
Fact 2: Caffeine helps you to maintain physical fitness
As a student, it is important for you to maintain a decent level of physical fitness if you want mental alertness. A cup of coffee every day helps you achieve that. The caffeine in your coffee helps to burn down the fats in your body quicker and increase the quality of your exercise. When you have an exam the next day, it is strongly recommended to take a cup of coffee the previous evening, indulge in an hour of physical exercise and then continue with your studies. If you are planning to stay awake until the wee hours of thenight, ensure that you have a couple of cups of coffee for your company.
Fact 3: Nutrient-rich beverage
Contrary to popular beliefs, coffee doesn’t hamper your health in any way, if consumed in the right quantities. One cup every day is indeed considered to be good for your health because it contains essential vitamins like Riboflavin, Pantothenic Acid, Manganese, Potassium, Magnesium and Niacin. These nutrients prove to be a huge blessing for you, especially when you are a student and are preparing hard for your exams.
When you drink around a couple of cups of coffee every day during your student days, you are less prone to suffer from age-related memory ailments like dementia and Alzheimer’s. When you suffer from these ailments, life becomes a pain for you as you have to depend on others even for basic things like finding your home, remembering names, etc. Having an active lifestyle, eating healthy food, engaging in regular physical exercise and drinking coffee are some of the suggestions given by medical experts for people who want to stay away from these ailments.
Fact 5: Caffeine keeps depression at bay
We hear many cases of student suicides on an everyday basis because of depression. When they score low grades, they are scared of the repercussions of the same and they end their life in seconds. Depression is a condition that can cripple anyone. One or two cups of coffee every day can help you stay calm and composed during critical times in life. According to a study conducted by Harvard in 2011, people who drank at least 4 cups of coffee per day were 20% less prone to suffer from depression than their non- coffee drinking counterparts. It was also found out that these people were 53% less likely to commit suicide than others. Aren’t these enough reasons for you to start drinking coffee and lead a happy life?
From the above, it is evident that caffeine can bring about a lot of benefits for your health and mind, provided you consume it within limits. It can energise your mind instantly. By drinking coffee regularly, you can stay on high alert always. This will improve your brain’s grasping power and help you recall stuff as and when you want from your memory (short term and long term).