Mark (an animal, formerly a criminal or slave) with a branding iron
an ointment that branded her with unsightly violet-colored splotches
Describe (someone or something) as something bad or shameful
the do-gooders branded us as politically incorrect
she was branded a liar
Assign a brand name to
branded goods at low prices
The promotion of a particular product or company by means of advertising and distinctive design
A type of product manufactured by a particular company under a particular name
a new brand of detergent
A brand name
the company will market computer software under its own brand
A particular type or kind of something
his incisive brand of intelligence
An identifying mark burned on livestock or (esp. formerly) criminals or slaves with a branding iron
A branding iron
A habit, trait, or quality that causes someone public shame or disgrace
the brand of Paula's alcoholism
A piece of burning or smoldering wood
he took two burning brands from the fire
trade name: a name given to a product or service
burn with a branding iron to indicate ownership; of animals
a recognizable kind; "there's a new brand of hero in the movies now"; "what make of car is that?"
stigmatize: to accuse or condemn or openly or formally or brand as disgraceful; "He denounced the government action"; "She was stigmatized by society because she had a child out of wedlock"
identification mark on skin, made by burning
mark with a brand or trademark; "when this product is not branded it sells for a lower price"
A brand is the identity of a specific product, service, or business . A brand can take many forms, including a name, sign, symbol, color combination or slogan. The word brand began simply as a way to tell one person's cattle from another by means of a hot iron stamp. ...
Heineken International is a group which owns a worldwide portfolio of over 170 beer brands, mainly pale lager, though some other beer styles are produced. As of 2006, Heineken owns over 130 breweries in more than 65 countries and employs approximately 57,557 people.
Brand is a magazine on anarchism that has been published since 1898 making it the oldest continuously published anarchist magazine and the second oldest in general. It takes its name from the Swedish word for "fire". ...
This is a list of kings of Dale from J. R. R. Tolkien's Middle-earth legendarium. Girion is named as the last Lord of Dale before the arrival of the dragon Smaug at Erebor, the Lonely Mountain; later Kings, his descendants, ruled after Smaug's death and the restoration of Dale following the ...
Brand is a hamlet in the municipality of Nuth in the province of Limburg, the Netherlands. It is one of the so called Bovengehuchten, or Upper Hamlets, of Nuth. Brand is located south of the stream Platsbeek.
Brand is a municipality in the district of Tirschenreuth in Bavaria, Germany.
A piece of wood red-hot, or still burning, from the fire; A sword; A mark of ownership made by burning, e.g. ...
(branding) process in which a mark, usually a symbol or ornamental pattern, is burned into the skin of a living person or animal
(Branded) A term used to describe some one who has been marked as a deportee with the EX brand.
(Branded) Any petro-related item that has an oil company logo or emblem ("brand") attached to it or imprinted upon it.
(Branded) marked permanently with a hot iron as identifiable property; traditionally used on cattle and livestock as well as on some enslaved people to denote ownership
(branded) Pre-DCE (dotcom era), this described the status of a steer after a rancher burned his symbol of ownership into the animal’s backside; now connotes how the public perceives a company’s image. In the company’s mind, though, that poor steer will always be you.
(Branding) A marketing concept used to create a greater awareness of your company's products and services. Companies that are interested in branding try to get as many Web users as possible to view their banner ads and logos, with less concern for the number of clickthroughs to their Web sites.
(branding (Yunrak)) involved in creating a unique name and image for a product (good or service) in the consumers' mind, through advertising campaigns with a consistent theme
Branding is the process of identifying and differentiating an organization’s products, processes, or services from another organization by giving it a name, phrase, or other mark.
(Branding) A traditional advertising method used to elicit a latent response from a target based on cumulative impressions and positive reinforcement. The most successful brands are considered “trustmarks” and enjoy loyal, lifelong customers.
(Branding) Use of the names, logos, symbols, trademarks, or product design to identify a product.
(BRANDING) Make a powerful first impression and build a strong, memorable identity with quality, affordable Logos, Business Cards, Stationery, T-Shirts, and other promotional products. Baker Concepts will help you design a look that will fit your image as well as your budget. ...
(Branding) A name, term, sign, symbol or design that identifies a seller. Branding differentiates one company's product from other sellers. Consider one of your favorite products. What emotions or memories are connected to the product? These emotions and perceptions are the brand of the product.