About Rear Admiral John D. Sloat, 1st Military Governor of California
John Drake Sloat (July 6, 1781 – November 28, 1867) was a commodore in the United States Navy who, in 1846, claimed California for the United States.
He was born at the family home of Sloat House in Sloatsburg, New York, of Dutch ancestry, and was orphaned at an early age, his father, Captain John Sloat, having been mistakenly shot and killed by one of his own sentries two months before he was born, and his mother dying a few years later. Sloat was brought up by his maternal grandparents.
Appointed midshipman in the Navy in 1800, he was sailing master of the frigate United States under Commodore Stephen Decatur during the War of 1812, and was promoted to lieutenant for conspicuous gallantry in the capture of the frigate HMS Macedonian. Sloat then commanded the schooner Grampus during which he fought the Action of 2 March 1825 against the pirate ship of Roberto Cofresí. He later served on the ships Franklin and Washington, and from 1828 commanded the sloop St. Louis with the rank of master commandant, to which he had been promoted in 1826. He was promoted to captain in 1837, and from 1840 to 1844 was in charge of the Portsmouth Navy Yard.
In 1844 Sloat was appointed to command the Pacific Squadron, and in 1845, as tensions with Mexico grew, he was instructed to land in Alta California and claim it for the United States if war broke out. Receiving a report of fighting on the Texas border while off Mazatlán, he raced north (the British were reportedly interested in California too), engaged in a skirmish called the Battle of Monterey, raised the flag over the Customs House at Monterey on July 7, 1846, and issued a proclamation announcing that California was now part of the United States. He was a Military Governor of California for only seven days, before handing over the office to Robert F. Stockton.
Later, his poor health forced Sloat to take commands ashore, where he commanded the Norfolk Navy Yard 1847-51, directed the construction of the Stevens Battery in 1855, and helped plan the Mare Island Navy Yard. After his retirement in 1866 he was promoted to Rear Admiral. Sloat was a Freemason, and belonged to St. Nicholas lodge No. 321 in New York City. He died in New Brighton, New York, and was buried in Brooklyn's Green-Wood Cemetery.
Two destroyers have been named USS Sloat in his honor as well as a WWII Liberty ship, the SS John Drake Sloat. A major street, Sloat Boulevard, and Commodore Sloat elementary school, both in San Francisco, are named after him. Local streets in Monterey, California, Sacramento, California, and the Carthay Circle neighborhood of Los Angeles also bear his name. There is a large monument erected in his honor on the Presidio of Monterey U.S. Army post. An elementary school in Sacramento is also named for him.
However, Commodore Sloat's claim to Sloat Boulevard in San Francisco may be slipping away. In August 2012, the California Legislature passed S.C.R. 93, which would designate the Sloat Blvd. segment of State Route 35 as the "John Burton Highway," named for the incumbent chairman of the California Democratic Party who was a former state and federal legislator in San Francisco. This might have the effect of subordinating the city and county's Sloat Blvd. name because State Route 35 coincides with Sloat Blvd. for most of Sloat Blvd.'s length. The "Burton Highway" amendment to S.C.R. 93 was added late in the legislative process and the resolution was rushed through the Legislature in the final days of the 2012 session.