Did your kids watch a Fourth of July parade over the weekend? Were they waving a flag and proudly sporting red, white, and blue? They just might grow up to be card-carrying Republicans, a new study finds. No, these researchers aren’t from The Onion. This study comes out of Harvard.
Shutterstock / Matt Ragen
Political scientist David Yanagizawa-Drott and economist Andreas Madestam wanted to know whether important childhood experiences shaped political views and behavior patterns later in life. They looked into how youth participation in Independence Day activities influenced adult engagement in the political process.
The researchers found that children who attended one rain-free Fourth of July parade before age 18 were 4 percent more likely to vote for a right-wing candidate before age 40. July 4th celebrations had no impact on increasing Democrats’ numbers.
“We were surprised to find that childhood experiences of Fourth July celebrations could have such persistent effects. The evidence suggests that important childhood events can have a permanent impact on political beliefs and behavior and that Fourth of July celebrations in the US affect the nation’s political landscape,” concludes Yanagizawa-Drott.
Yanagizawa-Drott and Madestam think the study results are linked to Republicans’ tendency to be more patriotic.”The political right has been more successful in appropriating American patriotism and its symbols during the 20th century,” the researchers write in a paper titled “Shaping the Nation: Estimating the Impact of Fourth of July Using a Natural Experiment.” “Survey evidence also confirms that Republicans consider themselves more patriotic than Democrats. According to this interpretation, there is a political congruence between the patriotism promoted on Fourth of July and the values associated with the Republican party. Fourth of July celebrations in Republican dominated counties may thus be more politically biased events that socialize children into Republicans.”