Despite the inherent commitment of community development to addressing inequality – within the community and voluntary sector itself and in the implementation of community development initiatives – significant gender inequalities exist. The following section outlines a number of issues which are the primary and most persistent factors in gender inequality within the community and local development sector. They are presented within the following categories: 1. Employment and volunteering trends; 2. Underrepresentation of women in decision-making; 3. ‘Male culture’ of boards/committees; 4. Child-care; 5. Gender analysis; 6. Gender-disaggregated data; 7. Multiple disadvantage.
The toolkit improves our understanding of why gender matters to the monitoring and evaluation of community-driven development (CDD) projects. It introduces M&E topics that the non-specialist can find useful when constructing gender indicators. Furthermore, the toolkit presents a generic CDD results framework that provides convenient categories for incorporating gender M&E indicators, tangible examples of gender indicators, and illustrates how gender M&E can be added to CDD program results frameworks. The objective of this toolkit is to provide practical guidance to World Bank EAP (East Asia and Pacific) operational task teams and other community-driven development (CDD) practitioners (i.e. government/NGO staff ) on how to measure the gendered impact of CDD operations.
For the sake of uniformity, the exercise on gender analysis in Burundi followed the same model such as presented in the Gender and Community Development Framework for the East African Community. After a brief overview on the country profile and the good practices for each country, the model presents exploration of the following elements: the legal framework, institutional mechanisms, capacity building for individuals and communities, issues of gender mainstreaming in priority areas, research and documentation, gender and peace process.
This is the first paper in a series intended to examine the role of gender in community development and resource management. It outlines women’s roles in natural resource management and economic development, as well as socioeconomic, institutional, policy, and program constraints on women and their participation in projects aimed at improving resource management and alleviating poverty. Brief examples of succsessful initiatives are also provided.
Addressing gender disparities in economic growth, particularly in agriculture, is not a new goal for development interventions, but after a hiatus in the 1990s it has received new attention in the past decade. Four research and outreach projects of the Global Livestock Collaborative Research Support Program working in Ethiopia, Ghana, Kazakhstan, Kenya, and Kyrgyzstan implemented activities which both raised women’s incomes and increased women’s income-earning opportunities and contributed to larger goals of community development and well-being. The projects facilitated increased women’s participation into different types of group-based activities, with consequences for improved incomes, health, and education outcomes. The capaCity-building process used in these different projects and some of the results they achieved are described in this report.