Being prepared is the key to surviving a disaster, and PrepareSoCal wants to help communities be prepared.
While disasters affect everyone, there are many reasons why their impact on vulnerable communities is exponentially more devastating. The factors that increase a community’s vulnerability include single parent households, minimal education, limited English proficiency, non-working multiple family dependents and low income. We are diligently working with organizations and community stakeholders in our targeted vulnerable communities to get everyone ready for all types of disasters.
Our Community Resilience Engagement Opportunities
Prepare U: Provides basic information on preparedness for disasters such as earthquakes, home fires and wildfires. Participants will learn about assembling a disaster supplies kit, developing a home escape plan and how to be informed about disasters and other emergencies.
Pillowcase Project: This preparedness education program teaches children in grades 3 through 5. Moreover, students who participate will be able to, identify the best ways to stay safe during emergencies, identify the best ways to prevent and stay safe during a home fire and gain confidence in their abilities to be prepared for emergencies.
Home Fire Preparedness: The most effective way to protect yourself and your home from fire is to identify and remove fire hazards. 60 percent of house fire deaths occur in homes with no working smoke alarms. During a home fire, working smoke alarms and a fire escape plan that has been practiced regularly can save lives.
Preparedness Apps: Provides free, immediate, relevant information so that expertise is always in everyone’s hand; current apps include: Emergency, Earthquake, Wildfire, Flood and First Aid.
Map Your Neighborhood: Designed to improve disaster readiness at the neighborhood level, teaching neighbors to rely on each other during the hours or days before fire, medical, police or utility responders may be able to reach them.
Youth Clubs: Youth interested in becoming the next generation of humanitarians enroll their college or high school as a Red Cross Youth Club, and in doing so, learn how to make a difference through volunteerism and civic engagement, as well as how to protect their families, school and communities through first attending and then teaching preparedness classes designed for and by youth: PreparedKIDS and PrepareTEENS.
Ready Rating: A free, self-guided program designed to boost emergency preparedness using a 123-point online assessment to help organizations measure their level of preparedness for businesses, and employees..