squinted, past participle; squinted, past tense; squinting, present participle; squints, 3rd person singular present;
Look at someone or something with one or both eyes partly closed in an attempt to see more clearly or as a reaction to strong light
the bright sun made them squint
Partly close (one's eyes) for such reasons
Have eyes that look in different directions
Melanie did not squint
(of a person's eye) Have a deviation in the direction of its gaze
her left eye squinted slightly
A permanent deviation in the direction of the gaze of one eye
I had a bad squint
A quick or casual look
let me have a squint
An oblique opening through a wall in a church permitting a view of the altar from an aisle or side chapel
askance: (used especially of glances) directed to one side with or as if with doubt or suspicion or envy; "her eyes with their misted askance look"- Elizabeth Bowen; "sidelong glances"
cross one's eyes as if in strabismus; "The children squinted so as to scare each other"
strabismus: abnormal alignment of one or both eyes
the act of squinting; looking with the eyes partly closed
be cross-eyed; have a squint or strabismus
partly close one's eyes, as when hit by direct blinding light; "The driver squinted as the sun hit his windshield"
(squinting) squinched: having eyes half closed in order to see better; "squinched eyes"
Squint was the 1993 critically acclaimed return of Steve Taylor as a solo artist after his stint as the lead singer of Chagall Guevara. ...
In a phased array or slotted waveguide antenna, squint refers to the angle that the transmission is offset from the normal of the plane of the antenna.
A hagioscope (from Gr. άγιος, holy, and σκοπός, to see) or squint, in architecture, is an opening through the wall of a church in an oblique direction, to enable the worshippers in the transepts or other parts of the church, from which the altar was not visible, to see the elevation of the Host.
(Squinting) To dream that you see some person with squinting eyes, denotes that you will be annoyed with unpleasant people. For a man to dream that his sweetheart, or some good-looking girl, squints her eyes at him, foretells that he is threatened with loss by seeking the favors of women. ...
(squinting) (strabismo, oculistica_pediatrica.html#strabismo) Squinting in Paediatric Ophthalmology. To be cross-eyed. To look or peer with eyes partly closed.
to be unable to direct both eyes simultaneously toward a point. Also known as strabismus (turned eye). For more information, see "Strabismus".
an angled slit in a wall allowing a view of the high altar from outside the sanctuary
Cross-eyed, with the eyes placed so that they seem to look permanently at the nose.
An oblique opening in a church wall, through which the altar can be seen
A permanent deviation in the direction of gaze of one eye; defective alignment of the eyes.
An aperture in a wall or through a pier, usually to allow a view of an altar. Also called a hagioscope.
Slang term commonly used by Rebel/Republic pilots, used in reference to the TIE Interceptor.