Summary: This is a study of the day of Pentecost a third in the series of the book of Acts
The Day of Pentecost
Acts Chapter 2
I. The Miracle at Pentecost: 2:1-13
NOTE: What was the day of Pentecost?
1. Pentecost means fiftieth, 50th. It was a day that was celebrated on the 50th day after the presentation of the first harvest of the barley. This is the 50th day of the first Sunday after Passover. (SEE Lev.23:15-16) Pentecost is Greek for Feast of Weeks.
Leviticus 23:15-16 (quickview)  And you shall count for yourselves from the day after the Sabbath, from the day that you brought the sheaf of the wave offering: seven Sabbaths shall be completed. Count fifty days to the day after the seventh Sabbath; then you shall offer a new grain offering to the Lord.
2. It is also known as the day of first fruits. This is the day when the first fruits of the wheat harvest were presented to God. (See Ex. 23:16 and 34:22)
Exodus 23:16 (quickview)  and the Feast of Harvest, the firstfruits of your labors which you have sown in the field; and the Feast of Ingathering at the end of the year, when you have gathered in the fruit of your labors from the field.
A. The gift of the Spirit. 2:1-4
1. The setting 2:1
2. The event 2:2-4
NOTE: Wind is noted as power from God. We do not know what the wind sounded like or who could hear it. What we do know is that the wind symbolizes the Holy Spirit scripture. (Ezekiel called the wind the breath of God to fill the dead bodies with new life. Ezekiel 37 (quickview) ) This is an Audible Sign.
NOTE: This fire did not pick and choose. It rested on all the believers. This is still true of the Holy Spirit today. The Holy Spirit comes and rests upon people at the moment of Salvation. Notice that the text does not say that the fire ever left. The only thing that we need to have for the Holy Spirit upon us is Salvation nothing else. This was a visible sign.
B. The witness of the Spirit 2:5-13
1. The gathering of the crowd. 2:5-8
2. The make up of the crowd. 2:9-11a
3. The response of the crowd. 2:11b-13
II. The Message at Pentecost. 2:14-41
A. The Introduction of the Message. 2:14-21
1. Defense that the men were not drunk.
NOTE: It is also this way today. When a person gives his or her life to Christ they are mocked by the world
2. Scriptural proof concerning the Pentecost experience.
NOTE: The Prophecy of Joel
B. The Explanation: Scriptural proof concerning Christ’s Messiahship. 2:22-36
NOTE: Peter gives five arguments or reasons why Christ is alive and thus the Messiah.
1. Christ’s Person and life demand that He be raised from the dead. 2:22-24
John 10:17-18 (quickview)  Therefore My Father loves Me, because I lay down My life that I may take it again. No one takes it from Me, but I lay it down of Myself. I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again. This command I have received from My Father.
Psalm 16:8-11 (quickview)  I have set the Lord always before me; Because He is at my right hand I shall not be moved. Therefore my heart is glad, and my glory rejoices; My flesh also will rest in hope. For You will not leave my soul in Sheol, Nor will You allow Your Holy One to see corruption. You will show me the path of life; In Your presence is fullness of joy; At Your right hand are pleasures forevermore.