S: George Washington Carver
1: George Washington Carver Dominic Smith
2: Basic info | born in Diamond, Missouri 1864 January ? - January 5, 1943 Tuskegee, Alabama. He is famous for peanut butter and its many uses.
3: Childhood | When he was born into slavery. He had ten brother and sisters. Who all died prematurely, except one older brother and sister. His parents name was were Mary and Moses.
4: Inspiring | He is inspiring, because people thought only whit people could accomplish great things. Another reason he is inspiring is because he was a good professor.
5: He is brave, because he didn't care about what people said. He also never stopped his research when people told him he was hopeless. | Brave
6: Interesting Facts | An interesting fact is all the items he made out of peanut butter. He made hair products, cosmetics, medicine, fertilizer, a yummy snack, and many other things.
7: Quote is education is the key to unlock the golden door of freedom fact he made over 300 items out of peanuts quote were there is no vision, there is no hope | Other facts + quotes
8: Time of my life | first event: he was born in 1864 January (day unknown) second event: 1877 he was kidnapped third event: 1890 he studied art and piano in college fourth event: 1900 he introduced crops and agricultural techniques to Alabama fifth event: he received a honorary doctorate from Simpson college in 1928 sixth event: he received the Theodore Roosevelt medal for outstanding contribution | Seventh event: the Washington Carver museum was established in Tuskegee on 1941 Eighth event:he dies January 5, 1943
9: George born in diamond Missouri child of Moses and Nancy Carver lived in slave quarters overcame slavery worked as a slave challenged by no family personal traits were bravery always working his hardest never giving up best known for peanut products Carver | bio poem
10: Dear Journal | Dear journal i just finished high school. It was very hard, because of racism. But i still finished high school. i got a letter in the mail, it said that they would give me a job as a professor. I'm going to go for the job, hope it goes well.
11: Dear hero Dear Mr.Carver I love your invention, peanut butter. I think you're a hero, because of all the products you made. I chose you, because you are cool. Another reason I chose you was, because you never left racism stop you from reaching your dreams. sincerely Dominic Smith
12: Bibliography brainyquote.com wikipedia.org about.com
14: Boys will be boys