"Welcome to Liars Anonymous," said the man in front of a small audience. "Who wants to go first?"

A beautiful woman raised her hand. "Hi, my name is Lana, and I’m a liar."

"Hi, Lana," everyone replied.

"It has been 10 seconds since I told a lie," she said.

"We know," said a man wearing a lab coat. "At the coffee pot over there, you told me your name was Marilyn, and last week you were Babs."

"Anyway," Lana continued, "I told you last week I'm job-hunting. I'm getting so many offers that I can't pick just one. I was wondering if anybody else knew of a company that’s hiring."

The man in the lab coat raised his hand. "I do. It's easy to get a job at the hospital where I work. I showed up and asked about the surgeon position, and they hired me on the spot! They gave me a lab coat and said, 'You start tomorrow!'"

The audience oohed and aahed.

"Anyone else want to share?" asked the moderator.

A man wearing a police uniform replied, "I would. My name is Chuck, and I’m a liar."

"Hi, Chuck!" the audience replied.

"I was just curious," he started, nervously looking around. "It's a totally random question, but does anyone know if there’s a law against impersonating a police officer?"

A young man dressed in a suit said, "Actually, I'm a lawyer, and I’d be happy to meet with you about this. I have 35 years of experience with police officer impersonation cases. My win rate is 100%."

Chuck sighed. "Whew, that’s a relief! Thanks!"

The facilitator checked his watch and said, "We have time for one more share tonight. Does anyone else want to speak?"

An elderly woman spoke up. "I do. I'm selling a miracle pill that reverses aging. It'll make you look half your age after one pill. Don't take too many, or else you'll go back into your mother’s womb. Let me know if you want more information after the meeting."

The facilitator raised an eyebrow at the elderly woman and inquired, "And you’ve been using this product?"

She said, "Well, I’ve only taken one pill. But I am 170 years old!"

The facilitator shook his head. "That’s a wrap. Goodnight!"
