What's in your water?
We know our bodies need water to stay healthy, but have you ever considered what’s actually in the tap water you’re drinking?
UK water is among the best in the world, but even though it’s in top shape leaving the treatment plant, it still needs to flow through miles of pipe before it reaches your home. On this journey to your kitchen tap, it can collect a large number of unwanted impurities from pesticides to disease-causing bacteria.
Here are just some of the foreign particles that could be floating in your cool glass of water.
While chlorine is added during the treatment process, microorganisms can still enter your water supply before it reaches your home. Coliform bacteria, such as E. coli, are commonly found in soil and in surface waters with some strains surviving in these environments for long periods of time.
Gastrointestinal problems are the main symptom; these bacteria are unlikely to cause illness in most people, but children and the elderly are at higher risk. It is important to note that the presence of Coliform bacteria in drinking water indicates that other pathogens may also be present.
Cryptosporidium and Streptobacillus are two of the species that could contaminate your water, putting your family’s health at risk. However, with our range of water filters, those pathogens can be separated from the water before it reaches your glass, giving you peace of mind.
As well as disease-causing pathogens, certain compounds can enter your water supply through the soil. One example is Metaldehyde, which is a pesticide used by farmers and gardeners to control slugs on their land.
Despite quality control, an above-regulation amount has been found in some UK water supplies in the past. While there is no current health risk from those extraordinary levels, many people prefer to remove any threat by using a water filter.
Drinking water in your home can pick up lead from pipes bringing the water supply from the treatment facility. It can even pick it up from pipes on your property if your house was built before 1970.
If consumed through water, lead can enter your bloodstream and accumulate in organs like the liver, kidneys and brain, and even bones. This can be harmful if too much builds up in the body, with pregnant women and young children more vulnerable to the risks.
In the UK, hard water contains high levels of calcium and magnesium minerals. When heated, these compounds combine to form limescale, which you’ll see inside your kettle and in your hot drinks such as tea.
Some Water filters will also remove these minerals from your drinking water for a perfect, scale-free kettle and great-tasting, clear cup of aromatic tea.
While the addition of chlorine to your water supply removes bacteria, it can give your drinking water an unpleasant smell and taste. General sediment can also be present, having the same negative effect.
Our range of filters remove these particles, improving the taste, smell and even appearance of your water.
Discover Our Water Filters
While the combination of some minerals in hard water can cause limescale, there are other essential minerals like calcium that are present. Our water filters remove over 98% of contaminants but some of our filter cartridges are designed to put back in beneficial elements such as calcium. Calcium is essential for the development of strong bones and healthy teeth, so it’s important for a growing family.
From saving money to the convenience of having filtered water on tap, discover the many benefits of a Kinetico water filter today!Learn more
To find your perfect water filter, take a look at our range today.See the range
A water softener or filtration system can offer homeowners peace of mind, but what do they actually do?Find out more