1. Conflicting hardware
Conflicting hardware usually happens because more than one components in the cover wants to use the same resource at the same time.
A lot of the time this can be fixed by making sure you have the latest drives for each device download and installed from the components manufactures website.
If you want to see if you have a hardware conflict or if a component is running properly you can always go into device driver manager and if you have a red “X” next to any of the components on the list you could have a conflict, bad or no driver installed on that device.
2. More memory needed
Memory should not be confused with storage. Storage is where you store you pictures and programs on your computer (your hard drive itself). Whereas memory is temporary and in layman’s terms hold your data up on the screen while you are using it.
A lot of your operating system files and programs are stored in your memory while you are using them or they are running in the background.
If you don’t have enough memory you cant run as many things at the same time. When a program executes and starts running it is loaded into your memory and if there is not enough memory programs have to swap in and out slowing your computer dramatically.
3. Hardware is failing
Like I said at the start of this article. Like me, the older it gets the slower it gets.
Components start to fail due to old age, heat and time degradation. It is unavoidable and can sometimes happens straight off the assembly line but usually after a couple of years of operation.
Its hard to determine which components are failing and can sometimes be a matter of process of elimination.
4. Too many programs running the background
The more programs you install on your computer, the more your computer will want to start them up when your computer boots.
A lot of these programs you might not even use or only want to run when you actually need them. A program like Microsoft Office for example which includes Word, doe not need to be running in the background all the time, only when you actually want to read or write a word document.
The more programs you unnecessarily run in the background the slower it makes your computer.
Stopping programs (not immediately needed) during the startup can reduce resources need for the hard drive and memory and can generally make your all round use of the computer much faster and better.
5. Viruses and Malware
More than any other problem effecting the speed and use of computers is computer viruses and infections.
Computer viruses can do anything to your computer from slowing it down dramatically, spying on you, advertising to you or stop you using it altogether.
By placing excessive use on your computer to reducing your use of its application, computer viruses can slow your computer down to the point it becomes unusable.
Antivirus software is not enough anymore and if you think you might have a virus on your computer you should definitely invest in a malware remove tool as well.