What would you like to do?
Why is the plural of tomato tomatoes?
The plural form of tomato is tomatoes.
Tomatoes are easy to grow from a plant. The main things the plant needs are good, loose soil, water, sunshine, and more sunshine. A great way to get good soil is to throw you…r autumn leaves onto the ground where you plan to plant the tomato. Leave the leaves there all winter so that their nutrients will be absorbed by the soil. It is a good rule of thumb to wait till there is no more chance of the ground freezing before planting anything. Once there is no more chance of the ground freezing, remove the leaves from the soil. The leaves will be wet and full of worms, so it is not a pleasant task, but the results in the soil are well worth it. Always return every stray worm to the earth. Next, plant your tomato plants. Plant them a good two feet away from each other, for tomato bushes grow big. While the plants are still small, put tomato cages around each one. Now you will have to wait for some time before anything seems to happen. Like every plant, tomatoes need water. It is good to check the soil around the plants everyday. If it is moist or wet, leave it alone. But if it is dry, water it generously. When you water tomatoes, always put the hose or the water pitcher right at the base of the plant's stem so that the water goes directly into the dirt without touching the leaves or branches of the bush. If the tomato plant is too wet for too long, it will become sickly. A sign of a healthy tomato plant is green powder from the leaves. Rub your fingers along the tops of the tomato plants; if a green powder is left on your fingers, your plant is healthy and getting plenty of sunshine. Eventually yellow flowers will blossom on the bushes. From these flowers will grow tomatoes. Although you have to wait a considerable time before the tomatoes start actually coming, once they come, they come in full force. Now you have to check the bushes for two things besides the dampness of their soil; you must also look for tomatoes and for cracked stems. Pick the tomatoes when they are ripe. If you leave a tomato for too long, it will fall prey to little rodents and insects. So it is best to check your tomatoes bushes every morning. If a tomato looks almost ready, pick it. It is better to pick a tomato a few hours early than to find it half eaten by vermin the next morning. Because tomato bushes are so thick, you will have to search through the mesh of their foliage to find the tomatoes growing on their central branches. It will take a good several minutes to completely find every tomato on a single healthy bush. Cracked stems are a problem caused by the weight of the tomatoes. A tomato bush can handle several cracked stems. But it is better to avoid cracked stems by tearing an old T-shirt into long, 1 inch wide strips. Use these strips to hold stray branches (like in a sling) and tie the ends of these strips to a horizontal bar on the tomato cage. Very large tomato bushes will grow so far beyond their cages that they will begin to fall over, taking their cages with them. In this case, hammer several tall, strong sticks into the ground and tie the bush and cage to the sticks to hold the bushes and cages upright. You may break a few stems in the process, but that is not bad if you do not break more than a few. Finally, as the tomato bushes die, remove the cages and sticks and ties. Also remove the dead tomato plants! Letting them "rot in place" or chopping them up and adding them to your tomato plot is one of the #1 ways tomato plant diseases are spread. A final note to keep in mind is that land cannot support the same plant for year after year. So it is good to let the land rest for a year every two or three years.
The plural of tomato is "tomatoes".
The plural of "tomato" is "tomatoes." (see the related question)
Wash your tomatoes. Dip them in boiling water for 30 to 60 seconds or until the skins split. Remove them from the boiling water and immediately put them into cold water. Slip …off the skins and remove the cores. Leave whole or cut into halves. Put the tomatoes in a large saucepan and heat to boiling, gently mashing from time to time to create some juice. Boil gently for 5 minutes. Stir to keep them from scorching. Put the tomatoes and juice into clean jars, leaving 1/2-inch headspace. Add 2 tablespoons of lemon juice per quart to acidify. Add 1 teaspoon of salt per quart. Adjust the lids and rings. Process in a boiling water bath for 90 minutes. The water level should be 1-inch above the tops of the jars. Remove from canner, and let sit until they seal.
Cherry tomato weight around 15gr and regular tomato 200gr so it around 13 cherry tomato in a tomato. But the cherry tomato plant will give half in weight of the total producti…on of a regular beef tomato plant.
yes they can eat tomatos but they can also eat mice,many tipes of bugs,even snakes!!!!
Tomato is singular and tomatoes are plural Totoma
The plural form for the noun tomato is tomatoes. The plural possessive form of is "tomatoes'". "The tomatoes' skins were very tough."
Most small cans have 34 tomatoes.
It is tomato or tomatoes for plural.
A tomato is botanically a fruit but was defined by the US Congress in the 1800's as a vegetable so that it could be taxed. Their reasoning was that they are used as vegeta…bles for culinary purposes. It is a red fruit with seeds and similar to strawberries and other red fruits with seeds.
The Aztecs called the fruit xitomatl, meaning plump thing with a navel. Other Mesoamerican people, including the Nahuas, took the name as tomatl, from which Europeans deri…ved the name tomato. In Mexico the Aztecs cultivated the tomato for food. During the early 16th century, returning Spanish conquistadores took it to Spain and, borrowing the Nahuatl word tomatl, called it a tomate. Soon Spanish enclaves in Italy, North Africa, and the Middle East were enjoying the new delicacy.
Tomatoes and potatoes are already in their plural form. Tomato and potato are the singular forms.
Everyone might not agree, but home grown and farmer's market tomatoes are almost always BETTER than supermarket tomatoes as far as texture and taste goes. Nutritionally, t…hey could be about the same, but it depends on how they are grown. If they are grown in nutrient-rich soil, the home grown ones are likely to have better nutrition.
Tomato is the correct spelling. Tomatoe is the incorrect spelling. However, if it's more than one tomato, then it's tomatoes. That is why people often spell the si…ngular tomato incorrectly .