PHILADELPHIA — A new study refutes the image of the homeless as a collection of street people with mental problems or aged alcoholics.
Drug and alcohol abusers or the mentally ill account for only about one-third of the homeless in Pennsylvania, the study said. It pointed to poverty as a major cause of homelessness and said the homeless population includes a surprising number of young, black males.
The study, released last week, is one of the most comprehensive ever conducted on the homeless. Data were collected on about 5,500 people across Pennsylvania on Jan. 28, 1988, in a detailed census involving three out of every four people in shelters that night.
The data showed ``that the name of the problem is not homelessness, it is that our basic systems are not working for all of us,`` said Phyllis Ryan, a study author.
Ryan said thousands of people were living on the economic margin-often in poverty even though they had jobs-and were prone to easily tumbling into homelessness.
These include families, Ryan said, ``who do work two or three minimum-wage jobs. But if a child gets sick they lose it all because they have no health insurance.``
The study was overseen by the Coalition on Homelessness in Pennsylvania, a group of advocates for the homeless, and paid for with state and private money. It was conducted by Ryan, executive director of the Philadelphia Committee for the Homeless, and by two social scientists from Temple University, Ira Goldstein and David Bartelt.
Though the study was done by advocates for the homeless, its findings are likely to generate controversy because it challenges some of the arguments advanced by those groups, such as that a lack of jobs is the main cause of the problem.
``There are eight or nine threads that produce homelessness at the end of the line,`` Bartelt said. ``You can`t open an `Office of Homeless` and expect to deal with the problem.``
The study presented this portrait of the homeless who were in shelters the night of the survey:
- Nearly 60 percent were male-most of them between the ages of 18 and 45- and most were members of minority groups. ``Minorities are only roughly 1 in 10 of the general population, yet they are nearly 7 in 10 of the homeless population,`` the study said. ``When race and gender are compared to the general population, minority males are the leading group among the homeless.`` - About 35 percent of the households had one or more members who had problems with either drugs, alcohol, mental illness or some combination of the three. About 20 percent were listed as having no problem other than a lack of money to pay for housing. ``Contrary to popular belief, most of the households are homeless as a result of larger economic forces rather than some eccentricity of the individuals,`` the study said.
- Not surprisingly, the income of those in shelters was extremely low.The study said 54 percent of the households had income less than $300 a month. Most of the rest had higher incomes but still lived well below the poverty level. However, not all of those in shelters lacked jobs; 15 percent were employed, but at jobs that paid so little they still could not afford an apartment or house.
- Twenty percent of the homeless in the survey were children-a finding that surprised and upset Goldstein because ``you begin to see the development of generations of homeless. In the shelters, school gets to be a problem.``
The study found that in the largest counties, fewer than half of the school-age children of those in shelters for a year or more attended school.
- Homelessness is a short-term problem for many in the shelters. While the study found that 25 percent of the households had been in shelters a year or longer, 60 percent had been in shelters for six months or less.