Before we can get started adapting our C++ code to our favorite scripting language we must have a C++ compiler installed and a copy of Excentury. First we start with the installation of Excentury.
Pip or Manual Installation¶
The easiest way to install Excentury is to use pip. If you wish to perform a global installation and you have admin rights then do
sudo pip install excentury
or to install in some directory under your user account
pip install --user excentury
Or if you prefer to do do a manual installation then you may do the following from the command line (where x.y is the version number):
wget https://pypi.python.org/packages/source/e/excentury/excentury-x.y.tar.gz tar xvzf excentury-x.y.tar.gz cd excentury-x.y/ sudo python setup.py install
The last command can be replaced by python setup.py install --user. See PyPI for all available versions.
To be able to call excentury from the command line you must have the executable directory in your $PATH. This can be taken care of my calling the install command in excentury. Since the executable is not yet available you will have to call the excentury script from python.
python -m excentury install
To verify that excentury is now in your path you can try the help option
The install command also takes care of the C and C++ include paths. This will make sure that you can access the C++ libraries as well as the MATLAB libraries.
To be able to use excentury we need a C++ compiler. We may obtain this by installing XCode.
The next step is not required but if you are having trouble installing python packages then you may want to try Homebrew. Try installing it and then try installing a fresh installation of python.
Regardless of what operating system we are using, we need to make sure that our $PATH contains the mex script that comes with MATLAB.
Before we can use excentury we need to make sure that mex is working properly. To do a test, you should try to work with one of the mex examples provided by MathWorks.
With every release of OS X and MATLAB there are a few changes that need to be done. If either the operating system or MATLAB is updated you should always first try to compile one of their examples to make sure that mex files can be compiled successfully before attempting to figure out what is wrong with excentury.
If you have OS X 10.9 and you are having trouble compiling the mex example then you may want to look at this stackoverflow question. Note that one solution is to upgrade your gcc/g++ compilers using either homebrew or macports and specify this in the mex setup.