Wat Chedi Luang is the most impressive temple in Chiang Mai. Built about 600 years ago, a large Chedi named temple (the temple name translates to “royal pagoda”) that soar above the city of Chiang Mai and its surroundings. But unfortunately, the construction of the Chedi was largely destroyed several hundred years ago.
Some say it happened because of an earthquake in the seventeenth century, but others say it is a cannon of King Taksin who shelled the city to expel Burma in the eighteenth century. The news sounds confusing, so no definite clarity.
Fortunately, now this place has largely been returned, although the top of the tower has not been rebuilt because no one can be sure about the model that will be created. Construction of the temple began in the 14th century, when King Saen Muang Ma planned to bury his father’s ashes there. After 10 years, the construction of the temple was still not finished, then resumed after the king’s death by his wife.
This is done to fulfill the will of the king, which make these temples stood firm and tall like a pagoda. Perhaps because of stability problems, it took until the middle of the 15th century in order to complete the construction of the temple during the reign of King Tilokaraj. The building has a height of about 82 meters and a base diameter of about 54 meters.
At the time, this temple was building the largest among all the existing buildings. In 1468, the Emerald Buddha installed in the east of the temple. Until the year 1545, about 30 meters topped structure collapse caused by the earthquake. And not long after, in 1551, the Emerald Buddha was moved to Luang Prabang.
In the early 1990’s, this place was reconstructed, financed by UNESCO and the Japanese government. But the result was somewhat controversial, as some parties claim the new element in the style of Central Thailand, not according to the style of Ghana.
In 1995, the reconstruction of a copy of the Emerald Buddha made of jade black stationed in the east. The icon officially named Phra Phut Chaloem Sirirat, but commonly known as Phra Yok. A large Viharn built in 1928. Round columns with bell-shaped base and finial lotus looks beautiful in the high ceilings of red. On the inside there is a standing Buddha image known as Phra Chao Attarot. Made of brass alloy combination and mortar, the work of Tolkien Saen Muang Ma (r.1385-1401).
Cross-shaped hall in the south of the main Viharn contains the city pillar. The sculptures in the small shelter that surrounds the building is the home of a guardian spirit. Legend has it that a monk went to Indrato ask God to protect the city from the enemy.
Because Wat Chedi Luang is situated on Prapokklao street which runs through the center line of the north to the south of the old town, to Changpuak Gate leading to Chaing Mai Gate. To get to this temple, we only had a short walk to the south of the junction between east and west that were on Ratchadamnoen street.