Head in the Cloud: Why Knowing Things Still Matters When Facts Are So Easy to Look Up
Little, Brown and Company
352 pp; $32.50
This story is apparently true. In 1995, a bank robber named McArthur Wheeler robbed two Pittsburgh banks in broad daylight. His face – he wore no mask – was captured on security cameras and broadcast on local television, and just after midnight he was captured. Wheeler, according to police, could not figure out what had gone wrong. “But I wore the juice,” he exclaimed.
“Wheeler told police he rubbed lemon juice on his face to make it invisible to security cameras,” author William Poundstone writes in his new book, Head in the Cloud: Why Knowing Things Still Matters When Facts Are So Easy to Look Up. “Detectives concluded he was not delusional, not on drugs – just incredibly mistaken.” Lemon juice, Wheeler reasoned, is used as an invisible ink: therefore the juice would make his face invisible to cameras.
The ridiculousness of this logic attracted the attention of a psychology professor named David Dunning and a graduate student named Justin Kruger. They were struck, Poundstone writes, by the phenomenon that “those most lacking in knowledge and skills are least able to appreciate that lack.” This observation became known as the Dunning-Kruger effect, and was subsequently confirmed by studying the test-taking of psychology students. “The students who scored lowest had greatly exaggerated notions of how well they did,” Poundstone reports.
The comedic actor John Cleese once expressed the paradox well. “If you’re very, very stupid, how can you possibly realize that you’re very, very stupid? You’d have to be relatively intelligent to realize how stupid you are.”
The Dunning-Kruger effect is one of the particulars that William Poundstone sets out to investigate in Head in the Cloud, his study of knowledge – a subject of some importance in this Age of Google. His central inquiry is: Do we still need to store factual knowledge in our craniums?
There is much controversy around this question, stoked by conservative critics who have long berated teachers for neglecting factual knowledge in favour of “thinking skills.”
The other theme of Head in the Cloud is what the author calls the Knowledge Premium. “The ability to answer so-called trivia questions correlates with higher income and other indexes of a successful life,” Poundstone explains. “There is a real-world value to knowing things, above and beyond a diploma or social connections made in university.” He discovered through surveys that (to put it bluntly) “people who knew more assorted facts made more money.”
Why this seems to be so is another question, to which Poundstone has no sure answer – all we know is that an engineer who has heard of Ernest Hemingway has a genuine advantage over an engineer who thinks that Hemingway was a basketball player.
This is all very interesting, but the real appeal of books such as Head in the Cloud is their challenge to the reader: Can you answer the questions devised by people like Poundstone? Or are you shamefully ignorant and only a few steps ahead of McArthur Wheeler?
Let’s try history. Poundstone devised a quiz to test facial recognition pertaining to one hundred historical figures. The results were unimpressive. “Excluding recent U.S. Presidents, there are five historic figures that effectively everyone in the United States recognizes.” (The same would probably hold among Canadian respondents.) “Jesus, Hitler, Abraham Lincoln, Albert Einstein, and George Washington.”
Poundstone elaborates, “Recognizability is not just a matter of historical importance. Unusual faces help … Abe Lincoln is gaunt. Hitler has that creepy moustache. In contrast, Thomas Jefferson gets lost in a be-wigged crowd of American founders. Barely 50 per cent could identify Jefferson from a picture, despite the fact that his face has been on the American nickel since 1938.”
Meanwhile, science questions have uneven results. Poundstone’s subjects, it appears, know their planets – even distant ones such as Uranus – but are not so good at nailing down scientific principles. Multiple choice questions testing for knowledge of the Uncertainty Principle (“The momentary speed and position of a subatomic particle cannot both be known with complete certainty.”) yielded shaky results: only 31 per cent picked the correct answer.
More promising results followed the question, “What’s the best way to see whether a new drug works?” Some picked the answer, “Try the drug on chimpanzees. If it works on them it will probably work on humans, as chimps share 99 per cent of our DNA.”
Wrong. The correct answer is, “Give the drug to half of a group of volunteers, and give the other a fake pill. See which group does better.” Poundstone explains that this option “is the only one that describes the all-important notion of a control, central to the scientific method and, indeed, critical thinking. It is the best answer here, and a respectable 59 per cent chose it.”
There is enough in Head in the Cloud to convince a heavy Internet devotee that there are dangers to its excessive use. The Internet won’t make us stupid, Poundstone concludes, but it can make us less aware of what we don’t know.