an interconnected system of things or people
"he owned a network of shops"; "retirement meant dropping out of a whole network of people who had been part of my life"; "tangled in a web of cloth"
(broadcasting) a communication system consisting of a group of broadcasting stations that all transmit the same programs
"the networks compete to broadcast important sports events"
net, network, mesh, meshing, meshwork(noun)
an open fabric of string or rope or wire woven together at regular intervals
a system of intersecting lines or channels
"a railroad network"; "a network of canals"
network, electronic network(verb)
(electronics) a system of interconnected electronic components or circuits
communicate with and within a group
"You have to network if you want to get a good job"
Hence: (Computers) A system of computers linked together by communications channels allowing the exchange of data between the linked computers.
(Radio, Television) A group of transmitting stations connected by communications channels that permit the same program to be broadcast simultaneously from multiple stations over a very wide area; as, the CBS television network; also, the organization that controls the programming that is broadcast over such a network. Contrasted with a local station or local transmitter.
(Electricity, Electronics) Any arrangement of electrical devices or elements connected together by conducting wires; as, a power transmission network.
A group of buildings connected by means of transportation and communication between them, and controlled by a central organization for a common purpose; as, a book distribution network.
To take steps to make and cultivate the acquaintance of people who can be helpful to oneself, especially in finding new employment, advancing to a higher position in one's occupation, or exchanging information.
To connect together into a network; as, to network computers; to network the printer with computers.
A fabric or structure of fibrous elements attached to each other at regular intervals.
Any interconnected group or system
A network of roads crisscrossed the country.
A directory of people maintained for their advancement
To get a job in today's economy, it is important to have a strong network.
Multiple computers and other devices connected together to share information
The copy machine is connected to the network so it can now serve as a printer.
To interact socially for the purpose of getting connections or personal advancement.
Many people find it worthwhile to network for jobs and information.
To connect two or more computers or other computerized devices.
If we network his machine to the server, he will be able to see all the files.
To interconnect a group or system.
Origin: net + work
a fabric of threads, cords, or wires crossing each other at certain intervals, and knotted or secured at the crossings, thus leaving spaces or meshes between them
any system of lines or channels interlacing or crossing like the fabric of a net; as, a network of veins; a network of railroads
Network is a 1976 American satirical film written by Paddy Chayefsky and directed by Sidney Lumet, about a fictional television network, UBS, and its struggle with poor ratings. The film stars Faye Dunaway, William Holden, Peter Finch, and Robert Duvall and features Wesley Addy, Ned Beatty, and Beatrice Straight. The film won four Academy Awards, in the categories of Best Actor, Best Actress, Best Supporting Actress, and Best Original Screenplay. In 2000, the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant". In 2002, it was inducted into the Producers Guild of America Hall of Fame as a film that has "set an enduring standard for U.S. American entertainment". In 2006, Chayefsky's script was voted one of the top-ten screenplays by the Writers Guild of America, East. In 2007, the film was 64th among the 100 greatest American films as chosen by the American Film Institute, a ranking slightly higher than the one AFI had given it ten years earlier.
The Standard Electrical Dictionary
Conductors in parallel and crossing each other, with connections at the junctions. The term is sometimes so loosely applied as to include parallel conductors.
Song lyrics by network -- Explore a large variety of song lyrics performed by network on the Lyrics.com website.
British National Corpus
Spoken Corpus Frequency
Rank popularity for the word 'network' in Spoken Corpus Frequency: #1414
Written Corpus Frequency
Rank popularity for the word 'network' in Written Corpus Frequency: #2269
Rank popularity for the word 'network' in Nouns Frequency: #502
The numerical value of network in Chaldean Numerology is: 4
The numerical value of network in Pythagorean Numerology is: 7
Sample Sentences & Example Usage
All men are caught in an inescapable network of mutuality.
Dealing with network executives is like being nibbled to death by ducks.
Usenet is distributed network anarchy at its best---or worst, depending on what is posted on any particular day.
Call it a clan, call it a network, call it a tribe, call it a family. Whatever you call it, whoever you are, you need one.
QSC noted that the access to a network is crucial for the company. This does, however, not exclude the possibility of selling the network and still using the network in the form of a corporation.
Images & Illustrations of network
Translations for network
From our Multilingual Translation Dictionary
- xarxaCatalan, Valencian
- netværk, netDanish
- Netzwerk, vernetzenGerman
- σύμπλεγμα, δικτυώνομαι, δίκτυο, πλέγμα, δικτυώνω, κύκλωμα, διασυνδέωGreek
- verkottua, verkko, verkostoitua, verkosto, verkottaaFinnish
- tissus, réseau, réseau informatique, mettre en réseauFrench
- líonra, eangachIrish
- lìonraScottish Gaelic
- rete, retiItalian
- 編, 網, 系統を組む, 人脈, ネットワーク, メッシュ, ネットに接続するJapanese
- 네트워크, 그물Korean
- мре́жа, вмрежува, вр́скиMacedonian
- jaringan, rangkaianMalay
- nettverk, nettNorwegian
- układy, sieć, układPolish
- rețea computerică, rețea de calculatoare, rețea, rețele, rețea de computereRomanian
- сеть, свя́зи, се́ткаRussian
- мрежа, mrežaSerbo-Croatian
- ජාලSinhala, Sinhalese
- نیٹ ورکUrdu
- mạng, mạng lướiVietnamese
- nünömaresod, resodVolapük
Get even more translations for network »
Find a translation for the network definition in other languages:
Select another language: