Definition of excursion
1a : a going out or forth : expeditionb (1) : a usually brief pleasure trip (2) : a trip at special reduced rates
2 : deviation from a direct, definite, or proper course; especially : digression needless excursions into abstruse theory
3 : a movement outward and back or from a mean position or axis; also : the distance traversed : amplitude the excursion of a piston
Examples of excursion in a Sentence
They went on a brief excursion to the coast.
our weekend excursions have encompassed virtually all parts of our home state
Recent Examples of excursion from the Web
The reason for Frank's excursion is to try to win the support of the country's most powerful men, most of whom are in attendance.
The 3-liter moves out smartly with 0- to 60-mile-an-hour excursions taking a brief five seconds.
Ivette has been wanting to check out the cave as a possible new excursion for her guide service.
A new interactive map explores the history of presidential jet-setting, tracking the many diplomatic excursions that have been made across the globe, as Greg Miller reports for National Geographic.
While the couple plans to use its tiny home for excursions like the one this weekend to Pearl Lake, near Beloit, Wisc.
In late 2016 Disney removed the center from its list of attractions for Cayman shore excursions.
Includes accommodations, excursions, tips and beverages, including wine and spirits.
A Sacramento man has been accused of killing two British tourists on a boating excursion from Belize 38 years ago.
These example sentences are selected automatically from various online news sources to reflect current usage of the word 'excursion'. Views expressed in the examples do not represent the opinion of Merriam-Webster or its editors. Send us feedback.
Origin and Etymology of excursion
Latin excursion-, excursio, from excurrere
First Known Use: circa 1587See Words from the same year
EXCURSION Defined for English Language Learners
Definition of excursion for English Language Learners
: a short trip especially for pleasure
EXCURSION Defined for Kids
Definition of excursion for Students
1 : a brief trip for pleasure
2 : a trip at special reduced rates
Medical Definition of excursion
1a: a movement outward and back or from a mean position or axis excursion of the femurb: the distance traversed
2: one complete movement of expansion and contraction of the lungs and their membranes (as in breathing)
Seen and Heard
What made you want to look up excursion? Please tell us where you read or heard it (including the quote, if possible).