Editorial: Using shale gas in transportation? We'll figure it out
Updated 7:24 pm, Tuesday, July 17, 2012
If ever there was a job that had "made for Texas" written all over it, surely it would be the chore of solving the imposing technical, logistical and materials problems that stand between the status quo of foreign oil dependence and making full use of our bounty of domestic shale gas for transportation.
This is mostly the job of the private sector responding to signals from the marketplace, but there's also room for government participation via strategic, targeted grants that focus on issues that fall outside the private sector/marketplace model but which require answers.
Getting natural gas into wider use in the transportation sector quickly and efficiently is a matter of urgent national interest. A large part of getting there involves creating safe, low-pressure storage tanks and finding ways for motorists to fuel up conveniently. The most obvious possibility is from gas lines in place for heat and appliances in homes.
What better places to find those answers than by asking the scientists at Texas A&M and the University of Texas at Austin for solutions? Few if any, we'd say, and so the U.S. Department of Energy has selected the two premiere Texas public universities to do the work, according the Chronicle's Jennifer Dlouhy ("More power to natural gas vehicles," Page D1, July 12). A total of $30 million in grants from the energy department will include $3 million for a project at Texas A&M and $4.3 million for the Center for Electromechanics at the University of Texas.
The Aggie project will focus on developing highly absorbent materials for low-pressure natural gas storage tanks. The Longhorn project will research the feasibility of at-home refueling stations that would compress natural gas with a single piston rather than the existing four-piston compressors, which are more costly.
Improvements in storage and accessibility are obviously required to bring the user of shale gas in line with the abundant supplies that have been discovered in the past few years. Several of the large shale gas plays are in Texas, and have the potential for large impact within the state. But until the transportation market can be accessed on a truly national scale, prices for natural gas are considered likely by many observers to remain flat or depressed.
The longer term solution to matching abundant supplies with the enormous potential market in transportation lies in passage of the Natural Gas Act, which offers a blueprint for restructuring the transportation system, from 18-wheelers to private automobiles, that would bring down energy costs and insulate the nation from global political and supply uncertainties.
For now, these grants qualify as welcome news while Texans and all Americans await implementation of a larger, market-based strategy.