In this Fast Pace World, it is very important to lead a healthy lifestyle and for that one has to eat healthy food. What we eat plays a very important role in making us old earlier and makes the live smaller. In this Article, we will show you some of the best foods which are not just healthy, but also promote you live longer. The motive of this Article is not only to show the food which can make you live longer, but also to promote you to lead a healthy lifestyle.
This delicious fruit is best among all as its low in calories and filled with fiber. According to some studies and Research, it can also reduce the risk of Cancer. This Healthy Food item will definitely promote your health and long life.
Broccoli is one of the healthiest food item on this Earth. It also contains Cancer-preventing chemicals like Sulforaphane. According to some study, broccoli-eaters were found to live longer than the ones who didn’t add this veggie into their diet.
We all love to eat Nuts and this healthy item can make you live longer. According to Study, eating a handful of nuts every day can help in extending the person’s lifetime. And nut-munchers can lower the risk of life threatening diseases like cancer and diabetes.
There’s nothing better than adding Tomatoes to your which gives a boost to your health. It’s been shown that it reduces the chances of some cancer, osteoporosis and cardiovascular diseases. It’s also a great source of Vitamin-C, which boost the antioxidant called Lycopene.
Garlic is very healthy for the health and it has nutrients in it which boosts the immune system and reduces the chances of colorectal cancer. It’s packed with antioxidants and helps in regulating the blood pressure. It can be great for the health.
6. Dark Chocolate
Yes, you heard it right!! Dark Chocolate is highly rich with antioxidants and flavonoid, which helps in preventing from blood clots and reduces the inflammation. According to Research, inflammation is related to aging and age-related diseases, so it can be key to a longer life.
This delicious Food can help you live longer. It contains antioxidants, which promotes a healthy long life. In one study, an oregano-cranberry mixture was found to extend the lives of fruit flies and Researchers are confident that the botanical mix would have similar effects on Humans too, helping in fighting with age-related diseases.