Every student believes scholarships are the very best tool to help them get to college. However, while scholarships can be fantastic they aren’t as clear as they appear to be. There aren’t many full scholarships available and many people do find they really don’t know anything about them. The following are just three simple but common misconceptions about scholarships and scholarship programs.visit this website for additional information.
You Pay Nothing When You Win Scholarships
Unfortunately when it comes to being awarded a scholarship, almost 90% of them are small or part scholarships. This really means you are going to be awarded a few thousand dollars in financial aid but aren’t going to be enough to see you through your entire college course.
It is a big misconception and one that needs to be cleared up. Yes, there are a few different scholarships which are fully going to give a student the chance to pay nothing throughout college, though these are few and far between. There aren’t many students who have a full scholarship and that’s the reason why student loans are unfortunately a necessity.
You Have To Be Smart To Win A Scholarship
Surprisingly it isn’t always the smartest students who end up with a scholarship. Most people believe that if you are top of the class and extremely smart, then you’ll somehow automatically be put forward for a scholarship. In reality that isn’t always the case. There are a lot of scholarships available today which essentially means anyone and everyone can apply for one.
You don’t have to rank in the top ten in your class; of course, if you are a hard worker and want to learn then this absolutely goes in your favor. However, don’t think you shouldn’t apply for a scholarship because you don’t have the best grades; scholarships are all about helping those who want to learn and who deserve that little extra help.Learn more detailed updates at http://college.usatoday.com/2016/04/15/what-every-student-should-know-about-scholarships-and-tuition-discounting/
Most people don’t realize that scholarships are very much like student loans. It is technically aid given out to students and not, in fact, ‘free’ money. However, it does seem as though most students and even some parents aren’t fully aware of this fact. Yes, you probably won’t pay the amount back right away, sometimes, it might not be until you have graduated college and have a good steady job but you’ll probably have to repay at some point. It isn’t free money but it is there to help you through college. The money can be awarded and can be put towards buying books and school supplies.
Scholarships Can Be Useful
The one thing that most can agree on when it comes to scholarship is that they are very useful and can be great. Students who wouldn’t normally get the help they required to go to college can find they are now able to just because they have been awarded a scholarship. This is absolutely something every student should look into even if they don’t believe they are eligible for a scholarship. Scholarships are there for a reason – they can help.
Across the world there are thousands of amazing scholarships though many of them aren’t regular scholarships. Really, there are quite a few unusual and somewhat strange scholarships available today and while many might not think too much about them they can be great. So, what are the top five strangest scholarships of today?
The Sophie Major Memorial Duck Calling Contest
For those who love ducks then this is the contest for you! Here, applicants have to create a duck call which works. The prize money is two thousand dollars for the scholarship and that can be really good. Of course, this does seem pretty strange but let’s be honest, there are a lot of people who love ducks so why not have a duck calling scholarship contest? They can help avoid more student loans since you are getting a fairly decent prize.
The Tall Clubs International Scholarship
Scholarships like these are very strange but aren’t as uncommon as you would believe. Those who wish to apply for the scholarship will need to be five foot ten inches for females and six foot two inches for males. Applicants will need to write an essay about being tall and the winner will get a one thousand dollar scholarship. This is really quite impressive because since there are a lot of children who are quite tall this can give them a voice in a sense.We can Help you getting more facts on scholarships at http://www.courthousenews.com/2016/04/15/atheists-fight-to-offer-college-scholarships.htm
American Welding Society Scholarships
Students who have a passion or talent for welding might find this scholarship to be perfect for them. If you are looking to further your education and work in the welding industry then this scholarship can help. The scholarships from the society can allow you the opportunity to learn the trade and get into welding.
National Marbles Tournament Scholarship
The requirements for this scholarship are very simple. All applicants must be aged eight to fourteen and must have good skills in the game marbles. This can be quite wacky it seems but it does offer a lot of younger marble players the chance to win a few thousand dollars which can always prove to be useful. Not a lot of people have heard about these types of scholarships but they can unique.
The Vegetarian Resource Group Scholarship
This scholarship really has to be in the top five strangest scholarship programs today! Now, those who are granted a scholarship here find they get five thousand dollars which can be put towards their college expenses. However, to be eligible for this, you have to be a high school student and a vegetarian and you must also be actively promoting the subject. Yes, you did hear it right and while this can be quite a strange scholarship it can be one way to avoid high student loans with five thousand dollars in rewards!
Strange, but True
Most of the above scholarships can appear to be very strange indeed though they are real and they can give many students the chance to continue their education. Yes, a lot of people will say they are just too stupid, but many are actually really good and offer good opportunities. Why not look into strange scholarships. You never know, you might find one which is suitable for you.