Here's a quiz generated from penguin facts you shared:

QUESTION 1: How many continents do wild Emperor penguins reside on?

ANSWER: One continent. 

Wild Emperor penguins are only found in Antarctica. They breed and raise their young mostly on ‘fast ice’, a floating platform of frozen ocean which is connected to the land or to ice shelves. From birth, they spend their entire lives in and around the Antarctic ice, although very rarely vagrants have turned up off the coast of New Zealand.

QUESTION 2: Emperor penguins are the largest living species of penguin, true or false?

ANSWER: True.

Emperors are the biggest of the 18 species of penguin found today, and one of the largest of all birds. They are approximately 120cm tall (about the height of a six year old child) and weigh in at around 40 kg, though their weight does fluctuate dramatically throughout the year.

But they would be dwarfed by the ancient ‘mega-penguins’. Fossils recovered from the Antarctic Peninsula reveal that a colossus species of penguin which lived about 37 million years ago may have stood 2m tall and weighed as much as 115 kg.

QUESTION 3: Approximately how many Emperor penguins are there in Antarctica? Choose A, B or C.

A. 0 to 100,000
B. 100,000 to 300,00
C. 300,000+

ANSWER: C.

There are approximately 595,000 adult Emperor penguins in Antarctica. But due to a lack of research, there is still so much we don't know about these magnificent polar creatures. That's why we're funding research in the Antarctic, because the more we know, the better we can protect them. This will encourage the formation of Marine Protected Areas and will help in protecting the species in the face of climate change.

QUESTION 4: True or False? Male Emperor penguins incubate a single egg while the females go out to sea to feed.

ANSWER: True.

Emperors incubate their eggs during the long dark southern winter months. Courtship displays are intricate but copulation is quick and the female lays a single egg in May or June. She then passes it over to her mate to incubate - and she’s off. She spends the next nine weeks at sea, feeding.

The male carefully balances the egg on his feet for between 65 – 75 days to keep it warm in a specially adapted brood pouch, and off the snow surface, before it hatches. Then out pops a fluffy chick.

QUESTION 5: What are some of the coldest temperatures Emperor penguins can endure? Choose A, B or C.

A.  -50°C 
B.  -25°C 
C.  -12°C 

ANSWER: A.

Emperors are uniquely adapted to survive these harsh conditions when temperatures can drop down to a bone-chilling -50°C and with winds of up to 200km/hr. They have two layers of feathers, a good reserve of fat and proportionally smaller beaks and flippers than other penguins to prevent heat loss. Emperors also have feathers on their legs, so their ankles don’t get too chilly.

Even their feet are adapted to the icy conditions, containing special fats that prevent them from freezing and strong claws for gripping the ice.

But most remarkably, colonies of adults and chicks work together to huddle for warmth. 5,000 or more tightly packed adults and chicks shuffle around, so each takes a turn - but not too long - on the outside of the huddle where it’s cold. This is in complete contrast to their quarrelsome and territorial neighbours, the Adélie penguins.

QUESTION 6: The deepest recorded dive by an Emperor penguin comes in at 2200m deep, true or false?

ANSWER: False.

The deepest recorded dive was 564 m – that’s the equivalent of nearly 2 x the height of the Shard, Europe’s tallest building. And the longest recorded dive was nearly 28 minutes. That’s incredible!

QUESTION 7: Which of these foods makes up the majority of an Emporer penguin's diet? Pick from A, B, or C.

A. Fried chicken, sweetcorn and hot sauce.
B. Sea Eagles and their eggs.
C. Antarctic silverfish, krill, and squid.

ANSWER: C.

Emperors feed mostly on Antarctic silverfish as well as other species of fish, krill (like Will & Bill from Happy Feet) and some squid. An adult penguin eats about 2-3 kg per day, but on a good day, they can eat twice this much to build up their store of body fat for the long winter, or for feeding their chicks.
