A network of 14 public laboratories scattered around the U.S. is geared up and ready to test for Ebola -- including the Texas state lab in Austin, which helped diagnose the Dallas patient, Thomas Eric Duncan.
They're backed up by federal labs at the CDC and the U.S. Army Research Institute of Infectious Disease (USAMRIID), whose researchers developed the test that's being used, according to Chris Mangal, MPH, director of public health preparedness and response for the Association of Public Health Laboratories, based in Silver Spring, Md.
"The list will expand," Mangal told MedPage Today, "as the CDC looks to distribute the assay to other laboratories."
The labs are selected members of the Laboratory Response Network, which was set up to allow rapid detection of a host of chemical or biological threats, including emerging infectious diseases.
In August, the FDA issued an emergency use authorization for an Ebola test, using real-time polymerase chain reaction methods (RT-PCR), and the CDC asked several labs to gear up for testing using the assay, Mangal said.
Aside from Texas, the labs now in the network include state facilities in Nebraska, Montana, Maryland, Florida, Minnesota, New York, Michigan, Virginia, North Carolina, Pennsylvania, and Washington, as well as local labs in New York City and Los Angeles County.
The testing process begins, of course, with a patient -- someone who fits the profile of a possible Ebola victim. That profile includes fever and recent travel to West Africa, the center of the current Ebola epidemic.
But the initial symptoms are nonspecific and mimic several other diseases, including malaria, which is also endemic in the Ebola hot zone.
So the first step in the process is a consultation between the hospital, local or state health department, and the CDC to decide if the clinical picture is worrisome enough to warrant testing, Mangal said.
When Duncan was diagnosed Sept. 30, the CDC had taken part in about 100 such discussions and had suggested going forward to full testing in just 15, according to agency Director Tom Frieden, MD. In all but the Dallas case, results were negative.
Once it's decided to test a patient, the hospital collects blood, using its usual precautions associated with blood-borne pathogens, and ships samples to both the CDC and its designated reference lab.
The blood is shipped in watertight plastic tubes placed within a watertight secondary packaging, with the whole enclosed in a rigid box. Samples are often shipped using commercial couriers, but some locations might also have their own transportation facilities, Mangal said.
At the lab, "everyone knows this is on the way," Mangal said, and only designated staff members are permitted to accept the shipment and move it into the test area.
The CDC's guidance for testing suggests that laboratories can use biosafety level 2 (BSL-2) methods, but most are taking the additional precautions associated with BSL-3 facilities, Mangal said. None of the 14 labs has BSL-4 capability, although both the CDC and USAMRIID do.
Personnel carrying out the test need both training and practice, Mangal said, but the "good thing for us" is that all of the designated labs had staff with the appropriate knowledge. "These are the types of things they prepared for and were ready to respond to," she said.
The test gives a "presumptive" positive or negative verdict, which must then be confirmed by parallel testing at the CDC, Mangal said. If the results differed, she said, the CDC would likely do additional testing, but "we have not seen that."
Nurses Feel Left Out
Meanwhile, a large nurses' unions says hospitals aren't communicating effectively with registered nurses about how to prepare for a possible Ebola patient.
In a survey of members by National Nurses United, also based in Silver Spring, nearly 80% of respondents said their hospital has not yet told them what the policy is regarding admission of Ebola patients.
And 85% said hospital education on Ebola has not allowed nurses to interact and ask questions.
"Handing out a piece of paper with a link to the Centers for Disease Control, or telling nurses just to look at the CDC website -- as we have heard some hospitals are doing -- is not preparedness," said union spokeswoman Bonnie Castillo, RN.
"Hospitals can and must do better, and we should have uniform national standards and readiness," Castillo said in a statement.
Some 1,400 RNs at more than 250 hospitals in 31 states have responded to the survey, the statement said. The union has about 185,000 members, according to its website.
Dallas Patient Critical
In Dallas, Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital said Duncan remains in critical condition and has been intubated. He is also undergoing dialysis after his liver function declined over the weekend, the hospital said in a statement, although it has improved since.
In late-afternoon media briefing today, Frieden said that a week after the diagnosis there are "real signs of progress, not only in Dallas but around the world."
In Dallas, he cited the contact tracing and monitoring, which is tracking 10 people with definite contact with Duncan and 38 who might have been in contact with him while he was symptomatic.
So far, none of those people has shown any sign of disease, although many are just reaching the median incubation period of 8 to 10 days.
He also said that there are encouraging signs in parts of West Africa, where the epidemic has been going on for more than 10 months. In particular, he said, one of the hot spots in hard-hit Liberia -- the region of Lofa -- has seen a sharp drop in new cases.
"We don't know that this decrease is going to be maintained," Frieden added, "because we've seen waves of disease before."
"But we do think that, at least in that one community, it's real," he said.
Frieden also noted that the unrelated Ebola outbreak in the Democratic Republic of Congo has been contained, while in Uganda health officials have controlled an outbreak of Marburg virus, a pathogen similar to Ebola in many ways.