We had 102 fifth graders participate in the Studies Weekly Election Day. The results are as follows: Donald Trump received 80 votes, Hillary Clinton received 10 votes, Gary Johnson received 7 votes, and Jill Stein received 5 votes.
Students will receive an electoral college map tomorrow to track the progress of the election. This will be an opportunity to receive bonus points if it returned completed on Wednesday.
We have been reading The Kid Who Ran for President, students have been completing comic strip chapter summaries. Their summary packet is due on Thursday, November 10th.
We had a wonderful RED RIBBON WEEK this past week! Students will be posting photos and telling about the history behind the week on their blogs. Be sure to check out their posts!
Tomorrow 5th grade will participate in the Studies Weekly Mock Election. All 5th graders need to fill out their voter registration form from their election packet and bring it to class tomorrow.
This past week students were introduced to the election process, we learned about the electoral college (ask your student how many electoral votes it takes to become president), we also studied past presidents and looked for good leadership qualities that made them a good leader for our country. This next week we will take a look at political parties and symbols as well as decide what the important issues are for fifth graders. We will be reading The Kid Who Ran for President as well. Be sure to check out your students blog later in the week to find out what they would do “If They Had Five Minutes with the President”!
Do you know how England became involved in the New World? It’s quite an interesting tale, ask your student to share it with you. This past week students have had voice and choice as we’ve explored the first English colonies established in the New World. Be sure to check out their blog posts!
Students are also working on Passion Projects with a historical twist. They have chosen a topic of interests to them and are discovering the history of that topic. Topics range from Ford cars to Emojis, Disney World to Atlantis and everything in between. Be sure to ask your student about the topic of their History of Things project! It’s been amazing to watch the power of student choice in action as we’ve worked on these projects!