Ancient China Unit: 9 engaging activities! Geography, Dynasties, & Philosophy!
In the Ancient China Unit, you will receive 9 highly-engaging lessons to teach your students all about Ancient China. This bundle saves you 30% over buying each activity separate!
**Featured in the TpT Newletter, Jan. 19, 2014**
Your students will enjoy making this lantern to help celebrate the Lunar New Year / Chinese New Year! Includes 2 different options of lantern printable.
2 different levels of lantern printables
Zodiac information cards
Around the World Literacy and Craftivity book
Your students will learn about 15 different countries. They will learn about traditions, holidays, customs and language while they take a trip around the world. As they complete each unit, they can track their progress in both the passport and the Arou
Let’s get to know China!
This worksheet includes 17 pages with a great variety of activities and exercises about China. The materials have informative exercises about the things that China is famous for, such as Dynasties, Mao Zedong, the Cultural Revolution, the Great Wall, Tibet,
This is a collection of images connected with India.
The images included in this set are: curry, elephant, Indian boy & girl, flag, India Gate, map, Indian dancer, poppadoms, qurub minar, sacred cow, sitar, Taj Mahal, bunting (flag colors) and word art sign.
The sets contain all of the images sh
This 20-something page kid-friendly and thorough informational booklet was written for UPPER ELEMENTARY readers. It contains 14 sub topics on Japan:
2. The Great Tohoku Earthquake
3. Prefectures and Cities
6. 3 Special Holidays for Children
Let’s get to know India!
This worksheet includes 16 pages with a great variety of activities and exercises about India. The materials have informative exercises about the things that India is famous for, such as the Taj Mahal, Gandhi, Hinduism, Caste System, Bollywood and many othe
This Chinese New Year pack contains 24 Thinking Treks - fun and engaging task cards - and a student Trek Tracker to keep track of activities completed. There are also informational text, mapping and art no prep printables, 50 word cards and posters.
**Updated January 2017 - Year of the Rooster
Ancient India Interactive Notebook Unit 6th Grade
This is a complete interactive notebook unit with assessments for Ancient India . This 38 page unit includes activities and a complete answer key.
I teach in Florida, and we use McGrawHill's Reflections on World History. This p
Ancient China Daily Life Webquest:
Students will gain a basic understanding of daily life in Ancient China through an easy to follow webquest. Please check out the website by clicking on the link below:
**Free uploads are included each year. I already included activity sheets for 2017 Year of the Rooster, 2018 Year of the Dog, 2019 Year of the Pig, and 2020 Year of the Rat.
Are you teaching your students about the Chinese New Year? This product will provide you with resources to help enhance your
Christmas around the world Endless (128 pages and growing) is a bundle filled with literacy activities and crafts. Your students will learn about how 20 different countries celebrate Christmas around the world - at least 10 countries will be added each year! They will learn about traditions, Christm
This slideshow helps elementary students quickly learn about famous landmarks, food, art, and the culture of India. You can use this slideshow at the beginning of a unit on India. You can also print it out and use it as a book for student research.
This NEWLY UPDATED slideshow also has 4 questions
This unit aligns with the 2nd Grade Social Studies standard involving Ancient Civilizations. Throughout this unit, students learn about Ancient China. It is packed with activities and resources to help students learn about China is a fun way. I've also included three writing pieces to accompany th
Chinese New Year freebie contains the following printable activities: a webquest, two fun thinking trek task cards, a Legend of Nian storyboard and Chinese New Year vocabulary on 5 Word Cards. The cards are suitable for Word Walls and associated learning activities.
2017 is the Year of the Rooster!
*NEW* May 22, 2014!
This 24+ page kid-friendly and thorough informational booklet was written for UPPER ELEMENTARY readers. It contains 17 sub topics on China:
1. Fast Facts
3. History (includes an overview of ancient China in the following chapters)
5. The Forbidden City
*NEW* May 22, 2014!
This 17+ page kid-friendly and thorough informational booklet was written for LOWER ELEMENTARY readers. It contains 15 sub topics on China:
1. Fast Facts
4. The Forbidden City
5. The Great Wall of China
6. Inventions from China
FREE GUIDED NOTES AVAILABLE AT:
This China PPT is available for download as a whole unit (with 6 parts and 93 slides) or as individual downloads to teach separately. There are games, graphic organizers, mov
Around the World Literacy and Craftivity book 2
Your students will learn about 15 different countries. They will learn about traditions, holidays, customs and language while they take a trip around the world. As they complete each unit, they can track their progress in both the passport and the
Let's explore China with puzzles and other fun activities. This supplemental resource is great for a country unit.
This 12-page printable handles several things that China is famous for, including:
- The Forbidden City
- The Great Wall
- The Terracotta Warriors
- Hong Kong
This is a complete 10+ day unit for the study of Asia in a Geography or other Social Studies course.
Includes a unit/lesson plan, student-centered activities, learning centers, online interactives, unit study guide and test, review games, all student materials, and more.
Unit covers the physical ge
Around the World Interactive Notebook
In this packet you will find reading passages and interactive activities for 30 countries. Students can learn a little bit about each country, then expand upon their learning through discussions and further research. They will learn about the different ways that
Once you've taught the Qin Dynasty you need to teach the Han, and you can't teach the Han without discussing the Silk Road, the trade route that stretched from China to the Mediterranean.
The exit card comes with a discussion question which has students analyze the differences between the economic s
This worksheet includes 9 Communist Chinese posters from Mao's rule between the 1940's-1970's. Students must analyze the poster to match it to a list of messages in English to determine the poster's main idea.
An answer key is included as well as directions on extensions for students to create thei
Welcome to the Around the World Task Cards Your students will practice their knowledge about 17 different countries with these 60 task cards. They will review traditions, holidays, customs, flags, food and language while they take a trip around the world.
Travel to the land of The Philippines with your lower elementary grade/ kindergarten/ special education learners. Includes super fun boarding passes and postcards from The Philippines (the kids just LOVE these).
This fun fact country study booklet is perfect to use for an around th
This is an 18 page workbook to use while reading Iqbal by Francesco D'Adamo. The book includes reading comprehension questions that range in difficulty, higher order thinking questions on issues of child labor and social justice, suggestions for ways to get involved in the issue of child labor and a
Chinese New Year- Year of the Horse 2014
Directions for Hanging Pendant Decoration
If you were born in 1954, 1966, 1978, 1990, 2002 or 2014, this is your year!
Celebrate the Chinese zodiac lunar calendar with this decoration. You can make a hanging pendant following these instructions or take the
Everything you need for an entire unit to introduce your students to the concepts of human adaptations and modifications to earth. It is designed around a 5E model to help make lesson planning easy and includes a list of vocabulary words covered throughout the unit.
Includes: 2 PowerPoint presentat
Prior to becoming a third grade teacher, I was a pen & ink illustrator, designing detailed greeting cards for international paper companies. Now that I am in the classroom, I create art for a smaller audience. This zentangle coloring sheet is one of a continually expanding array of black and whit
A word search puzzle to celebrate Chinese New Year. Includes 22 words to look for. Puzzlers will have to look in all directions to find the hidden words including backwards and diagonally.
The vocabulary words included are: Ancestors, Boar, Compass, Dog, Dragon, Dumplings, Envelope, Fans, Festival
China country study with a fun Instagram feel to it!
What a cute way to teach your students facts about China and let them pretend they are using Instagram at the same time! Let your student color the image pertaining to important facts about China. The fact that they need to know is writte
Do you love sushi? I do! I love the look of it almost as I love the taste.
This fun collection of clip art can be used to help teach a lesson about Japanese cuisine or perhaps the pieces of sushi can be used in a math lesson. Be creative! Have fun!
This collection includes:
*NEW* May 16, 2014!
This 20 page kid-friendly and thorough informational booklet was written for UPPER ELEMENTARY readers. It contains 13 sub topics on South Korea:
2. North Korea and South Korea
3. Symbols of South Korea
8. Children and School
Ancient China: Contributions Study Guide Outline - Contributions - King Virtue's Classroom
Starting your unit on Ancient China? Help your students get off to a great start with this simple study guide outline. This is a great tool that can be used to inform your parents about what their children wil
This Scoot game was created to cover both Ancient Egypt and Ancient China. Knowing that not all state standards/Common Core covers both these civilizations, there are 20 questions
created for Egypt and 20 created for China. You can either mix these two sets together, OR use them separately.
*NEW* May 19, 2014!
This 18 page kid-friendly and thorough informational booklet was written for LOWER ELEMENTARY readers. It contains 12 sub topics on South Korea:
2. North Korea and South Korea
3. Symbols of South Korea
4. Cities and Homes
7. Children and schoo
Let's explore Japan with puzzles and other fun activities. This supplemental resource is great for a country unit.
The 12-page printable handles several things that Japan is famous for, including:
- Tokyo Tower
- Himeji Castle
- Sumo Wrestling
INDIA GEOGRAPHY AND HISTORY POWERPOINT PRESENTATION
This 37 slide presentation provides an overview of India's geography, history, government, economy and culture.
The zip file contains: 2 products
- PowerPoint Presentation (37 slides)
- PDF (36 pages )
This is a beautiful and informative 37 slide P
Take your students around the world to the great land of China with this bulletin board. This display focuses on traditional instruments of China and will be a bright and colorful addition to your classroom. Included in this kit are full page pictures and descriptions of 7 Chinese instruments, a pa
Ancient China: Environment Study Guide Outline - Environment - King Virtue's Classroom
Starting your unit on Ancient China? Help your students get off to a great start with this simple study guide outline. This is a great tool that can be used to inform your parents about what their children will be
***Updated for 2016
This download includes structured notes, handouts, and ALL 5 parts detailed below.
The EPIC Japan Unit includes loads of visuals, graphic organizers, primary and secondary sources, maps, assessments, activities, instructions, writing assignments and much, much more...ENJOY!!!
Are your students learning about China? Here are 6 activites about language, goods and services, geography/history, festivals, animals and the flag. This document also includes a cover for storing each center and a check off sheet for each student to mark when an activity is completed. I make each
Let’s get to know North Korea!
This worksheet includes 15 pages with a great variety of activities and exercises about North Korea. The materials have informative exercises about the things that North Korea is famous for, such as the Kim Family, Nuclear Missiles, DMZ, the Mass game