13 Health Benefits of Figs
Figs, with their smooth skin, crunchy seeds, and chewy luscious flesh, make for a delectable addition to any meal. They are very easily perishable, and are thus dried to supply demand all year round. Following are some health benefits of figs.
1. Figs, with their high dietary fiber content, help greatly in weight management programs. Pectin, a soluble fiber found in figs, helps to clear out the accumulated cholesterol in the body.
2. Some cultures believe that consumption of fig leaves reduces the need for insulin injections in diabetics.
3. Figs are regarded as a dependable laxative because of its large cellulose content and tough skin. The tiny seeds in the fruit stimulate the peristaltic wave like movements of the intestines which facilitate easy evacuation of feces and keep the alimentary canal clean.
4. People, who regularly consume packaged food, have a higher intake of sodium, which is an ingredient used heavily in packaged food. High sodium leads to hypertension, which in the future causes high blood pressure. Figs have high potassium content, which is effective in lowering and controlling high blood pressure.
5. Figs are rich in calcium, which promotes bone density. The potassium contained in the fruit also counteracts the loss of urinary calcium, which prevents bones from thinning out.
6. Figs contain antioxidants like carotins, luteins, tannins and chlorgenic acid. They also contain adequate levels of some antioxidant vitamins such as vitamin A, E, and K. Altogether these phyto-chemical compounds protect from cancers, diabetes, degenerative diseases and infections.
7. Dried figs are an excellent source of important minerals like copper, manganese, iron, selenium and zinc.
8. Figs contain important vitamins like niacin, pyridoxine, folates and pantothenic acid. Vitamins are co factors for metabolism of carbohydrates, proteins and fats.
9. Fig leaves have been shown to lower the level of triglycerides, thus lowering the risk of heart disease and inhibiting the growth of certain cancer cells.
10. Fig leaf tea is considered to be a home remedy for bronchitis and lung ailments like asthma.
11. Figs are said to relieve fatigue and boost brain power.
12. Chewing and swallowing fig leaves is believed to cure ulcers.
13. Macular degeneration, or loss of vision, can be prevented with the help of figs.