According to the American Cancer Society, an estimated 4,440 new cases of invasive breast cancer and 900 deaths from breast cancer are expected to occur among women in Missouri in 2012.
The American Cancer Society offers 24/7 support to those diagnosed with breast cancer and their loved ones. In fact, one out of every two women turn to the Society for help and support following their breast cancer diagnosis.
This Oct., the Society will be using National Breast Cancer Awareness Month to remind women about the importance of breast health.
“The American Cancer Society encourages all women to put their health first. We want women to understand the benefits of eating a balanced diet, maintaining a healthy weight, exercising regularly and limiting alcohol intake,” said Laura Ozenkoski, health initiatives director at the American Cancer Society. “More than 2.9 million breast cancer survivors will celebrate a birthday this year thanks to early detection and improved treatment.”
Breast cancer is a leading cause of cancer death in women, second only to lung cancer. The Society is reminding women 40 and older to have a yearly mammogram and clinical breast exam.
Also, the Society recommends that women ages 20 to 39 receive a clinical breast exam at least once every three years. The five-year survival rate is 99 percent for breast cancer that is diagnosed in the earliest stages.
The American Cancer Society is the most effective breast cancer-fighting organization in the world, and is doing the most to help people with breast cancer today and works tirelessly to find cures to end the disease tomorrow.
The Society has spent more on breast cancer research than on any other cancer, and has played an important part in many major breast cancer research breakthroughs in the past century, including demonstrating that mammography is an effective screening test for breast cancer, the development of tamoxifen and herceptin, and knowledge that genetics, poor diet, lack of exercise, and moderate drinking increase a person’s cancer risk.
The Society also offers newly diagnosed women and those living with breast cancer a variety of programs and services to help them in their breast cancer experience.
•The Reach to Recovery program helps newly diagnosed patients cope with their breast cancer experience. Reach to Recovery volunteers offer the unique understanding, support, and hope from the perspective of someone who has survived breast cancer.
•The Look Good Feel Better program helps breast cancer patients manage the physical side effects of treatment. Patients gain beauty techniques to help improve their self-esteem and quality of life, but also a sense of support, confidence, courage and community with other cancer patients in the program.
•The Hope Lodge program offers patients and their caregivers free lodging for those receiving treatment far from home.
•The Society offers free information to help with treatment decisions and access to its programs 24/7 through 1-800-227-2345 and cancer.org.
The American Cancer Society’s affiliate advocacy organization, the American Cancer Society Cancer Action Network (ACS CAN), continues to fight back against breast cancer by working to increase funding for the National Breast and Cervical Cancer Early Detection Program (NBCCEDP) that provides low-income, uninsured and underinsured women access to mammograms and Pap tests.
Current funding only enables the program to serve less than one in five eligible women ages 40 to 64 nationwide. ACS CAN encourages anyone touched by this disease to let Congress know that support for the NBCCEDP is important and that an increase in funding for this program is vital to its continuation. To get involved, or to learn more about this effort, please visit acscan.org/breastcancer.
The American Cancer Society combines an unyielding passion with nearly a century of experience to save lives and end cancer for good. As a global grass roots force of three million volunteers, they fight for every birthday threatened by every cancer in every community.
They save lives by helping those affected stay well by preventing cancer or detecting it early, helping them get well by being there for patients during and after a diagnosis, by finding cures through ground breaking discovery and fighting back through public policy.
As the nation’s largest non-governmental investor in cancer research, contributing more than $3.8 billion, they turn what they know about cancer into what they do. As a result, an estimated 13.7 million people in America who have had cancer and countless more who have avoided it will be celebrating birthdays this year. To learn more about the group or to get help, call them anytime, day or night, at 1-800-227-2345 or visit cancer.org.