Fashion Design is a wide art and design program in which students learn how to cultivate and express their creativity and develop a personal signature in style. Becoming a Fashion Designer means to research, analyse, experiment, discover and create, with solid training in techniques including pattern design, knitwear, printing, drawing, draping and ultimately being able to play the role of an authentic author on the international scene.
Fashion Design is 60% Design, 20% Vision, 10% Communications and 10% Business. There is visible vertical improvement among the students, from learning the basics of every area in the first year to the ability to create a real collection in the third year, and then up to a master’s level in the fourth year when students choose a specialisation and present their dream collection on a real runway with a jury and international press, supported by a portfolio.
Classes are all run by teachers from the industry in the new open space Design Lab. Students receive a welcome kit with tools and materials to begin, and have access to expert guest lectures, an immense library, the computer lab, as well as production machines. Field trips to companies, fashion shows and trade fairs in Italy and Europe, as well as applied projects with companies, are all organised throughout the four years.
Candidates with a secondary-school (high school) diploma or equivalent are eligible and selected after an enrolment questionnaire and an interview with the course’s leading teacher. English language proficiency is required. Lessons take place from October to June, and amount to a total of 600 contact hours. The course is completed with an internship in a fashion company at the end of the fourth year. Each academic year is worth 60 credits.
Contemporary Fashion; Drawing I; Graphic Design I; Fashion Illustration; Fashion Design I; Knit Design I; Textile Design & Technology; Pattern Making I; Prototyping I (Hand & Machine Sewing).
Fashion Iconography; Drawing II; Graphic Design II; Fashion Design II; Knit Design II; Textile Design & Technology II; Pattern Making II; Draping I; Prototyping II (Tailoring Techniques & Menswear).
Fashion Design III; Pattern Making III; Graphic Design III (3D Printing); Prototyping III (textile, knit, leather); Print & Embroidery Techniques I; Presentation Techniques I; Industry Project; Industry Portfolio.
Pattern Making IV; Prototyping IV; Print & Embroidery Techniques II; Collection Development; Design Management; Fashion Styling & Communications; Costume Design; Personal Collection and Portfolio.
Based on the student’s personal abilities and skills acquired, the course qualifies graduates as Fashion Designers, specialised by gender (womenswear and menswear), reference material (textile, knit, leather) or category (eveningwear, streetwear, underwear), as well as Costume Designers or freelance Fashion Consultants in design research and development.