An upset stomach is the second most common ailment in the US next to the common cold. It is called gastroenteritis in the medical world. Symptoms include stomach aches and pains, diarrhea, vomiting, nausea, and fatigue. There are many different causes for an upset tummy, and different solutions for many of them. However, the first few days you will likely be at home waiting to see if it is a more serious condition or not. If you feel it is serious, or your upset stomach occurs for more than a few days, you may want to contact your doctor. It could be a sign of a food allergy or a serious stomach condition.
In the meantime, there are some foods that you will want to stay away from while dealing with an upset stomach. If you are vomiting, you are going to want to avoid all food until it has stopped for at least four hours, and your nausea subsides. You can suck on ice chips, ice pops or try to drink water to keep yourself hydrated. Pedialite is a great resource for small children, to keep them properly hydrated. When you feel you are ready to start eating again, start small. Some common foods you will want to avoid are:
Milk and Dairy products might seem like the way to go, since it is one of the first foods introduced to babies with new tummies. However, dairy products are hard on the stomach, and difficult to digest. Early humans were lactose intolerant, and many still are today. You especially want to stay away from dairy for a while if you suspect any food allergies. Lactose intolerance is a very common ailment.
Caffeine & Alcohol
Caffeine and alcohol are two more substances that are hard on your stomach, and may cause you more problems. Excessive alcohol consumption actually eats away at the lining of your stomach, a job best left for the acid already in your stomach. Caffeine is found in many common drinks, such as coffee, soda, tea, and energy drinks, so be sure to take note when reintroducing foods. For now, stick to low sugar sports drinks, water, and non-acidic juices such as apple juice. However decaffeinated teas and sodas such as sprite, may help an upset stomach. The key is to watch the caffeine.
As we all know, spicy foods can be hard enough on your stomach when you are not sick! Steer clear of spicy foods & seasonings for a while until your upset stomach is gone.
Nuts are another food group that can be hard to digest, as well as a common food allergy. Although nuts are a great food source otherwise, hold off until you are feeling better, especially if a food allergy is a possible suspect.
Acidic foods naturally increase the amount of digestive enzymes your stomach produces, so they can be broken down. This can be tough on your stomach, and should be cut out of your diet when you are having ailments. These include tomato products, citrus fruits, olives, and citrus juices.
These are the important foods that should be avoided, but in general one should stick to a bland, natural diet, with simple foods like oatmeal and rice. If your stomach problems persist for more than a day or two, you may want to contact your doctor. Food drinks like ensure are also a great way to keep up on your nutrients when dealing with an upset tummy.
Feel better soon,