By Sheila Moss : Source : The Citizen
Why are we always in a hurry? We get up in the morning and hurry to get ready for work even if it means falling over the dog and drinking instant breakfast on the road while talking on the cell phone about things that can’t wait until we get to work.
Of course, everyone on the interstate is in a hurry. Why are they in such a hurry to get to work? They must like working a whole lot better than I do. But I have to hurry even if I don’t want to so I don’t get rear-ended, dirty looks, or horns blown at me to get out of the way. Speed is often a contributor to accidents. But we speed, risk traffic tickets, accidents, and injury just because we are in a hurry.
At work, we hurry through the day. No matter how much we have to do there is never enough time. We hurry through our “to do” list to get to the next task, and then hurry through it as well. Work-related stress increases chance of stroke, heart attack, and even death, but we don’t have time to worry about that as we are in a hurry.
Maybe we are in a hurry to get to lunch. We didn’t eat much breakfast because we didn’t have time. Fast food is the most popular kind of eating out because it doesn’t take as long. We hurry through lunch so we can get back to work.
The same people that are in a hurry to get to work in the morning are also in a hurry to get back home at night. And we thought they liked work. But it seems they only like being in a hurry. Traffic is a nightmare with everyone rushing to get home. What do they have to do at home… Probably nothing.
We usually don’t want to take time to cook dinner. If we cook, it is most likely some of the convenience foods that are at least partly prepared in advance.
These are better because we can fix them fast and get the food ready in a hurry. We can no longer imagine life without a microwave to fix food in a hurry.
What if we are in too big a hurry to cook and decide to eat out? If the wait is too long, we look for another place. If the food doesn’t arrive quickly we mumble and complain because it is taking too long. Good service has come to be just as important as good food, and good service means timely service for busy people in a hurry.
Of course, if there are errands to do, we hurry to get them done so we can get back home in a hurry. If we shop, we do it in a hurry and complain about waiting in lines. Some stores have express lines for people who are in a hurry and didn’t buy much. Nowadays, they even have do-it-yourself checkout for the people who are in too much of a hurry to go through the express lines.
We live life in the fast lane, always in a hurry. We use email and send instant messages. We don’t have time to answer the phone so we let the voice mail get it. We have rush hours, express mail, jiffy lubs, instant rebates, overnight delivery, quick shops, and speedy service. Why? Because we are in a hurry! We live in a fast age, information flies, and so do we. In spite of all the time we save, we never seem to have enough.
And that’s why I’m going to quit now. I have deadline to meet and – you guessed it – I’m in a hurry.