Sunday, February 28, 2010
Another activity that my students worked on this month was publishing their writing using Microsoft Word. The students wrote about their thoughts on whether or not they like the snow. After revising and editing their work, they each published their own paragraphs. This work can also be found on our class blog.
Overall, using technology in our class is becoming more embedded into our daily routine with each passing day. The students have many opportunities to use the Promethean board, participate in lessons using Activotes, post blogs, and publish their writing. Their enthusiasm pushes me to look for even more ways to incorporate technology into each lesson.
Kellogg Class Blog
I used the same format for my English Language Development class. They wrote holiday riddles and drew pictures. Please take a look at those as well because we don't have any comments yet.
Also, in my classroom we use the SmartBoard all the time. My students are quite comfortable with Notebook software, so I usually have one of them at the board any time we are doing something routine. I have presentation or air mouse, so I can stand in the back of the room and quickly click to correct something if necessary without having to run up to the board. It's quite an excellent set up. I recommend getting a presentation mouse if you don't have one.
Saturday, February 27, 2010
Tita Martinez @ Haskin Elementary in Center, CO.
Thursday, February 25, 2010
My kindergartners also are always in engaged in the Smartboard lessons created at the Phenix Public school site (http://www.pcboe.net/les/elderweb/harcourtresources.htm). In order to make them accountable for the Smartboard work, they have to take a picture of it with at least two members of the group in it! They LOVE it!
Does anyone else have ideas for accountability and technology?
Wednesday, February 24, 2010
1. www.oneword.com. It is a one word writing prompt that you write about for just one minute. So far we have been doing them as a writing warm-up. The students have been enjoying it and writing some creative beginnings.
2. www.gameclassroom.com. This site is designed for K-6 educators and has a wealth of educational games categorized and described with links. I used to search through many websites looking for fun learning games to engage students with what I was currently teaching them or for review. Not anymore! Now I go there first and find many awesome activities!
Has anyone else been using The Teacher's Hub or any other neat sites?
Tuesday, February 23, 2010
I did a lesson called How Big is a Foot? I thought this would be a great introduction to measurement. It was about a king that wants a bed built for his queen and gives his apprentice measurements using his own feet. The apprentice ends up using his own feet to measure and the bed is too small. The project was: the students were supposed to use their feet to measure the length and width of a "bed" and I was to put their measurements in an excel spreadsheet and it was supposed to calculate and show a graph. First of all, I spent almost an hour and a half setting everything up. I am sure if you are used to excel it would not take as long. I had everything set to go the day of in the spreadsheet. I did everything the tutorial said to do, but it would not work. I am positive that it was not something I was doing wrong. I even went back during the lesson and listened to the tutorial again. It is hard to explain what went wrong unless you saw what I was talking about, but basically the tutorial directed me to use different pull down menus and what they said would be there wasn't. I don't know if it was atomic learning that was wrong or if it is because my computer is really slow. Either way, it was a huge disappointment and a lot of time wasted.
Has anyone else had better luck with these lessons?
Monday, February 22, 2010
In January, Jon and I did a wiki training for our staff. The week before, our staff meeting was dedicated to differentiation in our instruction. We discussed collaboration and sharing our materials and differentiation tools. Jon and I suggested that the Kemp Shares Wiki would be a great place for that. So we were given a staff meeting to train the staff on how to use the Kemp Shares Wiki, specifically how to upload and download files.
Also in January, the latest batch of SmartBoards arrived and now all classrooms K-5 have SmartBoards. Our principal had Dave in to do a SmartBoard training for our staff meeting and then hands on trainings at each grade level team meeting the rest of the days. All the teachers I talked to were excited to have Dave come in and even more excited get their fingers and hands on their new boards. I've been having a lot of fun sharing some of my enthusiasm and favorite parts of the Notebook software.
As Global Learners we share 21st century learning with our students as well as other teachers. I applaud the willingness of my colleagues to jump right into using new technology and new methods.
Once children successfully completed their assessment, they had the opportunity to complete a "Ways to Show Numbers" PowerPoint presentation. I created a template for the first five slides and they were responsible for slide six. We're still working to complete the presentations, but I have learned a lot. One thing is now students want to count tally marks by tens! Small review will get us back on track. Another WOW was how quickly they became self-sufficient at using PowerPoint. One day I showed them copy and paste (all watched me make a presentation), the next day I saved their file and let them roll without many questions. This certainly inspires me to become more of a risk-taker with new technology projects.
On another note, my next goal is to integrate nursery rhymes into my ALD lessons. I have the most advanced readers and writers during this time. Last week we read Humpty Dumpty and out of my 30 students, two had ever heard the rhyme and no one knew it by heart. If anyone has any suggestions for a nursery rhyme and/or folk tale unit I'd love to hear it!
Sunday, February 21, 2010
from the website++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
Interpreting your mind
Your brain speaks a "language" of electrical impulses. The MindSet plays the part of the translator, communicating your emotional states.
The MindSet contains advanced components to sense and interpret your brainwaves, and is able to determine your level of attention and meditation.
Is this the future? Using brain wave and brain wave entrainment to control computer actions with our mental activity? How cool is this? What possible applications might there be in the classroom? New student engagement strategies? Used for accomodations for spec ed students? .... 21st C technology!....
Here is a video from the company .Having used hemi-sync for many years as well as holo-sync and DAVID, I realize the power of binaural beat / brainwave entrainment.
What a future for those with the imagination and the skills to make it happen! What do you think!
Wednesday, February 17, 2010
Inspire your students! Share best practices, access free resources and collaborate with educators.
The Siemens Foundation, in partnership with Discovery Education, Oak Ridge National Laboratory and the College Board, is thrilled to announce a new nationwide initiative, The Siemens STEM Academy.
The Academy offers free hands-on and multi-media professional development resources and opportunities that boost science, technology, engineering and math learning in the classroom.
Check out the STEM Academy Portal.
Sunday, February 7, 2010
Saturday, February 6, 2010
Wednesday, February 3, 2010
Also, as we progress through the year I have seen the students become more comfortable using the technology. I remember the first glogster project we did and it felt like I was being pulled in every direction trying to provide assistance to everyone; however, during the last glogster activity very few students required my help and in fact any problems that we did encounter we worked through them together. I feel like as adults we are scared to try new things sometimes, but it seems like kids are always willing to try something new and many of them do not have any fear about failing. It is this attitude that makes students good problem solvers which in turn benefits everyone as we all learn of new ways to do things.
Lastly, during the month of January we had our parent teacher conferences which gave me an opportunity to reintroduce my classroom website to my students parents. In the beginning of the year I went through my website with my students and I sent home information for the parents; however, from many of the parents reactions it seemed like many of them didn't know about it. Therefore, I took advantage of our conferences to remind parents about it as well as to show them how they can use it to monitor their kids progress. Needless to say, this made the parents happy while many of the students were not!
Tuesday, February 2, 2010
I am a little nervous about all the new assignments coming up for this second half of the year.
Monday, February 1, 2010
I am most fortunate because my teammate attended the training with us here at our school and has already been utilizing the flipcharts using his projector and computer. He is now able to take that one step further and uses his Promethean on a daily basis also. We plan our lessons together and choose flipcharts that help us instruct our students. We are beginning to create our own flipcharts to better support our learners.