NAMI Ending the Silence
Ending the Silence: A mental health education program for high school students
WHAT IS ENDING THE SILENCE?
Ending the Silence is a 50-minute program designed for high school audiences and is typically presented in the freshman/sophomore health classes during the mental health portion of the curriculum. This transformational program is devoted to giving students an opportunity to learn about mental illness through an informative PowerPoint, short videos, and personal testimony. Through the presentation, students learn symptoms and indicators of mental illness, and are given ideas about how to help themselves, friends, or family members who may be in need of support.
HOW THE PROGRAM WORKS:
The program is delivered by a trained two-person team, including an individual who relates to the student population by sharing their own journey with a diagnosable mental health condition.
Students are given a resource card with valuable phone numbers and websites for mental health agencies and youth support services along with a list of symptoms/warning signs of mental illness. At the conclusion of the presentation, postcards are mailed home to parents informing them of the program. Students are also given information regarding additional programs and services they can utilize for support.
A primary goal of this program is to create a generation of students that are well-positioned to eradicate the stigma associated with mental illness through education and advocacy.
Read student testimonials about the effectiveness of Ending The Silence here: Ending the Silence Student Testimonials
HOW CAN I BRING ENDING THE SILENCE TO MY SCHOOL?
Contact your local NAMI affiliate or Erik Villalobos the NAMI California ETS Program Coordinator, at 916-567-0163 or firstname.lastname@example.org to learn how you can bring this educational program to your school. You can find the nearest NAMI affiliate offering the ETS program by contacting Kelly Boyles.
For More Information:
- For additional information on the Ending the Silence Program, please visit www.endingthesilence.org.
- Ending the Silence Flier
Interested in presenting Ending the Silence to schools in your community?
We are looking for passionate young adults (ages 18-30) to present the ETS program to high school audiences. Trainings are held via webinar on a quarterly basis. Please contact Erik at email@example.com.