A lot of medical emergencies happen outside the hospital. A car crash may occur in an intersection; a hiker may suddenly lose balance and fall; or a child while at play may complain of breathing difficulty. In cases like these, every second matters. Knowing how to respond to such situations can mean the difference between life and death. Likewise, having the ability to recognise the signs and symptoms of a medical emergency and administering the right treatments can also improve a patient’s chance to fully recover and minimise associated medical costs.
Our Medical Emergency Training Course will introduce you to the subject of emergency medicine and will equip you with knowledge on a variety of emergency medical services and their administration. It will point out different medical emergencies that can happen to children and adults, including life-threatening conditions and their common signs and symptoms. It will also demonstrate to you how to administer a range of medical emergency treatments following key industry standards. Additional topics that will be thoroughly covered in this course include stress management of patients during emergencies; emotional aspects of emergency care; medical, legal and ethical issues in emergency situations; and medical terminology, among others.
You may find yourself in emergency situation where another person needs immediate medical help. With the things you will be able to learn from this course, you will know the proper procedures on responding to such situation and have the capacity to save a person from a life-threatening condition.
To provide maximum flexibility, there is no specific deadline of completion for this course. Since the course can be accessed anytime online, you may choose to learn the lessons in multiple sessions or cover the entire course in one go. The duration to complete the entire course still depends on your learning pace.
Upon finishing the Medical Emergency Training Course, you will receive a certificate of completion from Skills on Projects. This certificate will be in PDF format and will be sent to the email address you have used on sign up. No additional fee will be charged to secure this certification. Use it to boost your CV and your knowledge in this field.
Access the course from any computer, laptop, tablet or mobile device. You also need an updated browser such as Chrome, Firefox or Internet Explorer 11.
Important points are spread throughout the course. A pen and paper will come in handy in such situation, so you can jot down the things you need to remember.
To participate in the online aspects of the course, you need to have access to a stable Internet connection.