Overwhelming feelings of bullying fear, distrust, paranoia, hypervigilance, hyperalertness? read this
"There is nothing to fear but fear itself."
Franklin D Roosevelt
Bullying results in fear, for fear is the means by which all abusers, including bullies, disempower and control their victims.
It's natural to feel fearful when a bully is undermining and disempowering you daily by whittling away at your self-confidence and self-esteem. Constant trivial nitpicking criticism sows the seeds of self-doubt which eventually take root and sprout into full-blown fear. Bullies co-opt others into isolating you, bad-mouthing you, ignoring you and distancing themselves from you.
Bullying, in the form of constant verbal abuse, creates uncertainty and attacks objectivity resulting in destabilisation (which is often misinterpreted as "unstable"). In the initial stages fear manifests as distrust, and if the source of the fear is not addressed, the distrust builds into what most people call paranoia. When this is a symptom of cumulative psychiatric injury, the correct term is hypervigilance or hyperalertness. In a bullying situation the level of fear is so high that one is on constant alert for danger. The differences between paranoia and hypervigilance are listed on the Complex Post Traumatic Stress Disorder page.
Undue fear is a common symptom of Complex Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD). Browse Bully OnLine and overcome fear to re-empower yourself with knowledge and insight. Start with Am I being bullied? and then find out Why am I being bullied? - the answer may surprise you. See the myths about bullying deconstructed and find out answers to frequently-asked questions about bullying.
Definition of fear
Rhonda Britten's Fearless Living Institute
Susan Jeffer's Feel the fear and do it anyway
Stress, injury to health, trauma and PTSD
How bullying, harassment and abuse damage health and cause trauma
Stress, trauma and PTSD Home Page
The cause of stress revealed
Stress at work, injury to health, fatigue, depression, suicide
PTSD (Post Traumatic Stress Disorder) and Complex PTSD
Bullying, stress and self-harm | Stress and debility
Bullying and suicide | Cases of suicide caused by bullying
Bullying shame | Bullying fear | Bullying embarrassment | Bullying guilt
Bullying and denial | Trauma | Shell shock: PTSD in WW1
David Kinchin's book Post Traumatic Stress Disorder: the invisible injury
validates and relieves the silent unseen suffering of trauma
Profile of David Kinchin | PTSD workshops by David Kinchin
Neil Marr and Tim Field's book Bullycide: death at playtime reveals the
secret toll of children who attempt or commit suicide because of bullying
The Field Foundation | Bully OnLine
Workplace bullying | School bullying | Family bullying
Bullying news | Press and media centre
Bullying case histories | Bullying resources
Stress, PTSD and psychiatric injury
Action to tackle bullying | Related issues
Books on bullying and related issues
Trauma and spiritual growth