Certainly! Congratulations on your upcoming marriage. 
Here’s a list of classic love songs for your rehearsal dinner with their release years for easy reference: 

1. “The Way You Look Tonight” by Frank Sinatra (1964) - This classic song has been performed by several artists, but Frank Sinatra’s version is widely considered the most popular.
2. “L-O-V-E” by Nat King Cole (1965) - Nat King Cole’s smooth and mellow voice is great for background music, and while this song may inspire some guests to hit the dancefloor, its tempo should keep the dancing fairly tame.
3. “Crazy Love” by Van Morrison (1970) - This song has been covered by several artists and appeared on the soundtrack to a number of popular films.
4. “You Are the Sunshine of My Life” by Stevie Wonder (1972) - With its romantic lyrics and upbeat sound, this classic song will be sure to put your guests in a great mood.
5. “Going to the Chapel” by the Dixie Cups (1964) - It’s hard to imagine a song with lyrics better suited to this occasion.
6. “I Say a Little Prayer” by Dionne Warwick (1967) - While this romantic classic may not be a big hit on the dancefloor after being featured in a rehearsal dinner scene in the film ‘My Best Friend’s Wedding,’ it might inspire your guests to burst into song at the dinner table.
7. “At Last” by Etta James (1960) - This classic is a popular pick for a couple’s first dance at their wedding reception, with timeless lyrics and a moving, emotional performance by Etta James.
8. “Be My Baby” by the Ronettes (1963) - The lyrics of this song hold promises for a wonderful relationship. It has appeared on many “Best of the 1960s” lists and is considered by some to be among the greatest songs of all time.  
9. “Can’t Take My Eyes Off You” by Frankie Valli (1967) - This song was so popular, it earned Frankie Valli a Gold Record. It’s been covered by artists all over the world and appeared in lots of popular movie and television soundtracks. 
10. “Love is Here to Stay” by Ella Fitzgerald & Louis Armstrong (1957) - This hit, composed by George Gershwin, has been covered by countless artists, but nothing says romance like a duet performed by jazz icons Ella Fitzgerald and Louis Armstrong.
