Today's post is provided by guest blogger Bob Levy with Paws, Inc., with an introduction to Professor Garfield. Paws, Inc. is the parent of Professor Garfield and Garfield, created by Jim Davis, a native Hoosier.
Professor Garfield learning portal. The web site has some of the finest online academic curricula that children love to use and is designed for grades kindergarten through 8th grades. ProfessorGarfield.org has won numerous awards and was recently named by the American Association of School Librarians as one of the 25 best web sites for Teaching and Learning in the US.
There is a wide variety of content that can be accessed online which include:
Animated Learning Modules – As part of a strategic partnership with the Virginia Department of Education, the Professor Garfield Foundation has created a series of animated educational modules called the Infinite Learning Lab. This section of the site is presented using humorous instructional videos which cover a wide assortment of topics such as:
Internet Safety - Online Safety, Forms of Media, Fact or Opinion, and Cyberbullying.
Character Education - Self-Esteem, Self Control, Peer Pressure, Listening, Giving Back, and Diversity.
English - Root Words, Summarizing, Main Idea, and Possessive Pronouns.
SparkTop.org promotes self-awareness, self-advocacy, and a positive self-esteem. Children learn that it is okay to learn differently, that everyone has their own strengths and challenges, and that their talents can help them achieve their dreams. SparkTop.org allows children to get help from their peers or from special education experts. All user generated content on the site is reviewed by adults prior to being posted online. SparkTop.org is one of the largest and most robust web sites providing assistance for this demographic.
You won’t find another web site that is so rich and academically sound! Take some time and visit the web site.
Have you heard of or used the Professor Garfield learning portal? If so, share your experiences. For those new to Professor Garfield, how could you use it in your classroom?