This comprehensive site deals simply and concisely with the history of ancient Greece from the Stone Age
to the Hellenistic period. As well as the history and a timeline of the period there are sections on
archaeology, culture, maps, architecture, museums, art and photographs. The history of the Acropolis,
Delphi and Minoan Crete are also dealt with in separate sections. The site is a good starting point
for anyone interested in the history of ancient Greece.
BRITISH HISTORY ONLINE
This is a digital library containing some of the core printed primary and secondary sources for the
medieval to modern history of the British Isles. Created by the Institute of Historical Research and
the History of Parliament Trust, it aims to support academic and personal users around the world in
their learning, teaching and research.
CASEBOOK: JACK THE RIPPER
Jack the Ripper was a serial killer who terrorised the East End of London in the autumn of 1888.
He has never been conclusively identified, and scores of myths and legends have grown up around his name.
This site presents all the known facts through police reports and official documents, together with
all the theories arising from the case and much more. There is enough material here to keep even
the most fanatical Ripperologist happy for weeks.
This site covers the history of the Kings and Queens of England from the early Saxons through to the
present. It contains a short biography of each monarch along with illustrations, maps and genealogical
tables. It is arranged chronologically by dynasties and has a search facility. There are also illustrated
articles about the Tower of London, the Crown Jewels and the Royal Residences, as well as an extensive
list of useful links which are divided into categories.
HISTORY ON THE NET
This site is geared to providing historical information that is easy for both children and adults
to navigate. It is written in accessible language, is illustrated wherever possible and aims to make
learning fun. It provides a variety of photocopiable worksheets and other resources
for teaching, but the information and timelines on the subjects covered are of interest to anyone.
Part of HISTORIC UK, the history and heritage accommodation guide, this site has much to offer in the way
of illustrated articles about all sorts of historical subjects including the Great Exhibition,
Passchendaele, the Princes in the Tower, Sir Robert Peel, Jack the Ripper and Robin Hood. It also has
information about "Living History" events in the UK, and Links to other related sites.
This site presents articles and timelines concerned with all aspects of world history, and is presented
in an easily-navigable way which allows the user to find any area, theme or biography on the site from
alphabetical lists. The timeline section also contains links to relevant Google pages and images,
so that information can be explored and expanded as much as desired.
This is an expanding scientific project presenting 3,000 years of world history with an interactive
combination of lifelines, timelines, and maps covering the areas of science, culture, religion and
politics. It is very easy to navigate between the categories of people, history, events and maps,
and the site provides a huge range of historical information.
Although this is a commercial site providing information about travel and accommodation in Britain, it
is strongly geared to the history of the country and also provides a wealth of information about what
happened when and where from ancient times to the present day.
NATIONAL MARITIME MUSEUM
This is the National Maritime Museum's collections blog, where museum staff can highlight objects
and aspects of their collections that they like. These can be new acquisitions, conservation work
or highlights from curators, and include clips from their film archive (also on Flickr), articles
QUEEN ELIZABETH I
Predictably enough, this site is devoted to the life and times of Queen Elizabeth I. It has articles
on every aspect of the period, starting with a brief biography of the queen, then going into more
detail about all the major events of her life and reign, and the people who populated her world.
There are also sections on films and books about Elizabeth (fictional and non-fictional) as well
as quizzes, a bibliography and related links of interest.
This amazing site has detailed chronologies of the rulers of almost everywhere in the world from Africa
and Egypt through China and India to Europe and the British Isles. The site "inhabits a frontier region
located somewhere near the intersection of political science, history, archaeology, and geography -
with a sprinkling of heraldry, genealogy, numismatics, epigraphy, and religion mixed in."
This site contains a wide range of information about Tudor England, its monarchs and citizens. There are
extensive articles, portraits, quizzes, information about related films and a particularly good section of
primary and secondary sources for research. There are also links to other relevant sites and to the Tudor
England search engine so that you can hunt for further information.
This is a comprehensive site presenting a wealth of information about the Tudor period of English history.
It deals with the monarchs and all aspects of Tudor life from Henry VII to Elizabeth I, with articles,
images, source material, timelines, genealogies, films, maps and blogs. It is an individual, personal
project which is constantly expanding and contains interactive elements for those who wish to participate.
The website of the V&A (Victoria and Albert) Museums in South Kensington is a treasure trove of
fascinating material about the past. It includes information about exhibitions, collections,
research and conservation, with pictures and videos on all aspects of the museum's work.
THE VICTORIAN WEB
This site embraces a huge range of articles and images concerned with the Victorian period of British
history. Topics covered include Politics, Religion, Science, the Arts and Entertainment. There are
also a number of e-texts by Victorian authors and wide-ranging bibliographies on all manner of subjects
and individuals. Any research into the period should start here, and most of the materials are free
to use under certain, specified conditions.
WORLD DIGITAL LIBRARY
This is a remarkable collection of culturally significant materials from various UNESCO countries,
dating from 8000 B.C. to the present. It includes photos, prints, drawings, maps, books, films and
recordings which can be viewed and downloaded for free. The materials can be browsed according to
place, time, topic, type of item or institution, and searches can be narrowed or widened according
to any combination of these categories.
The International World History Project contains a collection of history-related essays, documents,
maps, music and video outlining worldwide human history from the Neolithic era to the present.
There is a section containing historical documents such as the Magna Carta and the American Declaration
of Independence and sections relating to world religions, philosophies and scientific discoveries