Diseases & conditions A-Z List
Diseases & Conditions A-Z List - «R»:
Rib cage pain
Rib cage pain includes any pain or discomfort in the area of the ribs. See chest pain.
With a broken rib, the pain gets worse when bending and twisting the body. Such movement does not cause the pain in those who have pleurisy (swelling of the lining of the lungs) or muscle spasms.
Riboflavin is a type of B vitamin. It is water soluble, which means it is not stored in the body. You must replenish the vitamin every day.
Riboflavin (vitamin B2) works with the other B vitamins. It is important for body growth and red blood cell production and helps in releasing energy ...
Rickets is a disorder caused by a lack of vitamin D, calcium, or phosphate. It leads to softening and weakening of the bones.
Vitamin D helps the body control calcium and phosphate levels. If the blood levels of these minerals become too low, the body may produce hormones that cause calcium...
Rickettsial pox is a disease spread by a mite. It causes a chickenpox-like rash on the body.
Rickettsial pox is caused by the bacteria, Rickettsia akari. It is commonly found in the United States in New York City and other city areas. It also has been seen in South Africa, Korea, and Russia....
Right heart ventriculography
Right heart ventriculography is a study that images the right chambers (atrium and ventricle) of the heart.
How the Test is Performed
You will get a mild sedative 30 minutes before the procedure. A cardiologist will cleanse the site and numb the area with a local anesthetic. Then a catheter will be...
Riley-Day syndrome is an inherited disorder that affects the development and function of nerves throughout the body.
Riley-Day syndrome is passed down through families (inherited). A person must inherit a copy of the defective gene from each parent to develop the condition.
This condition is...
Ringworm is a skin infection caused by a fungus. Ringworm can affect skin on your body (tinea corporis), scalp (tinea capitis), groin area (tinea cruris, also called jock itch), or feet (tinea pedis, also called athlete's foot).
Often, there are several patches of ringworm on your skin at once.
Robotic surgery is a technique in which a surgeon performs surgery using a computer that remotely controls very small instruments attached to a robot.
This procedure is done under general anesthesia (you are asleep and pain-free). The surgeon sits at a computer station nearby and direct...
Rocky Mountain spotted fever
Rocky Mountain spotted fever is an infectious disease brought on by a specific type of bacteria carried by ticks.
Rocky Mountain spotted fever is caused by Rickettsia rickettsii (R. Rickettsii), which is carried by ticks. The bacteria spread to humans through a tick bite.
In the western Unit...
A root canal is a dental procedure to remove dead or dying nerve tissue and bacteria from inside a tooth.
A dentist will use a needle to place numbing medicine (anesthetic) around the bad tooth. You may feel a slight prick when the needle is being inserted.
Next, your dentist uses a tin...
Rosacea is a chronic skin condition involving inflammation of the cheeks, nose, chin, forehead, or eyelids. It may appear as redness, prominent spider-like blood vessels, swelling, or skin eruptions similar to acne.
Although the cause of rosacea is unknown, you are more likely to develop thi...
Roseola is an acute disease of infants and young children in which a high fever and skin rash occur.
The disease is common in children ages 3 months to 4 years, and most common in those ages 6 months to 1 year. It is caused by a virus called human herpesvirus 6 (HHV-6), although similar synd...
Rotator cuff repair
Rotator cuff repair is a type of surgery to fix a torn tendon in the shoulder. The procedure can be done with a large ("open") incision or with shoulder arthroscopy, which uses small button-hole sized incisions.
The rotator cuff is a group of muscles and tendons that form a cuff over th...
Rotator cuff tendinitis
Rotator cuff tendinitis is an inflammation (irritation and swelling) of the tendons of the shoulder.
The shoulder joint is a ball and socket type joint where the top part of the arm bone (humerus) forms a joint with the shoulder blade (scapula). The rotator cuff holds the head of the humerus...
Rotavirus antigen test
The rotavirus antigen test detects rotavirus in the feces. Rotavirus is the most common cause of infectious diarrhea in children.
How the Test is Performed
There are many ways to collect stool samples. You can catch the stool on plastic wrap that is loosely placed over the toilet bowl and held in p...