Germs, they seem to be everywhere. This is especially true during flu season. The recent outbreak of the Swine Flu has also increased the need for awareness and knowledge of how germs are spread. They can quickly pass from person to person with out even seeing who left the germs behind. Many viruses and bacteria can live on surfaces for more than two hours. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), illnesses are mainly spread by respiratory droplets of coughs and sneezes. This happens when droplets from a cough or sneeze of one infected person move through the air and come in contact with the mouth or nose of other people. They can also be spread by coming in contact with droplets that have landed on surfaces such as door knobs, desks, telephones, even the handle on the coffee pot or the valve on the water cooler in the break room at the office. The CDC says that keeping your hands clean is one of the most important steps you can take to avoid getting sick and spreading germs to others. Below are ways to help you stop the spread of germs and help you and your family stay germ free.
Things You Will Need
Disinfectant spray, Disinfectant hand soap, Disinfectant wipes, Gel sanitizers
The first step to preventing illness is to practice good health habits such as staying away from close contact with others when they are sick. Clean your hands often by washing them with a disinfecting soap and water for 15 to 20 seconds. You can also use gel sanitizers and alcohol based hand wipes if soap and water are not available. Also, avoid touching your eyes, nose or mouth. Germs are often spread when you touch something that has been contaminated with germs such as the items listed in the introduction to this article.
Another step to preventing illness is to do things such as covering your mouth with a tissue when coughing or sneezing. This will help keep you from passing germs to family members who may become ill and pass the germs on to others creating a chain reaction in the family. Also, when you are sick, stay away from work, school, and other public places to avoid close contact with other individuals. This will help protect others from getting sick
Get plenty of sleep, manage your stress levels and get physically active. It is also important to drink plenty of fluids and eat nutritious foods.
Germs are everywhere, especially during flu season. Take the necessary steps to protect yourself and your family from the germs that cause the flu and other illnesses.
Tips & Warnings
See your healthcare provider at least once a year.