Your diet is an important factor when it comes to maintaining good oral health and preventing cavities, and sure steps can help you go a long way. The moment you eat definite foods, your mouth starts to change. The sugars in the foods you eat are converted into acids by bacteria in the mouth, and these acids begin the decay process speedily by attacking the teeth”s enamel. Each time you eat, you expose your teeth to the decay cycle, but some foods are worse than others.
Fortunately, making easy dietary modifications can help you avoid tooth decay and hold the health of your teeth and gums.
The Best Food Choices
Foods rich in phosphorus and calcium remineralize the teeth after acids remove enamel. Dairy products, nuts, chicken and other meats are good choices that can strengthen your teeth.
Firm and crunchy vegetables and fruits are good choices because of their high water content. The water in foods like carrots or apples, for instance, stimulates the flow of saliva that washes away food particles. The water also dilutes the sugars these foods contain.
If you chew gum, switch to a sugar-free variety that contains ingredients that prevent cavities. Chewing sugarless gum actually helps preserve the health of your teeth because it increases the flow of saliva and dislodges foods, so it wouldnt harm to save a pack of gum handy.
The Worst Food Choices
Stay away from foods that can stick to your teeth or contain high amounts of sugar. These foods, including candy, cakes, potato chips, french fries, dried fruits and more, are fuel sources for bacteria.
Avoid drinks that contain sugar, including lemonade, tea or coffee with added sugar or soft drinks. Drink fluoridated water instead to guard your teeth.
These common sense recommendations wont force you to dramatically change your dietary habits to help promote good oral health, and knowing which food items can give you disproportionate benefits and also those having equally proportionate harmful effects, will help you create the right choices for a lifetime of healthy teeth and gums.