Chicken is a slam-dunk for health-conscious diners, with its gratifying combination of culinary versatility and lean, high-quality protein. In fact, chicken is so versatile from the cook's perspective that you might rely on nutritional considerations to narrow down your choice of cooking methods. For example "boiled" chicken -- more accurately, poached or stewed -- is low in fat, but throws off some protein as it cooks. The amount involved is minimal, so this shouldn't be a deterrent.
Rising to the Top
When you simmer a chicken, you'll soon begin to see a cloudy "skin" of proteins forming at the surface of the pot. They're usually skimmed away, to keep the broth clear, and they do represent a small quantity of lost protein. Figures from the U.S. Department of Agriculture's nutrient database show that the uncooked meat from a 1-pound chicken contains 51.3 grams of protein. That same chicken, after being stewed or simmered, contains 49.4 grams of protein for a net loss of 1.9 grams.
A Quick Comparison
To put that into better context, it's useful to compare boiled chicken with a bird prepared through an alternative method such as roasting. That same 1-pound chicken, when roasted, nets out at 48.6 grams of protein for a loss of 2.7 grams. The total is still minimal, but clearly the protein lost through boiling or stewing is not excessive. Roasting removes slightly more fat, but also causes more shrinkage. The bird's original 41.5 grams of fat drop to 24.2 grams when roasted, or 25.1 grams when stewed. The 1-pound bird yields 178 grams or about 6.3 grams of meat when roasted, but 200 grams or 7 ounces when stewed.
The other potential downside to boiled chicken is nutrient loss. Many vitamins and minerals are water-soluble and can be significantly reduced during cooking. A boiled or stewed chicken does indeed lose more of its B vitamins than a roasted bird, and the same holds true for minerals such as selenium, phosphorus and potassium. Boiled birds retain more of their iron, folate and vitamin E than roasted chickens. The nutrients lost through simmering aren't necessarily gone forever, either. Most are simply transferred to your cooking liquid, and you'll still benefit from them -- especially those B vitamins -- if you eat the broth.
A Chicken in Every Pot
Although vintage cookbooks usually speak in terms of "boiled" chicken, that's not quite accurate. Cooking the bird at a full boil will cause its muscle fibers to contract and toughen, leaving even the tenderest young fryer relatively dry and chewy. Just warm your cooking liquid enough that a bubble breaks the surface occasionally. Chicken cooked at his bare simmer -- approximately 180 to 200 degrees Fahrenheit -- remains tender and moist. Serve the meat on or off of the bone as a hot meal, or debone and cool it for use in sandwiches and salads. Lemon juice, spices and fresh herbs can all add flavor to your chicken, with little or no impact on its calories.
- BananaStock/BananaStock/Getty Images