Family Tree Researcher available to research your family history!
Melder: many internet lists define this term as a corn miller, however it seems that the term Melder may actually refer to the measure or quantity of corn that was taken to the mill to be ground by the miller. The term may be of Scottish derivation.
Mender: skilled woman who invisibly repaired faults in fabric. See also Fine Drawer.
Mendicant: a member of a monastic order who survived by begging or by receiving alms because of the constraints of their order.
Mercator: Latin term for a merchant.
Mercer: dealt in textiles and fabrics. In its oldest use the term can be a generic term for a dealer in any goods.
Metal Man: worked in a coal mine, responsible for maintaining rails on the underground railway haulage. Various reputable sources define this mining occupation as a person who took down roofs to increase the height, so there may be regional variations in meaning.
Meterer: may refer to a poet, or derive from a Latin term for an agricultural worker harvesting the crops.
Milestone Inspector: slang term for a tramp or hobo.
Militia Man: member of the public who was required by common law to undertake regular military training and be called up to defend the county, shire or parish. A remnant from the feudal system. Names of militia members may have been recorded on muster rolls.
Milker: an agricultural worker responsible for milking cattle.
Mill Scavenger: a child working in a mill for the textile industry. A very dangerous occupation which required small children to dash beneath active weaving machines to retrieve fallen scraps.
Miller: commonly refers to a person working in a mill, often a grain mill. May also refer to a person operating a milling machine for shaping metal or wood. Although milling machines were invented in the 18th century, occupations date back only to the early 19th century.
Miller’s Carman: a Carter who drove grain to a mill via horse and cart to be ground into flour.
Milliner: designed, made or sold millinery - women's hats.
Millwright: in earliest times a specialist carpenter who designed and built flour mills and watermills. The term evolved to mean a person who builds or maintains industrial machinery.
Millwright Apprentice: an apprentice working for and being trained by a master Millwright.
Millwright Supervisor: an experienced Millwright who oversaw workers moving or installing machinery.
Milner: an abbreviation or Milliner, (maker of women's hats) or a misspelling of Miller on old census records.
Mine Captain: worked in the mining industry, held supervisory responsibility.
Mint Maker: alternate term for a Mint Master, in charge of a coin making factory.
Mint-master: person in charge of a mint; a factory making coins.
Copyright: Jane Hewitt. This dictionary is authorised for use on www.familyresearcher.co.uk only.
Mise Gatherer: collected tax, possibly a Welsh occupation.
Mocado Maker: worked in the textile industry making mocado, an imitation silk velvet.
Modeller: a designer in the pottery industry, responsible for making clay models of items to be manufactured.
Molitor: German occupational surname for a Miller.
Mondayman: tenant who laboured for the landowner one day a week - you can guess what day - to save paying rent.
This dictionary is my own work, and copyright Jane Hewitt. I sometimes find unauthorised (i.e. stolen) copies of my website content appearing on other people's websites. If you should read a group of identical glossary definitions elsewhere on the web, consider whether such sites are reputable or not.
One man saved the British Royal Family in the first decades of the 20th century - he wasn't a prime minister or an archbishop of Canterbury. He was an almost unknown, and self-taught, speech therapist named Lionel Logue, whom one newspaper in the 1930s famously dubbed 'The Quack who saved a King'.
Logue wasn't a British aristocrat or even an Englishman - he was a commoner and an Australian to boot. Nevertheless it was the outgoing, amiable Logue who single-handedly turned the famously nervous, tongue-tied Duke of York into one of Britain's greatest kings after his brother, Edward VIII, abdicated in 1936 over his love of Mrs Simpson.