Thanks to Danny Brassell for joining us on #mdeschat tonight! Here is an expanded version of Danny’s responses to our questions and some ways to connect with him below:
What are some ways to engage reluctant readers?
Two rules to engaging reluctant readers:
Rule #1 Find books based on readers’ interests
Rule #2 Remember rule #1
What are the top three things that great teachers do when teaching reading?
1. Great reading teachers love to read themselves and their students feel their passion.
2. Great reading teachers read aloud to students every day, no matter how young or old.
3. Great reading teachers provide students with time to read and plenty of reading choices.
How do we involve parents in teaching their children to read?
Remind parents that they are their children’s most important teachers.
Communicate simple reading tips for parents: read aloud every night, provide lots of books at home etc.
You wrote the book Bringing Joy Back Into the Classroom, give us some advice on making learning joyful.
Start by taking your two index fingers, putting them on the sides of your mouth and pushing up. SMILE!!!
Incorporate your passions and interests into your teaching. You and your students will be happier and more productive.
Simple phrase I use to remember Maslow’s Social Hierarchy of Needs: “P.S., I Love You.” Different needs include:
P= physiological needs
I= “eye” above pyramid on back of $1bill- self-actualization
Love= love and belonging
You= self esteem
Fulfill these needs and reach the top of the pyramid, and you will truly make learning joyful to your students.
What are other countries doing better than us when it comes to reading instruction?
Not testing every other day. Not labeling kids at an early age. Not allowing their federal government to bully their educators.
Danny’s final thoughts:
The Gladstone/Disraeli Paradox
Queen Victoria was asked about the difference between Prime Minister Gladstone and Prime Minister Disraeli. Her answer provides an important life lesson. She said that whenever she spoke to PM Gladstone she thought he was the most interesting person she had ever met. Whenever she left a meeting with PM Disraeli she thought she was the most interesting person he had ever met. The lesson? Everybody wants to feel important. What do we do to encourage reluctant readers, weary teachers, and frustrated parents?
Other Ways to Connect with Danny
YouTube Videos Starring Danny:
Get FREE cool, short book recommendations
“Like” his Facebook Page: http://www.facebook.com/dannybrassell
Connect on LinkedIn:
Follow him on