Web applications are software that are stored in the cloud and are readily accessible through any web browser 24/7. The interface of such a software is the host website itself and the software never needs to be installed locally on the user’s computer and it is completely web based and cloud stored.
Online versions of Microsoft Office and Google Docs, etc. are common examples of web apps. These are so well made that they appear to function exactly like their desktop counterparts. These essentially enable people to work from nearly anywhere, on the go and thus reaching more people than ever before. This is the core principle of every web application.
The best reason to get into web application development is that almost any traditional software can be made into a web based application. But, that is a benefit for the developers, what is the benefit for business organizations?
Cost efficient development: Web based applications cut the cost of app development by 5 to 10 times. This might sound like an exaggeration, but bear with me on this. The key is that the method of accessing the application is a web browser and the internet. These are not platform specific requirements at all. It does not matter what the user’s operating system is, the only factor that might affect any development is browser compatibility, which is now more uniform throughout than ever. No need to develop for different desktop and mobile OSes, means no development, testing and debugging individually for those OSes, and the development cost is vastly reduced.
Better Integration: It is far easier to connect two different web applications or share data between them than to perform these tasks on similar software from different software developers. The only contrary to this example would be an application software package with multiple applications. But, this is only limited to the applications within that package. On the other hand, web applications share a common structure that allows them to send information to and from each other no matter who developed them. This results in drastic improvements in workflow when compared to traditional software.
Improved installation and maintenance: Unlike traditional applications where updates must be rolled out in batches after some significant changes were made, and the user is notified to manually initiate an update or schedule for update checks, web applications take this burden away from the user completely. Updating and maintaining the web application is the task of the service providers only and not a headache of the end user anymore. The application will be online at all times, while instantaneous updates are made to make it run smoothly and provide new or extra features. This increases the overall reliability of the software as it is less prone to malfunctions in this maintenance method.
Adaptability: Increasing hardware capabilities to provide better performance is a simpler task for web applications. If the requirements of a web app increases, it can be handled by combining several servers which would handle the software simultaneously in perfect harmony. Many companies also keep redundant server, so that any failure will not halt the online state of the application. On the traditional side, hardware management is the task of the user only, companies can either continue to ensure similar hardware requirements for every update, or update less frequently and both of decisions reduce the lifespan and functionality of the software in the long run.