Friday, February 20, 2015
Video has become essential in helping educators see all of the different ways of approaching the classroom. Whether you are looking for a video to show to your math department or want to look at a case study in a coach/teacher meeting, having good quality videos handy is always imperative. This week I am devoting our blog post to math classroom videos. Below are three free websites that offer a variety of approaches.
Inside Mathematics is a great resource that includes videos on the planning, teaching and debriefing of math lessons. The math lessons range in age from Kindergarten to 12th grade. There are classic number talk videos as well as videos that show teachers reteaching after giving a formative assessment. Feel free to further explore the Inside Mathematics Videos on your own!
Do you know about Jo Boaler's work out of Stanford University? She is the professor who coined the phrase "Low Floor High Ceiling" when addressing tasks that can be accessed by all students. She hosts a website called YouCubed where she shares math tasks, videos and teaching ideas. Many of the YouCubed Math Videos are lectures but a few of them are filmed in classrooms and focused on what excellent math group work looks like.
Did you know that the Teaching Channel now has 185 math specific videos on their website? Did you like "My Favorite No: Learning From Mistakes" that was shared in a previous blog post? There are now many more new Teaching Channel Math Videos that are equally as good. You can even search through these math videos by grade and topic.
Friday, February 13, 2015
As educators, we consistently talk about summative and formative assessments. Interim assessments, however, seem to be acknowledged significantly less often. Some districts look to outside organizations to help them create interim assessments that are aligned to the 2011 Massachusetts Curriculum Frameworks. Often these assessments are used to gauge where all students lie on the continuum in order to reteach or forge on where necessary. It can be expensive to buy premade interim assessments, but here are a few resources if you are looking to create your own.
Smarter Balanced (PARCC's computer-based testing counterpart) includes optional interim assessments. Although non-Smarter Balanced states do not have access to the actual interim assessments, we do have access to their blueprints. Are you curious to see if their assessments align to your scope and sequence/year-long plan? If so, feel free to check out their math interim assessment pacing guide at: Mathematics Interim Assessment Blocks Blueprint.
Have you begun exploring Edwin Teaching and Learning? This tool offers an excellent platform for making your own interim assessments. There are hundreds of items to choose from and the data gets sorted and color coded for you! If your district is not yet enrolled, check out the enrollment process here.
Monday, February 2, 2015
LIFT2 is an excellent opportunity for STEM teachers to participate in a paid externship! The idea is to get teachers out into the local STEM companies so that they can share the experience with their students. The more we know about the opportunities that exist in the STEM field, the more applicable project-based learning activities we can create!
Today is the perfect day for you to learn more about the LIFT2 program. Applications are due on February 28th and there are a limited number of externships available.
Application forms can be found here.