AGENDA FOR HAIR MITES TREATMENT. Basic hair structure knowledge Basic healthy hair scalp knowledge What are hair mites? Demodex hair mites check-up How do hair mites damage the hair? Demodex hair mites life cycle How to eliminate hair mites? Ungex product strength Ungex treatment steps
Basic hair structure knowledge
Basic healthy hair scalp knowledge
What are hair mites?
Demodex hair mites check-up
How do hair mites damage the hair?
Demodex hair mites life cycle
How to eliminate hair mites?
Ungex product strength
Ungex treatment steps
Ungex treatment & packages
Role play, study, and etc.
Demodex Brevis (oil gland)
male:0.165mm , female:0.208mm
Demodex Folliculorum (hair follicles)
They live in oil gland and hair follicles.
Lifespan: A few weeks to three months
Demodex is a genus of tiny parasitic mites that live in or near hair follicles of mammals.
About 65 species of Demodex mites are known.
Two species living on humans have been identified:
Demodex folliculorum and Demodex brevis, both frequently referred to as hair mites.
D. folliculorum was first described in 1842 by Simon; D. brevis was identified as separate in 1963 by Akbulatova.
D. folliculorum is found in hair follicles, while D. brevis lives in sebaceous glands connected to hair follicles.
Both species are primarily found in the face, near the nose, the eyelashes and eyebrows, but also occur elsewhere on the body.
They have a semi-transparent elongated body that consists of two fused segments. Eight short segmented legs are attached to the first body segment.
The body is covered with scales for anchoring itself in the hair follicle, and the mite has pin-like mouth-parts for eating skin cells, hormones and oils (sebum) which accumulate in the hair follicles.
The mites can leave the hair follicles and slowly walk around on the skin, at a speed of between 8 and 16 cm an hour-especially at night as they try to avoid light.
Mating takes place in the follicle opening, and eggs are laid inside the hair follicles or sebaceous glands.
The six-legged larvae hatch after 3–4 days, and it takes about seven days for the larvae to develop into adults.
The total lifespan of a Demodex Mite is several weeks to three months. The dead mites decompose inside the hair follicles or sebaceous glands.
Older people are much more likely to carry the mites; it is estimated that about 1/3 of children and young adults, 1/2 of adults, and 2/3 of elderly people carry the mites.
The Mites are transferred between hosts through upholstery items, contact of hair, eyebrows and of the sebaceous glands on the nose and etc.
In certain cases, usually related to a suppressed immune system, caused by stress or illness, mite populations can dramatically increase, resulting in hair loss as well as a condition known Demodex mite bite, characterised by itching, inflammation and other skin disorders.
It usually starts at middle age when the immune system is weakened and their population has increased.
One of the most obvious signs of the condition is a itching, crawling sensation on the scalp, but most of the time, there is no itching at all, and people are not aware they are infested with Demodex mites.
Tickling sensation on the scalp and face. This occurs most frequently on the lower nose, forehead and cheeks, especially in the evening and night.
This is the highest period of activity, usually when they mate. Many people are not aware of this tickle, because it starts gradually and it becomes an automatic reaction to scratch without noticing. You may have observed someone repeatedly scratching his face without realizing it.
· Professional "herbal solution" + "ozone therapy"
· Demodex hair mites technology
Breakdown of products to be used:
· Invigorating Shampoo (IS)
· Purifying Shampoo (PS)
· Revitalizing Hair Serum (RHS)
· Treatment Hair Tonic (THT)
· Pro-D’modex Treatment (PDT)
· High frequency comb (HFI)
· Digital Microscope (DHS)
· Refining Conditioner (RC) [optional]
· Nutrifying Moisturizer (NM) [optional]
1. First identify if you have Demodex mites then classify the nature of your scalp surface whether it is oily,
dry, itchy ... or normal.
2. Apply "IS" and "PS" shampoos on hairs and gently massage your scalp with finger tips around the hair line
in rotating motion for 1 minute if you have normal scalp or for 2 minutes if you possess an oily scalp
3. Rinse off shampoos thoroughly for a few minutes with cool water.
4. You can apply "RC" on edges of the hair after washing, then rinse off thoroughly, this procedure is optional
for long haired individuals. For short haired individuals – can apply "NM" at the all ends of the hairs.
5. Use "RHS" DAY and "THT" NIGHT on your scalp and massage smoothly for full absorption.
6. Scrub "HFI" comb slowly at your scalp to eliminate Demodex mites and stimulate the blood circulation for
7. Squirt the "PDT" on daily used items which nearly touched your scalp or hairs on daily basis to eliminate
the mites, e.g. your comb, towels, caps, pillow, bed linens and etc.
8. Use "DHS" to evaluate the improvement aspects in your scalp throughout or after the treatment monthly.
It is recommended to use digital hair scanner once a month.
1. Do not apply "RC" or "NM" on your scalp because it works with the
hair but not scalp.
2. Do not share your personal items with others such as towels, combs, . hair brushes and pillow cases.
3. Shake all products prior to using.
4. Don’t let the "HFI" comb stay in one spot more than 10 seconds.
1. Ask the customer to fill-up the personal details in the consultation card.
2. Do the hair mites check-up & microscope analysis.
3. Do the brief consultation; If the customers have mites, then offer them to do the Ungex Pro-Demodex Therapy; If they don’t have mites, then advise them to do the Ungex prevention hair mites therapy.
4. After treatment done, they can purchase Premier-kit or Introductory kit to use at home every night before sleep!