| Description :|
He who does not know food,
how can he understand
the diseases of man?
The human being is affected 24 hours a day by what he or she eats. To claim that diet has no relevance for the control of cancer is absolute nonsense ~ Dr. Hans Napier
Anyone who has an unhealthy lifestyle and eats improperly, spends his whole life preparing for cancer ~ Dr. Koliath, D.M.
He who takes medicine and neglects to diet wastes the skill of his doctors ~ Chinese proverb
Heart disease, cancer, diabetes, obesity and other lifestyle-related health problems have one common predisposing cause – the foods that we eat everyday! Apart from mounting scientific evidence, common sense tells us that if we want to be healthy, we need to provide our body with nutritious, wholesome foods, free from adulteration by chemicals, hormones and antibiotics.
Recent research has suggested that the underlying cause of chronic diseases, including cancer, is inflammation. We also know that certain foods cause inflammation, thus it is prudent for us to avoid these foods. Even those who consider themselves relatively healthy should know that cardiovascular disease is a consequence of chronic inflammation within the bloodstream. Chronic inflammation in the forms of gastritis, hepatitis, ulcerative colitis, etc., can lead to cancer of the stomach, liver and colon, respectively.
At CA Care, we tell patients to avoid inflammatory foods such as refined sugars, refined table salt, refined carbohydrates, all types of meat, dairy products and omega-6-rich polyunsaturated oils.
Very often, in our past dealings with cancer patients, upon hearing our dietary advice, many were upset and reacted negatively. They expressed their disappointment and frustration at being advised against their usual habits of eating. On top of that, many patients found it a challenge to start cooking and preparing meals with health as a priority.
As such, we spent many hours educating patients and caregivers on recognizing healthy and unhealthy foods, as well as how to prepare meals the healthy way. We often reminded patients that putting some effort into learning how to prepare healthy meals at home may be an initial challenge, but the pay-off is a great one.
Approached creatively and in the right way, preparing healthy meals can be a fun and rewarding experience. There are limitless possibilities for us in creating our own healthy dishes to suit the taste of our entire family. It is my hope that the recipes provided in this book will serve as a starting point for you to experiment with healthy cooking in your kitchen.
If you have lost money, you have lost a little,
If you have lost your reputation, you have lost much,
If you lost your health, you have lost everything.
104 recipes with 333 illustrations inside!
Finding it hard to balance healthy cooking and satisfying your taste buds? The truth is, adopting a healthy diet does not have to mean eating bland, tasteless food. This book guides you through basic preparation and cooking recipes aimed at transforming your ideas of how healthy cooking may be approached. Alternative ingredients and food preparation methods are provided as examples of the limitless possibilities in your kitchen. Learn how to make milk from almonds or rice
— who says milk only has to come from cows? Preparation of healthy meals does not have to be a chore either! Approached creatively and in the right way, preparing healthy meals can be a fun and rewarding experience for you and your family.
All Pages In Full Colour