We all have our favorite go-to sources for professional information—those specific education technology magazines, in-the-know influential bloggers, or even “hottest of the hot” social media sites. Each has their own unique take on the latest teaching trends and methodologies across all subject areas and instructional levels. They may review new products and services for everything from literacy to professional development. Or, they may publish the latest research studies on everything from the social-emotional factors influencing student learning to whether devices are engaging students effectively. All, in one way or another, can help us do what we do in our particular corner of the education world.
This title may be a little misleading—perhaps it should be “student social media tools I have never heard of.” Some of these sites are more prominent, more familiar, and have more subscribers than others. All of them fit into a category of networking or social sites that students in your school are probably using. Beyond Twitter, Facebook, and Instagram, here are a few that you need to know about:
10 Ways to Use Social Media
We live in the age of social media. It keeps us connected to our friends and families, our communities, and even the world. As educators, we need to take advantage of everything this tool has to offer, using educational connections and resources to better not only ourselves, but our students as well. So how can we best use this mighty tool?
School is already back in session for many teachers, but some of us are still savoring the last weeks of warm weather, sleeping in, and grilling out. We all have our back-to-school lists close at hand, however: folders that need to be labeled, tech that must be tested, and lesson plans to get ready for the year ahead.
During this time of prep and anticipation, it’s good to find new ideas and inspiration. To give you an assist, we’ve pulled together a list of great content, training sessions for the month ahead, and other on-demand resources.
Last week we discussed why accustoming students to whole-class collaboration is critical to their future success in the workplace, and looked at the ways that mobile applications can facilitate that type of classroom collaboration.
Today we’ll consider other types of ed tech: interactive whiteboards, digital displays, and Web 2.0 tools.
Interactive whiteboards and their software shouldn’t be classroom tools you forget
With all the new technology surrounding us, we tend to forget how many exciting ways we can use our interactive whiteboards with students. Most (if not all) interactive whiteboards come with software that offers a variety of tools for both teachers and students.
NEW MimioStudio 11.2: An inside look at what this release offers educators
By Chris Leonardo, Director, Research and Development, Mimio
Mobile devices have a growing presence in our world and in our schools. If we want to help kids prepare for the real world, we need to make mobile devices a key part of the learning environment. With this latest release of MimioStudio™ software, we’re pleased to have made the use of mobile devices even easier and more cost-effective.
Three FREE mobile-device connections
MimioStudio 11.2 software lets every classroom with a Mimio hardware or software license connect up to three mobile devices using the MimioMobile™ app, for free. Now you don’t have to buy a full MimioMobile classroom license to find out how easy it is to use mobile devices in your classroom.
Work Smarter Not Harder with the Big Three Tools
In our last blog, we shared a tip on using resources you already have in your classroom. Let's dig into that concept a bit more and explore some great ways to work smarter instead of harder with your MimioStudio™ software tools.
Reflecting on a year just ended is always an interesting activity. This is true whether you’re looking back on your accomplishments at work, in your personal life, or in an entire business. First there’s that moment of disbelief that another year has passed, and the recognition of how quickly it has gone. Then, as you begin to write down the events of the year, you realize just how much was achieved. Perhaps the year did not pass so quickly after all. In fact, it only seemed to pass quickly, because you were so busy doing great things.
To summarize this past year at Mimio in a single word, I would say that it was definitely “interesting.”
We went through some pretty significant changes at Mimio. The most notable change was Skyview Capital’s acquisition of Mimio from Newell Rubbermaid. The upshot of this exciting transition is that we are now even more nimble and flexible in responding to the needs of our customers. I would like to thank both of these outstanding companies for their support during the transition.
We also added some very significant and innovative new products to our portfolio. Three that I will highlight for this post are the MimioProjector™ interactive projector, the MimioMobile™ application, and the MimioCapture™ ink recorder.
Today’s article was written by guest blogger Jason Schmidt. Jason is an instructional technologist for Bennington Public Schools in Bennington, Nebraska, as well as a Mimio Quick Learn moderator.
For years, PowerPoint has been the de facto standard across the country for creating presentations. While PowerPoint can be an excellent tool for enhancing your speaking skills, it lacks much of the collaboration and annotation abilities that are the strengths of MimioStudio™ classroom software. For as long as I can remember, PowerPoint presentations could be imported into MimioStudio Notebook. This has been a great way to reuse content that you have already created by adding shapes, reveals, and annotations, but any ability to interact with the objects and animations in those files was lost in the process. With the next update to MimioStudio software (available in September), you will gain the ability to import not only the entire static slideshow, but also the objects, graphics, animations, links, and media.