There are two main types of fatty liver disease. The first is alcoholic liver disease, which is the result of drinking excessive amounts of alcohol over time. In those who are diagnosed with this disease, the blood is not able to break down alcohol properly, which greatly affects the liver.
The second type is non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, which is the most common liver disorder in the Western world. It occurs most commonly in people who are overweight and middle-aged. The disease causes fat to build up in the liver.
There are often no symptoms of fatty liver disease, so you may live with the condition and not realize it. Over time, sometimes it can take years or even decades, some signs may begin to surface. These symptoms include fatigue, sudden weight loss, appetite loss, nausea, dark urine, bruises, pain in the center or right upper part of belly, constipation, and dry or dark patches on the skin of one’s neck or underarms.
Lifestyle changes can keep the condition under control and help keep reverse the damaging effects of liver disease.
Try the following foods and supplements to reverse liver disease efficiently:
Bananas are super-packed with potassium. In fact, one banana contains about 470mg potassium. Eat more bananas to cleanse your liver naturally, and plump up the potassium in your body. Bananas enhance digestion and ease the elimination of toxins.
Ginger root is rich in fiber, which helps support a healthy digestive tract and eliminate toxins from the body. Also, it contains antioxidants that strengthen the immune system to fight off infection and illness. Make ginger tea by boiling ginger slices in green tea or water, or add some ginger to a homemade stir fry, salad or smoothie.
Potassium in sweet potatoes stimulates the cleansing of your liver. A single sweet potato offers over 700 milligrams of potassium. It’s also rich in magnesium, iron, vitamin B6, vitamin C, and Vitamin D. sweet potatoes provide huge anti-inflammatory potential which is useful in the treatment of fatty liver disease.
Turmeric has an extremely beneficial active component, curcumin, which effectively treats liver diseases and jaundice. This amazing spice also lowers the inflammation, oxidative stress, changes fat metabolism and improves insulin sensitivity, so it reduces liver injury and non-alcoholic fatty liver disease.
Moreover, it efficiently treats liver cancer, known as hepatocarcinoma, and liver fibrosis. You can prepare a turmeric tea, or simply add it to your meals, and enjoy its health benefits.
Milk thistle is considered the top herbal remedy to improve liver function and treat and prevent fatty liver disease. The flavonoids in milk thistle can effectively protect one from liver damage. The flavonoids also help enhance the detoxification process, including increasing the glutathione in the liver.
Glutathione is a key component for low liver function in patients with fatty liver disease. Evidence also suggests that milk thistle is useful for other liver-related diseases such as alcoholic hepatitis, cirrhosis, viral hepatitis, and chemical toxicity. The recommended intake is 900 milligrams of milk thistle twice daily with meals.
Dandelion leaf or root is often used to promote proper liver function as an effective cleansing herb for fatty liver disease. Dandelion will detoxify and metabolize fat that accumulates in the liver. A study published in the journal Food and Chemical Toxicology found that dandelion leaf extract can help prevent and treat obesity-related fatty liver disease. The dandelion leaf extract significantly suppressed fat accumulation in the liver and lowered insulin resistance.
Enjoy dandelion root tea to obtain the full effects of a fatty liver disease. Add a teaspoon of dried dandelion root to a cup of boiling hot water. Next, cover and steep for up to 10 minutes. Strain the decoction. It is recommended to drink three cups of the tea each day over a three-week period.
Black seed oil
Research has shown that black seed oil benefits patients with liver disease because it’s able to reduce the complications and progression of fatty liver disease. Black seed oil works to speed up the healing process for people with this health condition.
The nutrients found in raw vegetables have been used for centuries to help treat liver disease. Juicing is a great way to help your body absorb the nutrients. Ideal vegetables for a liver detox include kale, cabbage, beets, celery, and broccoli. You can also add some lemon, ginger, and turmeric for an extra immune system boost!
Research performed at the University of Florida suggests that lifestyle changes, along with vitamin E supplements, are helpful for people with liver damage caused by fatty liver disease. Vitamin E benefits include its role as a powerful antioxidant that reduces inflammation. It also increases immunity and helps the body fight serious conditions.
Liver from young, healthy, grass-fed cattle or chicken liver pate is loaded with nutrients and vitamins. It’s high with vitamins A and B, folic acid, choline, iron, copper, zinc, chromium, and CoQ10. As a matter of fact, it’s one of the most nutrient-dense foods that you can eat. If you rather not animal liver, take liver supplements that guarantee no hormones, pesticides or antibiotics were used in the feeding and care of the cattle.
Tips to prevent liver disease:
Here we will suggest some effective ways to prevent liver disease in a completely natural, and safe way. Moreover, these tips will also be of great help in the case of a liver transplant:
- Avoid all processed foods: Avoid processed foods and ingredients like high fructose corn syrup (HFCS) or corn syrup. HFCS will produce uric acid that causes gout, increases blood pressure, and lead to liver damage. Genetically modified foods like corn will destroy good gut bacteria, and interfere with digestion. This process makes the liver work harder.
- Minimize your intake of saturated fat: Focus on eating nutrient-rich foods to boost your immune system and avert liver disease.
- Avoid dangerous drugs: Tylenol (acetaminophen) in large quantities is regarded as a harmful drug for the liver.
- Avoid drinking alcohol: Even when your fatty liver disease is the non-alcoholic variety, it is best to avoid drinking alcohol altogether. Be aware that alcohol is found in some cough syrups and other drugs.
- Pregnancy precaution: It is recommended that women who had a liver transplant should avoid pregnancy for at least 1 year after it, and should avoid breastfeeding due to possible risks of the baby to be exposed to immunosuppressive medicines through the milk.
- Check your liver enzymes: Undergo liver enzyme tests if you have fatty liver disease.
- Avoid receiving live virus vaccines: Note that people who have undergone a liver transplantation ought not to receive live virus vaccines.