One-Step Dengue NS1 Ag Rapid Test
The One Step Dengue NS1 Ag Test is a rapid chromatographic
immunoassay for the qualitative detection of dengue virus NS1
antigen in serum or plasma and whole blood to aid in the diagnosis
of Dengue viral infection.
Dengue is transmitted by the bite of an Aedes mosquito infected
with any one of the four dengue viruses. It occurs in tropical and
sub-tropical areas of the world. Symptoms appear 3—14 days after
the infective bite. Dengue fever is a febrile illness that affects
infants, young children and adults. Dengue haemorrhagic fever
(fever, abdominal pain, vomiting, bleeding) is a potentially lethal
complication, affecting mainly children. Early clinical diagnosis
and careful clinical management by experienced physicians and
nurses increase survival of patients. One step Dengue NS1 Ag Test
is a simple, visual qualitative test that detects dengue virus NS1
antigen in human serum or plasma. The test is based on
immunochromatography and can give a result within 15 minutes.
PRINCIPLE OF THE PROCEDURE
The One Step Dengue NS1 Ag Test is a qualitative membrane strip
based immunoassay for the detection of dengue virus NS1 antigen in
serum or plasma and whole blood. In this test procedure,
anti-Dengue NS1 antibody is immobilized in the test line region of
the device. After a Serum or plasma or blood specimen is placed in
the specimen well, it reacts with anti-Dengue NS1 antibody coated
particles that have been applied to the specimen pad. This mixture
migrates chromatographically along the length of the test strip and
interacts with the immobilized anti-Dengue NS1 antibody. If the
specimen contains dengue virus NS1 antigen, a colored line will
appear in the test line region indicating a positive result. If the
specimen does not contain dengue virus NS1 antigen, a colored line
will not appear in this region indicating a negative result. To
serve as a procedural control, a colored line will always appear at
the control line region indicating that proper volume of specimen
has been added and membrane wicking has occurred..
REAGENTS AND MATERIALS SUPPLIED
1.Test cards/ test strips individually foil pouched with a
MATERIALS REQUIRED BUT NOT PROVIDED
3.Specimen Collection Containers
RAGE AND STABILITY
1.Store unused kit at 2 - 30°C.
2.Store test cards/strips at 2 - 30°C and away from direct
WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS
1.For professional in vitro diagnostic use only. Do not use after
2.Do not eat, drink or smoke in the area where the specimens and
kits are handled.
3.Handle all specimens as if they contain infectious agents.
4.Observe established precautions against microbiological hazards
throughout all procedures and follow the standard procedures for
proper disposal of specimens.
5.Wear protective clothing such as laboratory coats, disposable
gloves and eye protection when specimens are assayed.
6.Follow standard biosafety guidelines for handling and disposal of
potential y infective material.
7.Humidity and temperature can adversely affect results
SAMPLE COLLECTION AND PREPARATION
1.The One Step Dengue NS1 Ag Test can be performed used on Serum or
plasma and whole blood.
2.To collect whole blood, serum or plasma specimens following
regular clinical laboratory procedures.
3.Separate serum or plasma from blood as soon as possible to avoid
hemolysis. Use only clear non-hemolyzed specimens.
4.Testing should be performed immediately after specimen
collection. Do not leave the specimens at room temperature for
prolonged periods. Serum and plasma specimens may be stored at 2-8℃
for up to 3 days. For long term storage, specimens should be kept
5.Bring specimens to room temperature prior to testing. Frozen
specimens must be completely thawed and mixed well prior to
testing. Specimens should not be frozen and thawed repeatedly.
Contact Rebecca Yan