The Principal Chief Conservator of Forests,
Government of Goa
The inclusion of Goa in the nomination of Western Ghats as a UNESCO World Heritage Site
India had submitted the nomination dossier for inscription of 39 serial sites in the Western Ghats in the States of Kerala, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and Maharashtra to the UNESCO World Heritage Centre (WHC) in Paris, in February 2010. But sadly and surprisingly, Goa was not included in this dossier.
Goa has been blessed with the Western Ghats mountain range which passes through the states of Maharashtra, Goa, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and Kerala, and further into Sri Lanka. The Western Ghats was designated as one of the 18 ecological hotspots in the world at the United Nations Earth Summit held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil in 1992. This international designation put the Western Ghats on par with the rainforests of the Amazon, Congo and Indonesia and other countries. In addition to being a reservoir of botanical and zoological wealth, the Western Ghats is also one of the last refuges of the elephant and India’s national animal, the Royal Bengal Tiger. It is also the catchment area of the south west monsoon and is a watershed for all of Goa’s rivers and tributaries which are the life-lines of Goa’s fishing and farming communities.
It is therefore extremely surprising to note that the nomination dossier submitted by the Ministry of Environment and Forests (MOEF) consists of 39 sites from Maharashtra, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and Kerala but it excludes the state of Goa. Prior to India submitting the proposal to the World Heritage Committee, Paris in February 2010, the MOEF had asked Goa for its participation. The Goa state government neither concurred with the application to UNESCO, nor did it supply any information on Goa’s protected areas viz. Mhadei, Bhagwaan Mahavir, Netravali and Cotigao to the MOEF. At the 35th session of the WHC which was held in Paris from 19th to 29th June 2011, India’s delegates Dr. Vinod Mathur, Dr. Kishwan and Shri A.K. Srivastava interacted with the delegates of the 21 member WHC to highlight the strengths of India’s proposal. Eleven countries led by Egypt and Brazil and followed by Australia, Bahrain, Barbados, Cambodia, China, Jordan, Nigeria, Russia and South Africa supported India’s proposal and moved it from “deferral” to a “referral” status. It is distressing to note that when the Indian delegation to UNESCO has to struggle against all odds to bring pride to the country and lobby hard on behalf of the nation for the nomination’s success, the Government of Goa does not even provide any information and refuses to participate and bring further value to this endeavor.
The deadline for revision of India's existing "Tentative List of Properties" by including the sites from Goa is January, 2012 and this time we expect to see Goa included.
In support of Goa’s first Tiger Reserve
Furthermore, on June 28th, the then Minister of Environment and Forests Mr. Jairam Ramesh who has led the nomination process at UNESCO, wrote a letter to the Chief Minister of Goa asking him to take immediate steps on submitting a proposal for the Mhadei Wildlife Sanctuary (WLS) to be brought under the National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA). It was one of the last things the Hon'ble minister did before moving onto the Ministry of Rural Development.
The importance of Goa is elaborated on page # 133 and 134 of the report titled "Status of Tigers, Co-Predators and Prey in India (2010)" which was prepared and put together by a dedicated team of wildlife biologists and scientists of Wildlife Institute of India and MOEF.
Mhadei Wild Life Sanctuary, the first Tiger Reserve of Goa, would be a matter of pride for all Goans - in Goa and abroad. But the Goa government has not taken any steps towards this objective.
We, the undersigned members of the Goan Diaspora, urgently call upon the Government of Goa to take immediate steps to provide information to the Indian delegation to UNESCO, so that Goa can be included in the nomination dossier to UNESCO World Heritage Committee and also to submit the Tiger Reserve proposal to the MOEF as requested by Shri Jairam Ramesh per his letter dated 28th June 2011. Please treat this matter as urgent.
The UNESCO PETITION TEAM
Sign the Petition here:
Please enter your details here:
To view the current list of signatories, click here.
You will be asked for to confirm your details before your name appears on the public list. The automated response may end in your spam folder so do check it. If you experience problems, do write to email@example.com