Chapter1: What is Bullying? Chapter2: We Need To Stop It Chapter3: Alex Libby Chapter4: Jackie Chan
We need to stop bullying because many kids are getting suicidal thoughts and actions. Bullying is a bad thing to do to someone; it may hurt their feelings. The kids that are getting bullied are going to think it's okay for them to bully other little kids, and it continues until one little three or two-year-old kid slaps a baby in the face, and the mom of the toddler picks him up and tells him to go sit in the corner for a timeout him and says that is bad. Then the toddler starts to cry and it's just a whole mess of tears, and runny noses. When bullying happens, it's not okay what they are doing, but instead of putting yourself in harm's way and standing up to them and trying to hurt them with your fists or trying to kick them, you could warn an adult about it and they could take care of it.For, if you do interfere with the bully he/she will give you a major beating and then you will have to go home and explain to your mother why you have a bloody nose and a black eye.See look what could happen if we let bullying happen, so please if you find someone or if you are getting bullied, then tell your mother/father or any adult that will stop the bullying. "if you can't, fly, then run, if you can't, run then walk, if you can't walk then crawl, but whatever you do, you have to keep moving forward." --- Martin Luther King, Jr.
Alex Libby was a victim of bullying all his life until 8th grade when he didn't get bullied. When he did get bullied, it just wasn't verbal bullying, but it was physical as well. In the physical bullying, he was hit, strangled, and tackled. While he was getting bullied, his mother tried talking to the school staff, but nothing changed.He still got bullied all up until his 8th-grade year when he didn't get bullied.There was another family who's son died from suicide due to bullying, and they reached out to help Alex Libby. This family pushed for conversations about bullying and that bullying was happening at his school. All that time getting bullied for the two years straight, he got hit or punched, strangled and even worse tackled while the teachers did nothing about it because they had no idea of what was happening."I would rather be a little nobody than to be an evil somebody." --- Abraham Lincoln