Workshops for All Ages
| Specialized Workshops | Workshops
for Educators & Parents | School Assemblies
| Artist Residencies
Workshops for All Ages
hands-on workshops increase participants' creativity and confidence,
while sharpening language and music skills. Designed for smaller
groups, workshops generally last 45-90 minutes. In some settings
they may meet more than once.
The Author's Story*
Hear the stories behind Steve's stories... where his ideas come
from... how early versions are developed into the final books...
thoughts for young writers on developing their own stories. Excellent
for combining with Performances, Author Visit or Book Signing.
Living Poet Society
Nearly every writer knows the benefits of an attentive listener
and encouraging coach. In this workshop, Steve works with selected
students on their own emerging stories, poems, and musical compositions.
Key skills include learning to express what we really mean and finding
creative solutions when we're stuck. Ideal as part of an Artist
Residency or Author Visit.
Roots of Rhythm & Harmony*
workshop of rounds, chants and canons that teach the roots of rhythm
and harmony. The level of complexity is appropriate to group's age
and ability. Songs range from medieval canons to chants with motions,
sign language, and "non-pitch-critical" rounds that are
fun even for those who don't consider themselves singers. Excellent
for developing music and math skills.
The Art of Storytelling
This ancient art comes alive as participants experience Steve's
storytelling and begin working on their own storytelling skills.
Excellent for developing writing, memory and speaking abilities.
Click here for suggested Storytelling
Art of Songwriting I & II
Format I: Explore the steps from writing a song to arranging and
recording it. Students go behind the scenes on one of Steve's recorded
songs to learn the different parts that go into it.
Format II: Create an original song complete with lyrics
and music. The group can either work on a song together, or individuals
may work on their own. (Meets three times.)
on the Loose*
This workshop offers a liberating look at the many different violin
sounds and styles from Bach to Bluegrass, Irish to Jazz. Steve will
perform some of his own compositions, offer ideas on various influences
and creativity, and engage students in a discussion based on their
own questions and observations. If desired, the workshop may be
structured as a master class, with students playing (or improvising)
some of their music too. Ideal for orchestra or band students and
Funding & Resources
Recommended bibliography, handouts, and other resources are provided,
along with Steve's own recordings and songbooks. These are excellent
for in-service teacher training. Funding may be available from Eisenhower
Title II grants, Title VI, and other sources.
For more options, see Specialized
Workshops. See also Workshops for Educators
*Offered both as a smaller
workshop and as a keynote address (for larger groups).