Deliberate Practice 6
By Scott Sterling Grit has become a buzzword in the education community. It falls in with the conative skills that we discuss occasionally—skills that are not academic by nature, but important in the cognitive and academic growth of a student. To be sure, perseverance is important. An effective teacher’s classroom becomes one of the most […]
By Scott Sterling A recent study by TNTP, formerly The New Teacher Project, was covered by the Wall Street Journal and others under a headline that teacher professional development is, as a whole, ineffective. But if you dig deeper into the study, you can see that there are research-based findings that concerted, intensive professional development—including […]
By Scott Sterling In education, Twitter has become as indispensable a tool as we have. Its implications are wide-ranging. It can help: Teachers bring the outside world into the classroom Students practice important writing skills Educators from all over the world connect with each other That’s a lot of tasks for only 140 characters. […]
By Scott Sterling As a teacher, you’re used to observations, especially if you work in a Marzano-inspired system. You do your best to prepare, but sometimes things just don’t go as planned. Perhaps a projector bulb blows, a more challenging student had extra Nutella with breakfast, or it’s just that the lesson fell flat. It […]
By Scott Sterling The great teachers, and those on the way to achieving greatness, view their craft as a process—and processes should always lead to improvement. The strategies and steps you take in that process are what make up deliberate practice. However, if you think deliberate practice can only be accomplished through two old-fashioned tools—data […]
By Scott Sterling The story of Michael Jordan, the greatest basketball player to ever put on sneakers, being cut from his high school basketball team has reached the stuff of legend (a legend that’s true, but legend nonetheless). It’s a story of perseverance—and practice. The story has implications for any skill that requires effort toward […]
Make this the most engaging school year ever.
Boost morale and encourage teamwork
with the SOAR School-Year Theme Kit.
RESERVE YOURS TODAY
Cultivating Coaching Mindsets
By Rita M. Bean & Jacy Ippolito