Women are more likely than Men are to develop the disease, in part because they live longer. Alzheimer’s disease (AD) was first described in 1906 by German neurologist Alois Alzheimer.
Alzheimer’s (AHLZ-high-merz) is a disease of the brain that causes problems with memory, thinking and behavior. It is not a normal part of aging.
Making mealtimes easier
Alzheimer’s and eating can be a challenge. Understand what causes eating
problems and take simple steps to ensure good nutrition.
By Mayo Clinic staff
Alzheimer’s disease and eating challenges often go hand in hand. As
Alzheimer’s progresses, poor nutrition can aggravate confusion and lead to
physical weakness, as well as increase the risk of infection and other health
concerns. If you’re caring for a loved one who has Alzheimer’s, understand
what causes eating problems and take steps to optimize good nutrition.
Researchers found that foods rich in vitamin E were associated with a reduced risk of developing Alzheimer’s disease. Those foods include oil-based salad dressings, fortified cereals, green leafy vegetables, cantaloupe, seeds and nuts.
Walnuts, Coffee, Blueberries, Coconut Oil, Salmon, Elderberries, Pecans, Beets, Vegetable Juice, Omega 3, Peanut Butter, Whole Grain, Cumin, Turmeric, Avocados, Rhubarb, Sardanes, Chocolate, Water, Almonds, Oats, Red Wine, Tea, Grapes, Apples, Tuna, Bok Choy, Cashews, Tomatoes, Brussels Sprouts
Tweet Us: @zekhealth, @zekelhealthcare
One recent line of research suggests that frequent stress may even boost the risk for Alzheimer’s disease. A new study headed by scientists at the University of California at San Diego showed that repeated stress triggered brain changes in mice that were similar to the abnormal clumps of protein seen in the brains of Alzheimer’s patients. The changes were most pronounced in the hippocampus. In humans, this part of the brain plays a key role in memory and is hard hit by Alzheimer’s disease. For people with Alzheimer’s Disease and other Dementias music, especially familiar songs, unlocks memories; participation in music improves communication, overcomes withdrawal. For people with Parkinson’s Disease and other movement disorders, moving to music helps improve, balance and range of motion.