Do you agree with the key principles of equity why or why not?
After reading “Key Principles of Equity” by Edwin Lou Javuis, Ed.D., I would have to agree to these key values. Awareness, attitudes, and analysis are what I believe to be crucial stepping stones to ensuring educational excellence. When an educator is fully aware of the community they serve in, and the student body that make up the community, school and classroom, it brings forth a sense of identity alertness that empowers the community in which the educator serves. Being culturally aware changes the dynamic of the classroom and environment in which the students inhabit. As a part of 75% Mindset, I believe it is imperative to be in the right attitude to successfully lead a classroom that is culturally diverse. Students in a diverse classroom are depending on the teacher to lead and provide quality instruction and support them morally. In order to ensure this, having the right attitude that all students can succeed and holding all students to high expectations is important in a culturally competent classroom.
In our 21st century world, we are becoming more diverse by the day, hour, minute and second. The nation we live in is growing beautifully in different schemes of color, language, and practices. As an educator, I see the same in my diversely populated classroom with multiple languages being spoken such as Russian, Chinese, and Arabic. Holding all students to high expectations “regardless of their skin color, cultural background, or previous learning challenges” (___) is doing the students a favor and having this equity based attitude will take students far.
25% Strategies listed in the key principles of equity is equally important as the 75% Mindset. After having a clear gasp of the mindset of equity, taking actions to ensure all students are reaching grade level standards such as providing the same resources, learning opportunities and treatment for each student is pivotal in a child’s learning, especially in a culturally diverse school. In order for students in a culturally competent classroom to succeed, I believe an enriched education in a culturally competent classroom consists of differentiated instruction and activities that are constructed around the needs of students’ learning while incorporating culture to bridge meaning between home and school experiences. It is important for students to see that teachers are at least trying to incorporate culture into school curriculum. While all teachers are to be held accountable for their teaching practices and reaching grade level standards, I believe teachers in culturally conscious classrooms are more sensitive to being “actively involved in creating equity-based environments for all students to exceed achievement and performance targets” (Edwin Lou Javius, Ed.D). As a culturally conscious educator, holding yourself accountable can make a tremendous difference to a child’s learning. When you establish accountability in a culturally diverse classroom, you fight and fight until you see your students succeed academically and perform at or above grade level benchmarks.
Determine your beliefs about equity and equality and how they impact education?
My belief on equity and equality is that both equity and equality are equally valuable principles that should be recognized by all educators and utilized to its maximum potential to positively impact schools. With equity and equality, there comes culturally responsive teaching and I believe using the value of cultural responsiveness in diverse schools empowers the students. However, to keep the function of cultural responsive teaching effective and positively impact education, we as educators must not lose sight of staying committed to ensuring fairness and maximizing opportunity for accessed experience in school for our students.