Elementary school assemblies are an important part of a school's culture. Not only do they foster a sense of community and increase school spirit, but they are a great way to impart information to the entire school at the same time. Most elementary schools strive to have at least one assembly per quarter, but this can vary by school. Assemblies can be informative, fun, educational or all three.
Hold a pep assembly to foster school spirit. Although elementary schools do not have Homecoming games or dances, they have mascots and school spirit. Hold the assembly to kick off the beginning of the school year, or to start a contest such as a holiday door-decorating competition. Have chanting contests between the grades (ask classes to sit in sections by grade). Ask each teacher ahead of time to randomly select one boy and one girl to compete in a game, such as a race against a teacher. Handicap the teacher by tying his or her legs together, or ask the teacher to crawl. Have each classroom create a poster that best exemplifies the theme of the school year, and have the students vote for the best one by clapping as loud as they can.
Hold an assembly to honor those students who have perfect attendance, straight A's or who show outstanding character and judgment. Give out special certificates to reward the students. Also honor those students who participated in a club or other organization, or who were on a sports team. This is a good assembly to have at the end of the year. Invite the parents and finish the assembly with a rousing rendition of the school's song.
Hold an assembly to introduce a fundraiser, such as a walk-a-thon. Explain the fundraiser and introduce any contests that may be happening along with the fundraiser, such as a prize for the students who walk at least 15 laps around the track during the walk-a-thon. Ask the teachers to demonstrate the "right" way and the "wrong" way to walk, and make sure the "wrong" way inspires hilarity.
Hold an assembly to welcome a holiday. For example, at Halloween, hold a costume contest. Assign each grade a theme, and see which one best demonstrates the theme. Hold a pumpkin carving race or contest between teachers and the principal during the assembly. See which grade level can make the loudest ghost noises. A winter holidays assembly could feature the singing of non-religious carols and the throwing of "snowballs" (crumpled pieces of paper). Ask the students to write their names on the paper, crumple it up and throw it. Whichever "snowball" goes the farthest (or lands in a hula hoop) wins a prize.
Special Event Assemblies
Celebrate other special events with assemblies. Many elementary schools participate in special reading activities and competitions during the annual "Read Across America" day held each year in March. Have a "read in" and fill the entire gym or cafeteria with children sitting on pillows and quietly reading books. Other special event assemblies could include a science assembly (many large museums have traveling science teachers who will come to your school and put on a "science show"), a performance group such as a children's puppet theater, or a presentation by a recycling company on starting a recycling program at the school.