The filling material we use is a strong composite resin which is tooth colored used to fill teeth that have decay, defects, or chipping. These fillings come in a range of shades to help us create the most natural appearing restoration.
Crowns are covers or caps that fit securely over badly damaged, cracked, chipped, or stained teeth. By covering the entire surface area of a tooth, crowns are able to strengthen that tooth, and restore its function. They can be fabricated in a variety of materials from very esthetic porcelains to strong and durable gold crowns.
Root Canal Therapy
When teeth are broken or have very large decay. The nerve, also called dental pulp, can be exposed or infected and cause severe pain. Without treatment, the nerve of the tooth will eventually die and infection can spread. Root canal therapy is a procedure designed to save such damaged teeth. During the procedure, the injured nerve is removed and the roots are cleaned. The roots are sealed with a filler material and in most cases the tooth is then permanently sealed with a crown, restoring its strength, function, and appearance. Contrary to popular belief, a Root Canal should not be a painful procedure under local anesthetic.
A tooth extraction is performed in cases where a tooth is too severely damaged to repair. Extractions are also recommended if a tooth is crowding other teeth, impacted (often times found with wisdom teeth), or causing bite problems.
Dental implants replace missing teeth. They are artificial roots made of titanium, which is very bio compatible. We work with a specialist who places this root portion of the implant. Once healed, we take an impression of the area and make the tooth portion, or the crown. They are connected b something called an abutment. Implants serve as artificial teeth and prevent bone loss and protect your remaining teeth from shifting. The implant restoration eliminates embarrassing gaps and helps with function and look as if you had a natural tooth.
Bridges are recommended when a patient is not a candidate for an implant. It requires an anchor tooth on either side of a space and they are prepared for crowns. The two crowns are adjoined with an artificial tooth in the middle.