Individual differences |
Methods | Statistics | Clinical | Educational | Industrial | Professional items | World psychology |
A monosexual is someone who is sexually attracted to one sex (or gender) only, monosexuality being this capacity for attraction or sexual orientation. A monosexual can be either heterosexual or homosexual. The term is fairly uncommon, mostly used in discussions of bisexuality to denote everyone other than bisexuals (with the exception of asexuals, who are sexually attracted to no-one). It is sometimes considered derogatory.
The proportion of people who fit into the category depends on how one uses the word. If the term is used to mean exclusively monosexual, then according to Alfred Kinsey's controversial studies, only 5% to 10% of people are in this group. If the term is used in a non-exclusive sense the proportion would be lower and many people think that Kinsey's figure is too low, saying that no-one is exclusively monosexual, and that the 90 to 95% testing as such were just in denial or closeted because of biphobia. Freud thought that no one was born monosexual and that it had to be taught by parents or society though most people appear to believe that monosexuals are in fact the majority and identify as such.
Fred Maus (2004, p.164) compares the criticism of Béla Bartók's works for their use of tonality and nontonal methods unique to each piece to the bias towards monosexuality and against bisexuality (see biphobia).
The term “monosexuality” has also been used to describe the sexuality of people who only wish to have sex with one specific person, regardless of gender.  This becomes important when considering partners that choose to remain in their relationship with a transsexual or transgender person. Note that this meaning is quite contradictory to the usual meaning of the term, since someone who chooses to remain in such a relationship cannot reasonably be considered either homosexual or heterosexual.
- Maus, Fred (2004). "Sexual and Musical Categories", The Pleasure of Modernist Music. ISBN 1580461433.
|This page uses Creative Commons Licensed content from Wikipedia (view authors).|