Written by Dev Bhakta
The issue at the forefront for ECOSOC was how to end world hunger. Many of the solutions were centered around the same idea with different solutions but ultimately the differences finally came together and a resolution was passed.
One of the major differences that divided delegates was the issue of dependency and self sustainability. The delegate for Germany went as far to state “Dependency is failure.” However other delegates believed that extensive foreign aid is necessary. Even the United Kingdom delegate saw an issue that if Syria fell into dependency, there would be no self sufficiency. Algeria in their plan set up an international plan targeting to help farmers. By facilitating agriculture they believed that hunger in developing nations would ultimately decrease. Other nations saw the issue of corruption needing to be weeded out in order for solutions for ending hunger to be successful. The link between corruption and food supply was argued as delegates believed domestic corruption does not allow for an equal allocation of food. By weeding out corruption all citizens would have an equal opportunity to food.
Furthermore another contentious part that delayed a passing resolution was the issue of technology and education. The delegates from Japan believed that it was important to give technology to rural areas in order for them to develop modern agricultural practices which would allow local citizens to be fed. India saw this as difficult as it would difficult for rural areas to implement this modern areas. Their suggestion along with Algeria proposed an initiative on education allowing citizens to learn about agricultural techniques and implement it themselves.
An issue such as world hunger needs to be fought worldwide. “Poor nutrition causes nearly half (45%) of deaths in children under five - 3.1 million children each year.” Although nearly the vast majority of world hunger comes from undeveloped countries, there needs to be a global initiative to end world hunger. Without this undeveloped countries have no resources to distribute food to their citizens. Developed countries need to use their advantage, as wealthier and more technically advanced than others, to help fight this. Ultimately this was the final straw as when this issue was finally settled, as the final resolution that passed had a global initiative to end hunger, a sense of hopefulness was present as world hunger could possibly end.