the definition of a rainbow in an old Blackie's Standard Shilling Dictionary !! ( with coloured plates...that are gorgeous picked up at the local Restore for 50c ..I love it!) is
RAINBOW (noun) An arc of a circle, consisting of all the prismatic
colours appearing in the heavens opposite the sun.
..love those words!
A 1935 Thorndike Junior Dictionary definition....
RAINBOW 1. a bow or arch of seven colours seen sometimes in the sky, or in mist or spray, when the sun shines on it from behind one. The colours of the rainbow are violet, indigo, blue, green, yellow, orange and red. 2.having many colours like a rainbow. noun. adjective.
The Good Spelling Dictionary circa 1964 definition...
RAINBOW noun. arc in sky containing colours of the spectrum, formed by reflection of sunbeams from falling rain.
Just when you thought it couldn't be more beautiful these little clouds drifted through!!
When you think about it there are very few ordinary days when nature has such daily delights.
The mornings and evenings are starting to have an autumnal feel about them...we had a 6 deg frost on Friday morning...the lawn was white and crisp..too early for this...luckily nothing was too frost bitten. The butterbeans are ready and the rosehips ripening, the white berried rowan tree shared some of her berries with me for the house.
The man of the house was away for the week at a conference in the North Island, a darling friend came to stay and gave me a Willow pattern, prettily faded cloth that is just perfect under my Asiatic Pheasants faded looking china ashette...
...some other friends popped by with this rosy posy..
..it looks most at home on the table with Tasha Tudor and she would have loved it.
Finally got my lavender picked ready for drying.
My tiny Hydrangea Paniculata yielded a couple of it's first flowers....my large heavenly previous paniculata sadly is no more after a case of mistaken identity !!! by the man of the house wielding a chainsaw!!!! was very sad at the time....NEVER trust a man with a chainsaw in your garden unsupervised!!!!
Tonight it has got dark quite early and there is a lovely moon..time to be tucked up in bed.
The moon was but a chin of gold
a night or two ago,
And now she turns her perfect face
Upon the world below.
Her forehead is of amplest blond;
Her cheek like beryl stone;
Her eye unto the summer dew
The likest I have known.
Her lips of amber never part;
But what must be the smile
Upon her friend she could bestow
Were such her silver will!
And what a privilege to be
But the remotest star!
For certainly her way might pass
Beside your twinkling door.
Her bonnet is the firmament,
The universe her shoe,
The stars the trinkets at her belt,
Her dimities of blue.