Do you remember the Permian? No, it is not some mid 20th century hairstyling system.
No, of course you don’t remember. You weren’t around on this planet some 250 million years ago, so how could you.
Or perhaps you and I were a part of that scene if my reading of Rosicrucian and other cosmological systems is correct. Something that I do not place a great deal of faith in but which I accept as one possibility among many. If we were actually there then it might have been as a member of quite a different life form. Perhaps as a mineral, or a plant, or an insect, or even as one of the higher vertebrate animal life-forms of the time.
No matter. Well… no matter for the purposes of this post at least. Perhaps I will expand those thoughts further some other time. If there is time.
If you and I were actually present in some form during the Permian then we would have experienced the most ancient mass extinction of life that this planet has experienced for which we have geological records. Not necessarily the oldest extinction event in the history of our world. After all, 250 million years is a small period, geologically speaking, in the overall span of its planetary existence.
This event is now known as the Permian Extinction Event or The Great Dying in which most life on Earth ceased to exist. Not to be confused with the Jurassic (200 million years ago) or Cretaceous (65 million years ago) almost equally devastating extinctions. Of course, things changed and life went on, or we would not be here now. The planet is self-renewing. It can look after itself. But the fact remains that planetary extinctions are recurring events.
Yes, many species were extinguished at the end of the Permian and other historical periods, but they were replaced by other new species. That is the way things are. Species come into being. They flourish for a while. Then they die off. Become extinct. And the circle goes on. At least as far as we can tell.
Human beings, homo sapiens, are a species. Some would like to think that we are somehow special. Normal rules of life don’t apply to us. Who do we think we are? We are sentient beings. We are the current dominant species on the planet. We can do whatever we like. Don’t worry, be happy! Technology is our forte. We can invent our way out of any situation that confronts us.
Perhaps we can. Perhaps not. George Carlin sums it up nicely …well, as nicely as he can!
Perhaps we are special. Perhaps not. Perhaps the non-human part of us, that spark of life that separates us from other life forms, is special. Perhaps it will go on living for ever. Finding, or maybe even creating ever more advanced species to inhabit. On this world or perhaps even on other worlds.
One thing remains true. Homo sapiens is a species. We have come into being. We have flourished for a while. We will die off. Become extinct. At some stage.
I don’t want to frighten you …well, yes I do …a little bit. There are genuine earth scientists today who think that the time of our demise has now come. They have recently concluded that planet Earth is about to go through another extinction event of similar or greater magnitude to the previous Permian event that I have just brought to your attention. The scary thing is that they have calculated that this will happen in your lifetime. Actually within the next thirty to forty years. Don’t believe me? Read this!
If you can’t be bothered reading all of the evidence in that document, just read this paragraph extract:
“Giant fountains/torches/plumes of methane entering the atmosphere up to 1 km across have been seen on the East Siberian Shelf. This methane eruption data is so consistent and aerially extensive that when combined with methane gas warming potentials, Permian extinction event temperatures and methane lifetime data it paints a frightening picture of the beginning of the now uncontrollable global warming induced destabilization of the subsea Arctic methane hydrates on the shelf and slope which started in late 2010. This process of methane release will accelerate exponentially, release huge quantities of methane into the atmosphere and lead to the demise of all life on earth before the middle of this century.”
The basis for these conclusions is scientific research carried out over the last decade, culminating with recent events in and around the Arctic Circle in the last month or so of this year.
The question is: Why hasn’t your government told you about this dire situation? Ask yourself why your bank manager, spiritual or religious advisor, local police chief, business leaders, defence chiefs, newspaper editor, environmentalists or mining magnate have not been in touch to tell you the news.
Let’s just say, you heard it here first.
The same scientists who announced this story have also been working on geo-engineering solutions to prevent or mitigate what they have predicted and have called on the rest of the world to get behind that huge task before it is too late. Also they have called on all developed nations to immediately stop producing all greenhouse gas emissions.
Personally I think that the chances of those calls being answered positively is about zero. I also think that any attempt to fix this technologically will utterly fail. The best we can do is to gently accept our fate and gracefully live out our lives as peacefully and simply as we can. Let this be our last and greatest generation ever to have lived. I advise all young women not to have children. You will be unnecessarily condemning them to horrifying suffering. Thankfully I expect that I will not be around for the worst of the inferno to come. My heart goes out to my own children who, in their middle years, will suffer intolerably. I am sorry. If I had known years ago that this was coming, I would not have started a family. I guess most parents reading this would say the same.
I am happy that the decision I made years ago to move to Australia will probably give my family a few extra years of life. According to the forecast outcomes, the southern hemisphere will have ten to fifteen years of possible existence longer than the northern hemisphere will. Also that the Antarctic continent (which will presumably br ice free by then) will be the least affected area on the globe, possibly providing shelter for some folk.
Is this what the 2012 mystery is all about? Is this the watershed year that humanity as a species becomes aware of its predicament? Is this the year that we come together globally to jointly attempt to turn the tide of history? Will some miracle save us? Will we jointly experience some mass evolutionary jump as some predict? All nice thoughts. I don’t think any of these things will occur but I am open to being surprised.
Has this knowledge altered my thinking? Yes it has. But I don’t intend to let it alter my life in any major way. I am already living a fairly simple life and am prepared to see it over time become an ever more basic existence. Until the end is reached, when it will be a case of: “Goodbye Cruel World. I’m Off To Join The Circus.”