“WISeKey” stands for “World Internet Security” the ‘e’ being a mnemonic symbol for electronic and “Key” representing the root-based Public Key Infrastructure (“PKI”). WISeKey is a digital information security, authentication, and identity management company. WISeKey uses distributed root-based PKI, known as their Root of Trust “RoT”, to secure electronic information via their proprietary, world-wide digital certificate technology. A digital certificate can be analogized to an electronic ‘credit card’ used to establish your credentials when conducting business or other online transactions. It can contain information such as your name, a serial number, expiration dates, a copy of the certificate holder’s public key (used for encrypting messages and digital signatures), and the digital signature of the certificate-issuing authority (CA), such as QuoVadis, so that a recipient can verify that the certificate is real.
WISeKey’ s digital certificates and dual factor authentication are accepted worldwide and the Swiss –based technology is recognized as being ‘neutral’ when compared to certificates issued by governments and global companies. Their digital certificates are provided to and used by both public and private organizations (i.e., by the organizations’ CAs) to identify the authenticity of individuals and electronic transactions. WISeKey’s cryptographic RoT can work without proprietary hardware (e.g., it can be used by a web browser). Or, RoT be embedded into a microprocessor -based “chip”, such as Vault ICs technology, that is itself embedded into a card (e.g., contact cards such as credit cards or contactless cards such as a wireless access ID card) or devices (e.g., IoT devices, smart watch networking equipment, shipping package).For example, using cryptographic RoT embedded technology, IoT product manufacturers can use code-signing certificates and a cloud-based signature as a service to secure interactions among objects and between objects and people.
The OISTE/WISeKey RoT serves as a common trust anchor, which is recognized by operating systems (OS) and IoT applications to ensure the authenticity, confidentiality and integrity of on-line transactions. With the cryptographic RoT embedded on a device, the IoT product manufacturers can use code-signing certificates and a cloud-based signature-as-a-service or on a blockchain to secure interactions among and between objects and people. These unique features on the WISeKey platform are vital in opening up multiple business opportunities with various governments, international bodies, industrial companies which are wary of foreign government oversight and centralization of data on servers outside their jurisdiction.