The Donkey’s Role
Daily Bible Reading – Esther 9, 10; Luke 19
Today’s Key Passage – Luke 19:28-44
Last week, we read Zechariah’s prophecy that the Messiah would ride into Jerusalem on a donkey’s colt. (Zechariah 9:9) In today’s key passage, Jesus made his triumphant entry into Jerusalem fulfilling this prophecy. Jesus knew what He was going to face in Jerusalem. He knew He would be degraded, beaten, and ultimately killed, but He went there anyway because this was the will of the Father. This was God’s ultimate plan for humanity. As He entered Jerusalem on that donkey, the crowd, familiar with Zechariah’s words, rejoiced at the coming of their King. They spread their cloaks and palm branches along the road and shouted, “Blessed is the king who comes in the name of the Lord!” and “Peace in heaven and glory in the highest!” (19:38) Of course, a short time later these same people would yell, “Crucify him!” (23:21), but it must have been quite a site to see Jesus on the donkey that day.
While preaching about this story, I once heard a pastor ask the question, “What if the donkey thought all of the praise and shouting that day was for him?” While it is humorous to humanize a donkey in this way and imagine what he might have been thinking on that fateful day, it does bring up an interesting point. See, the donkey needed to know his role. He needed to understand that all of the fanfare of that moment had absolutely nothing to do with him. No one was shouting because of what he was doing, they were shouting about what Jesus was doing. The donkey was simply there to lift up Jesus. Ironically, our role is exactly the same as the donkey. We are not here on this earth to receive shouts of joy and praise. We are not here to see fanfare based on what we are doing. Our role in this life is simply to lift up Jesus. Let us all be like the donkey today, and lift Him up for the praise He deserves.
During your Bible reading today, what “key passages” stood out to you? Leave a comment below to share what God is showing you about His Word today.
To become a fan of The Daily Bible Plan’s Facebook Page, CLICK HERE.
To follow me on Twitter for inspirational tweets, click the follow button – Follow @kevin_griggs
If you like this post, please SHARE it with others to spread the Word of God.
May the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with you today.