Animal Farm and the Russian Revolution have many similarities and ideas. The characters, settings, and the plots are the same. In addition Animal Farm is a satire and allegory of the Russian Revolution, George Orwell meant for it to be that way. My essay will cover the comparison between Animal Farm and the Russian Revolution. Also it will explain why this novel is a satire and allegory to the Revolution.First of all the characters of the farm have a special role in Russian Revolution. The farm itself represents Russia, with its poor conditions and irresponsible leaders. Napoleon, the mad dictator pig who plays Joseph Stalin in real life. Snowball, the leader who gets betrayed by Napoleon and plays Lenin, Old Major as Karl Marx. And who could forget the others like Boxer, who plays the working class, and Molly as white Russia, and of course
Mendez 2 the evil dogs of Napoleon who inspire the role as the secret police of Joseph Stalin. Both the novel and Russian Revolution cover the same ideas because of these reasons. In the Russian Revolution an irresponsible leader name “Nicholas the second” or how people in those days refer to him as “the Czar” was overthrown by a new leader with better ideas and ways to keep Russia alive, he was Lenin! But then he was betrayed by one of his communist comrades, Stalin. Stalin ruled for a great period of time, but everyone knows there is no such thing as immortality, and so he got kicked out too! This time by his own people. In Animal Farm a boar name “Old Major” has a dream about a world where animals rule, there are no differences, all equality, a dream about communism. This same thought applies with the idea of Stalin and his plan in ruling Russia. So when Snowball hears this him and his comrades get ready to attack the government, Mr. Jones (also known as “the Czar”). When he is overthrown Snowball becomes the leader and is betrayed by Napoleon. This event is when Stalin kicks out Lenin. Mendez 3
Animal Farm is a great example of a “Political Satire”. The novel was written to criticize the totalitarian regimes and particularly Stalin’s rule in Russia. In Chapter one its tells how the author, George Orwell, feels about the novel. Also it give reference to the farm and how it relates to Russia. But you can see all the satire in chapter two. It tells how inefficient of the idea “communism” does not work. Human nature can’t handle “communism”. We are too devious and too demanding for the things we want, we are “bossy”. From chapter two to the last chapter shows how the novel is a Satire and in the end has a conclusion that was shown in chapter two.
The characters, settings, and plot of Animal Farm is an “allegory” to the Russian Revolution. For example Napoleon symbolizes Joseph Stalin because they are both advocates of the devil and follow an idea of a certain race or species ruling everything.
The farm of course is Russia with their bad conditions and no good government. And last of all the plot tells about the same thing, dictatorship never works! Mendez 4
George Orwell has made good points in his novel. I think he’s a great and very smart writer because his novel was disguised as a children’s novel to a Revolution where if you spoke what you thought about it you would get executed. In conclusion I think Animal Farm is a great novel and not only did I learn about a group of Animals taking over a farm but I learned more about World War one history and Russia’s history.