History of Fly Screens
Woven wire for fly screens were referenced in the American Farmer in 1823. Advertisement for wire window fly screens appeared in Boyd's Blue Book in 1836. Two wire window fly screens were exhibited at Quincy Hall in Boston in 1839. In 1861 Gilbert, Bennett and Company was manufacturing wire mesh sieves for food processing. An employee realized that the wire cloth could be painted gray and sold as window fly screens and the product became an immediate success. On July 7, 1868, Bayley and McCluskey filed a U.S. Patent number 79541 for screened roof-top rail-car windows, allowing ventilation, while preventing "sparks, cinders, dust, etc." from entering the passenger compartment. By 1874, E.T. Barnum Company of Detroit advertised fly screens that were sold by the square foot. Apparently, window fly screens designed specifically to prevent insect entry were not patented in the United States, although by 1900 several patents were awarded for particular innovations related to window screen design. By the 1950s, parasitic diseases were largely eradicated in the United States in part due to the widespread use of fly screens. Today most houses in Australia, the United States and Canada have fly screens on all operable windows and doors . Fly screens are mandatory in any premises where food is stored, prepared, cooked, eaten or sold. Now they are a common sight in UK homes.
In the UK fly screens are fitted in all food preparation companies and retail food shops in the UK as required by The food safety (Food Hygiene) General Regulations 1995, states:
"...windows and doors which are opened to the outside environment must where necessary be fitted with insect proof screens..."
As with many products that start in the Industrial and commercial sector, fly screens have found their way to the domestic market. Whilst the UK does not have the volume of disease carrying insects as many countries, it only takes one insect to contaminate food and spread disease.
Nowadays fly screens are a popular choice for use in conservatories and sun rooms so that fresh air can be enjoyed without the nuisance of flying insects.
Fly screens are also well used in domestic kitchens so that the heat of the kitchen can be controlled by opening doors and windows and not have the fear of flying insects enjoying the fruits of your baking!
VIP Screens have a comprehensive range of effective fly screens to suit your home so check out our range.
The manufacturer of the aluminium chain has been producing the aluminium chain flyscreen for over 80 years.