The “Internet of Things” is heralded as bringing about a new, connected era in which all of our devices will be able to communicate with one another. Imagine smarter appliances, self-regulating energy systems, and more efficient public transportation, just for a start. But one area where we will really see the benefits of this new form of technology is in personal health and fitness. If you use an activity tracker like a FitBit, you’re already tapping into these benefits.
Here’s a rundown of how the Internet of Things could potentially transform the fitness industry.
What is the Internet of Things?
So what is the Internet of Things, anyway? This blanket term refers to the simple prospect of connecting everyday objects in our lives to the Internet. Connected, smart devices are able to both send and receive data. They are typically equipped with sensors allowing them to pick up this data, and then must be able to send the data over a central connection for analysis. In the case of the health and fitness industry, this involves fitness trackers.
Existing Fitness Devices
Although it’s often talked about as a future technology, the Internet of Things is already here, and can be utilized with the wealth of fitness trackers on the market today. These use sensors to track your exercise activity, sleep patterns, and caloric intake to generate data each day. For example, the Nike Fuel band tracks your hikes, runs, or daily walks and uploads this data to the Internet where you can see how many calories you’ve burned. You can download apps like RunKeeper, which works with your mobile phone’s GPS to collect data based on your actions. You can choose to share this information with your social networks and keep tabs on activity with an online dashboard.
Do you want to track your activity and sleep patterns? Devices like FitBit, Basis, and Jawbone UP wristband are all capable of not only tracking your heartbeats, steps, and caloric intake, but also your sleeping patterns. This lets you adjust your activity for a more efficient, restful result. Some also send you notifications if you’ve been slacking on your usual fitness routine, serving as a motivational tool.
The Future of Wearable Fitness Tech
The wearable tech that we already have only scratches the surface of what the Internet of Things will ultimately be capable of. Major businesses like Nokia Networks are working on devising new ways to stay connected via the IoT, and as a result, in the future we’ll see even more functions from our connected, smart devices. Wearable devices are just one piece of the puzzle, because the IoT involves far more than the devices themselves. It will also impact the supporting infrastructure for these devices, which is an area we’re only seeing the beginning changes of.
Future devices will be able to take health monitoring to the next level. Imagine smart devices that can constantly monitor your health and fitness, sending automatic alerts to your doctor if any irregularities arise. Early disease detection, weight management, and blood sugar monitoring could lead to increased longevity and a reduced strain on our healthcare systems. The basic fitness trackers we’re already using will be amped up and connected to a holistic healthcare network, keeping you fitter than ever.