In general, as part of the concept for transition of Kazakhstan to "green economy", the volume of electricity generated from renewable energy sources
is planned to reach 3 percent of the total volume of electricity by 2020 and 10 percent by 2030.
Azerbaijan has started to develop alternative energy sources
in recent years.
CARE has announced plans to produce 50 percent of its current energy needs used in power generation and water desalination from sustainable energy sources
by the year 2032, he said.
2 Power Market, Colombia, Cumulative Installed Capacity by Energy Sources
, 2011 152
With gas prices on and off campus hovering between $3 and $4 per gallon in the spring 2006 semester, college and university faculty and students planned summer field trips and academic practica focused on developing renewable energy sources
and solutions to bring back to campus in the fall.
We see an exciting and long term future in the production of renewable fuels and Alternative Energy Sources
will be helping to meet the significant ethanol demand caused by the shift away from oil energy dependence to a renewable carbohydrate based fuel source.
This means that power plants that previously used fossil fuels can not only benefit from any tax breaks or subsidies on offer for going green, they will also secure valuable carbon credits for switching to a renewable energy source
Where combustible biomass is the chief energy source
, life often revolves around an indoor cookstove or open fire that likely has no vent to the outdoors.
what possible "clean" and renewable alternate energy sources
are being considered.
Instead of investing in nuclear power, which just trades one set of problems for another, let's invest in renewable energy sources
like wind and solar energy.
While finding alternative energy sources
appeals to most people, proving that biomass plants can operate cleanly may ultimately be the harder sell.
The rise in prices spurred by the increased demand for energy led to the development of new and previously little-used energy sources
The debate about the Kyoto Protocol centres around two alternatives to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in the environment: 1) use of low-carbon energy sources
such as hydroelectric or eolian power; and 2) reduction in energy consumption and increase in energy efficiency.
The manager of public works in Greater Sudbury, Paul Graham, is supportive of the accord and believes people should be looking towards alternative energy sources
in order to reduce GHGs.
Several countries, among them Norway and Brazil, have begun deliberations on proposing an increase in the global share of renewable energy sources
to 10% of total primary energy supply by 2010 at the ongoing U.