What is metalanguage? (select one answer)
Vocabulary used to discuss language conventions and use (for example, language used to talk about visual arts terms such as 'style', 'colour', 'composition')
Vocabulary used to describe an artwork.
Vocabulary used to explain relationships between the artist, audience and artwork.
Vocabulary used to explain the artists process.
All of the answers are correct
Vocabulary is an important aspect of understanding metalanguage. What are some possible definitions of the word 'Vocabulary'? (choose multiple answers)
A body of words known to an individual person. For example, "he had a wide vocabulary".
Reading a dictionary to see how many words there are. For example, "today I did a vocabulary on my dictionary".
The body of words used in a particular language. "comparing the vocabularies of different languages...".
The words used in a particular subject or sphere of activity. For example, "the vocabulary of law".
Metalanguage is language that describes language. This means that in English words such as 'noun', 'adjective', 'plot' and 'character' are all examples of metalanguage because they are words used to talk about the language itself. The language of Visual Arts is different to language of English. Visual Arts metalanguage draws from the visual characteristics within an artwork. What are some possible forms of metalanguage present when analysing an artwork such as a painting? (select one answer)
Composition, style, colour, symbols.
Ned Kelly, trees, sky, grass.
Noun, adjective, verb, grammar.
Lounge, chair, table, dresser.
Finish this sentence. "Metalanguage is language that describes...". (select one answer)
What does the Visual Arts metalanguage term "composition" mean?
The act of combining parts or elements to form a whole.
The way in which something is put together or arranged.
The placement or arrangement of visual elements in a work of art.
All of the answers are correct.
Learning about metalanguage in Visual Arts is important because it means you will be able to... (select one answer)
interpet, analyse and convey information about visual images using metalanguage, that is language specific to the field of Visual Arts.
backflip out of the classroom.
paint a portrait of someone using the colour red, yellow and blue.
convey information about visual images.
What are some possible definitions of the Visual Arts metalanguage term "symbol"? (choose multiple answers)
Something representing something else.
A material object used to represent something abstract.
An emblem, token or sign.
An object, person or idea used to stand for something else with which it is associated.
This artwork titled "Burning at Glenrowan" by Sidney Nolan was painted in 1946 and is a part of Nolan's larger series, the Ned Kelly series. Nolan sought to represent Ned Kelly and his narrative as a universal image for the themes of violence, love, injustice and betrayal. Knowing this, what metalanguage term can we use to convey the role Ned Kelly plays in Sidney Nolan's paintings? (select one answer)
Ned Kelly is a "symbol" for the universal themes of violence, love, betrayal and injustice.
Ned Kelly is a "composition" for the universal themes of violence, love, betrayal and injustice.
Ned Kelly is a "colour" for the universal themes of violence, love, betrayal and injustice.
Ned Kelly is a "meaning" for the universal themes of violence, love, betrayal and injustice.
What visual language has been used in this Sidney Nolan painting, "Ned Kelly" from 1946, and what does the language convey? (select one answer)
This painting has used the visual language of "composition" to place Ned Kelly's horse and armour morphed body amid the vast Australian landscape. This "composition" conveys a narrative within the Australian landscape, giving new meaning and identity to the place.
The "composition" used here by Sidney Nolan conveys Ned Kelly's iconic postbox head in such a way that the audience is able to see Ned Kelly's point of view.
Nolan has "composed" this painting with Ned Kelly as the central figure in the artwork. This use of centralised "composition" allows Ned Kelly to be viewed as the main protagonist and main viewpoint from which the painting's narrative takes place.
This artwork, "The Burning Tree" by Sidney Nolan uses the metalanguage of colour to locate the narrative within the Australian landscape.