Send the link below via email or IMCopy
Present to your audienceStart remote presentation
- Invited audience members will follow you as you navigate and present
- People invited to a presentation do not need a Prezi account
- This link expires 10 minutes after you close the presentation
- A maximum of 30 users can follow your presentation
- Learn more about this feature in our knowledge base article
Do you really want to delete this prezi?
Neither you, nor the coeditors you shared it with will be able to recover it again.
Make your likes visible on Facebook?
Connect your Facebook account to Prezi and let your likes appear on your timeline.
You can change this under Settings & Account at any time.
Biome Animal Project
Transcript of Biome Animal Project
How would and animal adapt if it were placed in a different biome? Tropical savanna Respiration Star Fish lives in marine areas, mostly the muddy ocean floor bottom where it scavenges the sea floor for food. Hypothesis Where they can be found
Africa, Australia, and South America. Animals/Plants of the Tropical Savanna wildebeest, warthogs, elephants, zebras, rhinos, gazelles, hyenas, cheetahs, lions, leopards, ostrich, mousebirds, starlings, and weavers.,The acacia and baobab trees, Eucalyptus Trees, Jakal Berry Tree, Manetti Tree Feeding They eat coral polyps (sea anemone like organisms that grow on coral) but are known to eat crabs, snails, sea urchins and some species are cannibalistic. While others filter nutrients out of the water or even swallow mud. Starfish have tiny breathing tubes like gills all over their body and on their feet. The water passes over the gills and tiny vessels remove the oxygen and then transport it to the rest of the body. Response They cannot tolerate being exposed to direct light at low tide and sometimes bury themselves in the sand or mud Support Movement They use their flexible arms and sucker-like feet to get around but if each arm must move in the same direction if not they star fish would not go anywhere. To move, the sea star contracts and relaxes its muscles, which forces water into the tube feet or draws it out. This allows the sea star to move its feet. Each cylindrical foot has a sucker on each end, which allows the sea star to attach to surfaces. Adapted :They crawl under shaddy trees to keep from direct sunlight Adapted: Feed on leftover animal bodies or scavenge for small insects adapted:
They take in fresh air through their
breathing tubes on the body Adapted:
The body is rock-like covered in a thick skin with multiple spikes Thancor Feeding:
Mostly feeds on remains bur is willing to take down any animal available Thancor Respiration:
Normanl breathing through nose into lungs then exhaled through mouth Movement:
Walks on all 4's with thin tail for balance and large font legs for sturdiness Grass trees Grass hopper centipedes sea Star zebra Gazelle Lion hyena Elephants Conclusion The supply of food can be very high at some times of the year. Then they are very low at others.
Savannas cover almost half of Africa and large areas of Australia, South America and India
The Savanna is a grassland with scattered trees and shrubs
Savannas are generally found between the desert biome and the rainforest biome. They are mostly located near the equator.
In a Savanna the temperate does not change a lot. When it does, its very gradual and not drastic
The African Savanna is a thornbush savanna, which has many different kinds of plants
A rolling grassland dotted with trees is one way to define the African Savanna
Many plants have developed long tap roots to be able to reach down to water.
Annual rainfall in the African Savanna is about the same as that of Wisconsin.
Many animals have developd tough cheek teeth so they can stand their diets Sea stars are not fish, they do not carry scales,gills or fins
Sea stars are Echinoderms, meaning their body has 5 sections arranged around a disk
There are about 2,000 species of sea stars.
Not all sea stars have 5 arms some have 40
Sea stars can regenerate a lost arm.
Sea stars do not have blood but instead a water vascular system
Sea stars eat with their stomachs inside-out.
Sea stars have eyes, sea stars have an eye spot at the end of each arm
Common colors of starfish include red, orange, yellow, and pink
Starfish have sense cells all over its body enabling them to detect their prey The Thankcor has no know natural predators
It can survive up to a week without eating food while it feeds on the supply of fat it stores in its back hunch
It has been known to go after fully matured adult lions if food is scarce
It is an omnivore
it usually has about 1-3 cubs
It is more active at night since the temperatures are cooler then
It can see in the dark
It has been known to imitate lion behavior in order to join a pack of feeding lions
They are aggressively territorial
They shy away from eating the Bone Starfish because of the fact they carry poison barbs in their skin Starfish facts Biome facts Made up animal
facts I think that the Thancor will probably be
at the top of the food chain since it has no
and the starfish will be a secondary consumer Inference I think it will be able to have a wide range of food
even with a limited environment The outcome if that it will survive in the new environment turns to if it is able to adapt to every challenge it comes across If the starfish is able withstand an environment that is hot and dry for the majority of the year with limited water then it will be able to adapt to its surroundings