No matter what happens from here, Roger Shawyer can feel at least a bit of vindication. There’s no way to know whether his potentially world-changing new fuel-free thruster called the EM Drive will be debunked, as many predict. But even so, his career-spanning obsession will never again seem quite as absurd as it has in the past. In spite of decades of professional skepticism and rejection, Shawyer’s technology has finally swept up the popular culture in the dream of the perfect next-gen space drive. All that remains to be seen is whether scientists will follow.
The recent and explosive popularity of the EM Drive is mostly due to a couple of borderline-sheepish reports from NASA itself, which seem to confirm that the drive can produce very small amounts of reliable thrust while at the same time distancing the agency from the results. The initial announcement of testing actively washed its hands of the results, but a more recent report actually tested the drive in a vacuum chamber, shoring up one of the major sources of criticism of early, in-atmosphere testing.
NASA may not know how the thing produces thrust, but in its own words, “NASA Eagleworks has now nullified the prevailing hypothesis that thrust measurements were due to thermal convection.” Eagleworks doesn’t necessarily speak with the unified voice of the NASA establishment, but it’s a high-enough profile platform that the mainstream media was forced to take notice.
Still, NASA’s lukewarm approach to its own results has given plenty of ammunition to both sides of the EM Drive debate. One side sees the other as gullible and ignorant of science, the other as closed-minded and ignorant of history. Not since the Airplane on a Treadmill disaster of ought-eight have net-nerds known such fierce fighting as this.
The crux of the problem is the EM Drive’s central claim, which makes it both impossible to believe and impossible to ignore: This thruster allegedly requires no fuel to work. This means that an array of EM Drives could be powered by solar panels to provide infinite low acceleration, solving many of the most intractable problems with long-distance spaceflight. Eagleworks researcher Harold White went so far as to predict that a manned mission could get to Mars in just 70 days by producing just 0.4 Newtons/kW, or about 10 times the power efficiency of a modern ion thruster.
Its allegedly fuel-free nature also means that the drive may directly contradict the law of conservation of momentum, since it would be producing a forward-facing force without an equal and opposite force acting in the other direction. This makes it seem uncomfortably close to an attempt at a perpetual motion machine.
While it’s unlikely that Shawyer has built the world’s first real refutation of the fundamental laws of physics, it is possible that the drive does conserve momentum via some currently unknown process. The most widely cited candidate is a process called vacuum polarization, which is theorized to create short-lived particles in the vacuum of space, which the EM Drive basically turns into a plasma and ejects in a specific direction. If this idea is validated, the EM Drive would be using these particles as its version of the fuel that all other drives must bring along with it, thus perhaps staying on the right side of the physical properties of the universe.
It’s also possible that the drive is some sort of far-out version of a Star Trek warp drive — that its electric field is contracting space in front of the drive and/or expanding it behind the drive. Eagleworks tested this with laser pulses, finding repeatable results indicating that the drive was causing distortion of a laser. It’s thought this could be due to spacetime distortion, but unlike the latest thrust reading these laser tests were conducted in-atmosphere. Going forward, the researchers want to re-run these interferometer experiments in a vacuum, to rule out the possibility that the air caused the observed laser diffraction.
EM Drive’s biggest boosters don’t claim to have a robust understanding of its mechanics — only empirical evidence showing that it works. Everyone seems to be taking a measured approach, here — even someone as far-seeing and confident as Elon Musk won’t take a definitive stand for or against these results.
Fundamentally, that means that the EM Drive is now a scientific controversy, rather than a popular one. All on its own, that’s a huge achievement, and arguably a win for the EM Drive’s supporters. Their central quest was to get the technology serious testing by serious researchers. In a sense, even if that testing invalidates the drive, the need to involve high-level researchers to do so proves that the boosters were not quite as irrational as many have claimed.