Funerals are ceremonies that serve to honor, remember, or celebrate the life of the person who died. Different cultures and civilizations have their own version of funeral services, going back to as old as 300,000 years ago. Funeral services and customs concerning death in general have evolved over the years, resulting in many traditions and taboos.
Why people held funerals isn’t exactly known, but most have a root in the belief of the afterlife and helping the soul of the deceased cross over or find a way to reincarnation. Whether a person believes in this or not, it’s an undisputed fact that funeral services are a solemn and somber part of anyone’s life.
For most people, a funeral is a way for family and friends to get together to mourn and celebrate the life of the deceased. Because of the evolution of funerals and customs, different types of funeral services have become available. These could be the complete funeral service, graveside service, complete cremation service, immediate cremation service, and immediate burial.
1.Complete Funeral Service
The most traditional type of service, the complete funeral service will have three parts. The first is the wake, where the deceased’s body is placed in a funeral home, church, or the deceased’s home to be viewed and visited by friends and family. After a few days (depending on how long customs says the body is allowed to be displayed), the wake is followed by a service led by the designated church leader or similar.
This to commemorate the life and death of the deceased and for the family members and friends to say their final words. After this is the burial ceremony. The burial ceremony could be either above ground or below ground. An above ground burial means that the casket of the deceased will be placed inside a vault or mausoleum, whereas the below ground burial lowers the casket into the ground.
The graveside service is similar to the complete funeral service, with the major difference being that the service is held at the place of burial rather than the funeral home or the church. After the service, the remains of the deceased are then buried in either the above ground or below ground site.
3.Complete Cremation Service
Opting for the complete cremation service is much like opting for the complete funeral service, except that instead of burying the remains, they are cremated instead. Cremation of the deceased has existed since the ancient Roman civilization and is used mainly so that the family of the deceased could either keep the remains with them or to avoid having to spend for a casket and graveyard plot (and for its upkeep). The ashes of the deceased are stored in an urn, which could be made of different materials. Sometimes, the ashes are scattered in some place after the funeral service as per the deceased’s request before he died.
4.Immediate Cremation Service
Instead of a lengthy wake and burial, the immediate cremation service is used to dispose of the body quickly. This is usually followed by the actual funeral service, where friends and family could then view the urn containing the ashes.
5.Immediate Burial Service
The immediate burial service is the quickest of the funeral services. A few days after the death of the deceased or immediately after death, the body is taken to the burial site without a memorial service or wake. Families usually opt for this to cut down on costs for an open-casket viewing or expensive caskets and would just file the necessary documents. However, like the immediate cremation service, the family sometimes holds the memorial service at the burial site after the burial itself.
Gentry Griffey became the only funeral home to operate an on-site crematory. Whether you are in need of traditional funeral options or cremation services.