Time Management for Administrators Before We Get Started… • • • • • • • • IPAD Download: Totes m' Notes From Shelf, add a folder Customize Open folder click on the + Customize Type • Index Card Activity! • Pull out the two objects from your ziploc bag. • On your index card write what you think these objects have to do with time management. Be prepared to share! Using time on what is important will allow you to "build rich relationships, have inner peace, balance, and confidence that you are doing what matters most and are doing it well." Harold Taylor- Time Management Expert Video Jigsaw Article Activity! Directions: 1. Chose an article 2. Become the expert! 3. Read, then share findings with the group! To Find Article: • • • • • MCPS website CES page Principal’s Message Administrative Resources Select Article • The Big Rocks, by Kim Marshall • How Principals Manage Their Time, by Peggie J. Robertson • The Effective Principal, by Pamela Mendels Article Presentations! • Use the app, Totes m' Notes, to take notes during each presentation, one word summaries... • Alternative, Tagxedo, to summarize the presentations Key Points from "The Big Rocks" • *The principals' number one priority is zeroing in on the highest priority activities for bringing all students to high levels of achievement. • "If you don't put the two or three top priorities into your calendar first, all the other stuff will clutter your days." • Covey, "The key is not to prioritize what's on your schedule, but to schedule your priorities." (p. 161) The challenge is figuring out which two or three are the highest priority in your school, setting measurable goals, and pursuing them with laserlike determination. WHAT ARE YOUR BIG ROCKS? Big Rocks Handout Take some time to reflect on your “Big Rocks” for the upcoming school year. Planning System Steps: • Decide on a planning system • Daily "to-do" lists are not enough, they don't address the big rocks! • Daily Planning Example... – suggested from the article... Advice from the author• Get into classrooms! • Teachers crave feedback. • What works best? – short, unannounced observations of 5 -15 minutes – face-to-face feedback with teacher – goal of five classrooms per day Advice from the author• Be out front when students arrive, be available during lunch duties (mix your visits up), go outside during recess/break times as well as during dismissal times. • Visibility and accessibility really matter in this job! Tip! • Spend little time in your office for those frequent droppers that invariably start with the words, "Got a minute?" -A sitting principal is a sitting duck! “Management is doing things right; leadership is doing the right things.” - Peter Drucker (1909 - 2005) The Effective Principal Highlights: • Be concerned with instruction above all! • Today's best principals "know what good and effective instruction looks like so they can provide feedback to guide teachers." • Best Practice by Zemelman, Daniels, and Hyde can help principals recognize effective instruction. Great Book! (see handouts) Best Practice Today’s Standards for Teaching & Learning in America’s Schools By: Zemelman, Daniels, and Hyde Time Saving Tips! • IPAD Resources for Administrators 1. 2. • Marshall Memo (by the 3. author of The Big Rocks) 4. • Common Core Checklist Directions to Access: MCPS website CES Page Principal’s Message Timesavers THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE Stephen R. Covey Recommended Books • IF YOU DON'T FEED THE TEACHERS THEY EAT THE STUDENTS by: Neila A. Connors • Jesus, CEO by: Laurie Beth Jones • The One Minute Manager by: Blanchard and Johnson • Get Organized! Time Management for School Leaders by: Frank Buck • The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People by Stephen Covey Bullying and Time Management • Kentucky's Bullying Statutes (handout) • MCPS Bullying Resources- presented by • Officer Campbell • Staff Binder • Best Practices in Bullying Prevention and Intervention 3, 2, 1 Activity! Time Saving Sites! • Safe Schools Checklist To Access: • CES homepage – Principal’s Message • Seven Steps to a Safer School • Safety Toolkit- Includes Surveys • Bullying Resources • (or click on link) Bullying Resources/Teacher Training: • Staff Training Hyperlinks! • Webisodes For Kids • Teacher Guide • Webisode Example! Kentucky's Top 10 Safety Recommendations! • School Safety: What Can Educators Do? Character Education • 100 Ways to Promote Character Education • http://www.coreessentials.org/ Summary Ball • A Summary Ball is merely a beachball or other harmless ball that can be tossed about the classroom with relative safety. After the teacher has presented a sufficient amount of information, or after students have read a chapter in their text, this activity can be used as a review. Students stand around the classroom and the teacher tosses the ball to the first student, who must catch the ball and in 5 seconds state any idea, fact or concept from the lessons. He/she then tosses the ball to another student who has not yet spoken. The second student must add something that has not been mentioned. If a student can't add anything from the lesson, he/she still tosses the ball, but must sit down. Play continues until only one student is left standing.