Free Graphing Practice Problem Worksheet
By the time I teach the fungi to my biology classes, several months have passed since the beginning of the school year. At the start of the school year, much time was spent on graphing and data analysis skills. I use this simple and FREE activity to kill two birds with one stone. It allows me the opportunity to review the basic science skills of graphing and data analysis while at the same time reinforcing concepts on the fungi.
No prior knowledge about fungi is needed to complete this activity.
NOTE: This product is also included in my bundled product called Fungi Complete Unit Plan Bundle of Products
In this activity, students are given information about plants that are grown with and without the assistance of mycorrhizae. Quantitative data is given. Students graph the data and answer 8 data analysis questions.
This is perfect for a short homework assignment or classwork. This can also be left in your sub folder to be used in your absence.
Related products include:
Scientific Method Task Cards
Introduction to Science Interactive Notebook Pages and Warm Ups
Scientific Method: Writing a Laboratory Procedure (FREE!)
Scientific Method Homework / Study Guide
Science Skills Reinforcement: Graphing, Applying the Scientific Method, Experimental Design, and Scientific Writing
Science Skills Lab: Student Designed Experiment
Biology Buzz Words: Introduction to Biology
Graphic Organizer for Writing Science Lab Reports
Common Core Science: Informational Reading Task Cards for ANY Science Reading Passage
Lab Cleanup Task Cards
What's In a NAme? (A Study of Biological Prefixes and Suffixes)
Science Skills Worksheet and PowerPoint: Comparing and Contrasting
Tabling, Graphing and Analyzing Data
Free! Graphic Organizer for Reading Science Informational Text
Metric Measurement Task Cards - Set of 90
The Ultimate Lab Safety Bundle
Science Calendars: Important Dates in Science History
I hope that you will follow me at:
My TpT Store
Science Stuff Blog
My Facebook Page
Amy Brown Science.com