Our nation`s history is preserved in words-archives full of letters, diaries, military orders, Colonial charters, treaties, laws and proclamations that, when gathered together with old weaponry and other period artifacts, are the stuff of most history museums.
But that history was made by flesh-and-blood people, as widely various in character and countenance as Americans today. Some bore themselves with the greatness that time and events bestowed upon them. Others, with different haircuts, could be your neighbors. Still others looked like the clowns or villains many of them were.
You can meet them all in Washington, D.C.`s unique National Portrait Gallery, a small and all-too-often overlooked capital treasure that provides an extraordinary opportunity for an intimate look at America`s history and culture through the faces of the men and women who created and contributed to it.
Visitors will find, for example, that Dolley Madison was not a dignified grande dame but a plump little dumpling of a woman with twinkly mischief in her eyes and a flair for daring decolletage.
Fabled folk hero Davy Crockett, ``king of the wild frontier`` and legend of the Alamo, actually looked less like actor Fess Parker and more like Sleepy Hollow`s Ichabod Crane, possessing a long, pointed nose, an even longer chin and slightly crazed eyes.
And Commodore Perry? Why, one finds him looking a little Japanese, but only because the gallery`s 1854 woodcut portrait of him was done by a Japanese artist who hadn`t seen many Caucasians.
Occupying half of a stately, columned, neo-classical building at 8th and F Streets N.W. (around the corner from Ford`s Theater and several blocks north of the grand museums that flank the capital Mall), the Portrait Gallery was an idea much too long in coming.
Inspired by a famous British institution of similar purpose, the celebrated American artist Charles Willson Peale urged in 1794 that an American portrait gallery be established in the new capital at Washington and filled with ``occasionally painted portraits-as might be valuable in a future day.``
Washington being Washington, nothing was done. It wasn`t until after World War I that a collection of historical portraits began to be amassed, not until 1962 that the gallery was finally established (in what for more than a century had been the Patent Office) and not until 1968 that its first public exhibition was held.
From the moment the doors first opened, however, the gallery has seemed a historic part of the capital.
Only a small portion of the thousands of pictures owned by the gallery are on public view, but one could easily spend an entire week getting to know them.
The permanent exhibits are arranged thematically and more or less chronologically. There is a painted portrait of a strikingly beautiful Pocahontas, dressed in Elizabethan court clothes, who died in 1617 at the age of 23. There is also a photograph of Chief Red Cloud, who died in 1909.
The American Revolution section includes some predictable, formally posed portraits of the period-the one of a chubby ``Light Horse`` Harry Lee, father of Confederate Gen. Robert E. Lee, gives you the idea that to his horse, Harry didn`t feel very light. But you`ll also find an extraordinarily lifelike marble bust of the Marquis de LaFayette, who looks even more extraterrestrial than Star Trek`s Dr. Spock.
The Early Republic exhibit is full of Founding Fathers and great heroes but also contains a portrait of the redoubtable John Randolph of Roanoke, a Virginia aristocrat and congressman who spoke in a high-pitched squeal and was fond of bringing his hunting dogs into the House of Representatives. Nearby is onetime Vice President and drunken womanizer Col. Richard M. Johnson, who ran for president-and lost-with the campaign ditty ``Rumpsey dumpsey, rumpsey dumpsey, Col. Johnson killed Tecumseh.``
In the Frontier section, you`ll find Crockett, a bald Sam Houston and a very warm and human painting of Mexican War hero and later President Zachary Taylor with his officers and soldiers.
The more contemporary military heroes on display include a fantasized Gen. Douglas MacArthur portrayed more heroically than even he could imagine.
The Great Hall of Presidents, a grand and stately place on the gallery`s 2d floor, is its centerpiece. Yet there`s a very human touch to these portraits as well. Former president Ronald Reagan is portrayed wearing an open-collared shirt and blue jeans. President Bush is represented by a handsome bust completed during his vice presidency.
Teddy Roosevelt appears not only there but in a separate gallery dedicated to American progressives, joining the likes of Wisconsin`s Robert LaFollette, John Dewey, John Muir and William Jennings Bryan.
Important political figures who never held public office-such as Dr. Martin Luther King and FDR`s Harry Hopkins-are handsomely portrayed, as are sports figures dating back a century (pudgy John L. Sullivan, ``the Boston Strongboy,`` looks a pushover).