Invention of the Radio
Posted on December 7, 2010 by Jamie Slaughter, with 32767 views
The invention of the radio was a great achievement in terms of communication between two positions. The inventors of the telephone and telegraph had already introduced the technology of wire-to-wire communication. Thus, the inventor of radio based his idea heavily on the technology that existed in the telephone and telegraph.
This invention was no immediate, but staggered over a number of years. The discovery of radio waves actually provided the platform for the invention of the radio. Radio waves are electromagnetic waves that can carry information in the form of pictures, sound and other details. Therefore, the radio was based on a number of scientific findings.
In the 1800's, a physicist from Scotland had predicted radio waves. A German physicist then proved this theory by showing that radio waves are the same as light or heat waves. This allowed wireless technology to launch.
Nicola Tesla, a Serbian Scientist, designed the first radio in 1892. He also designed a Radio Controlled Robotic Boat using similar technologies.
Sir Oliver Lodge brought considerable improvement to the original design in the form of a coherer, a primitive form of radio signal detector. He is the first person to transmit a successful radio signal.
The invention of the radio is obviously a great milestone. It has enabled the news to be transmitted on a very broad basis. The way the news was conveyed on the radio was completely different from the conventional method of print in the daily newspaper.
The invention of the radio was a huge step in the field of technology. Since the time it was invented most of us have forgotten how useful a radio can prove to be even in the present world where computers and laptops have dominated. The sound that can be heard emitting from radio speakers is mainly attributed to the transmission of radio signals, known as a process called modulation. The modulation of electromagnetic waves transmit the signals at a low frequency.
The oscillating electromagnetic fields emit electromagnetic radiation. These radiated waves go through a process of modulation in regards to the frequency, amplitude and pulse width. The waves then transform into sound that are responsible for carrying information.
The invention of radio made it easy for any person hear the world news. The radio was the most widely used device, despite the popularity of both the telegraph and telephone, invented during the same period.
The invention of Audion, the first radio tube responsible for improving the clarity brought about a complete new generation of radio. This was a time when people could enjoy their favourite music on the radio.
The addition of digital radio has improved the quality of broadcast further, reducing interference and delivering a superior end product.