Death Due to the Fourth of July: President Zachary Taylor
Zachary Taylor for Teachers, Students, & All Who Love to Learn
Looking for great YouTube video clips, books, and free worksheets and lapbooks for teaching and/or learning about President Zachary Taylor? Here you will find my favorite picks we used while studying the individual Presidents of the United States. This is part of a series of lessons I posted on individual Presidents. You can find links to all the lessons at President's Day Unit Study .
Do You Think Zachary Taylor Was a Good President?
Just the Facts on Our 12th President
Presidential Term: 1849 - 1850
Political Party: Whig
(the last Whig to be elected President)
Vice President: Millard Fillmore
Yearly Salary as President: $25,000
First Lady: Margaret Smith Taylor
Nickname: "Old Rough and Ready"
The Worksheets, Lapbooks, Trivia, & Recipes We Used
We found these to be helpful when creating a notebook, lapbook, and cooking project on President Zachary Taylor
Zachary Taylor for Teachers offers links to free worksheets, book suggestions, general information and trivia, interactive computer games, and more related to president Zachary Taylor.
Zachary Taylor's Favorite Calas-Tous-Chauds Recipe provides a recipe for one of Zachary Taylor's favorite pastry recipes, Calas-Tous-Chauds, and also includes a a description of Creole cuisine preferences.
Presidential Statistics and Points of Interest includes an overview of Zachary Taylor's life and some fun points of interest.
Our Favorite Children's Books on President Zachary Taylor
This was our favorite picture book. It includes events from Taylor's entire life and has fun illustrations to keep the attention of even my younger children.
Zack Taylor: Young Rough and Ready (Childhood of famous Americans) by Katharine Elliott Wilkie is an excellent children's chapter book biography on Zachary Taylor. It focuses on his children and includes events that shaped him into who he became. It is 200 pages and includes black and white illustrations every few pages. How To Draw The Life And Times Of Zachary Taylor (Kid's Guide to Drawing the Presidents of the United States of America) by Roderic Schmidt combines history and simple art lessons. We love this series! My children are amazed at how easily they can draw, and they love gettig to sketch while learning about the Presidents. Zachary Taylor by Patricia Miles Martin is a See and Read Beginning to Read Biography. It is a nice 64 page picture book biography on Taylor that covers his entire life.
Timeline of Major Events During Taylor's Presidency
Timeline of Major Events from 1849-1850
Harriet Tubman escaped from slavery
California Gold Rush of 1849
Clayton-Bulwer Treaty signed with Britain paved the way for the Panama Canal
Gas mask patented by Benjamin Lane
First cornerstone laid for Washington Monument
Taylor died of cholera, which he contracted at a 4th of July celebration
One of Taylor's most important actions was signing the Clayton-Bulwer Treaty with Britain, which established joint control of Central America's isthmus and paved the way for the Panama Canal. (Info Credit: http://www.amazon.com/Presidents-Fandex-Family-Field-Guides/dp/0761112030/ and Image Credit : http://www.factbook.org/wikipedia/en/n/ni/nicaragua_canal.html)
Taylor was known as a friendly president, who shook hands with everyone he met. He let his war horse, Whitey, graze on the White House lawn, and visitors would sometimes take Whitney's hair home as a souvenir.
Slavery was the main issue of the day. Though Taylor owned slaves, he attempted to stop slavery from spreading to the western territories. He encouraged Congress to allow for California and New Mexico to immediately become states (rather than territories) because they both planned to be free states. While in office, the Compromise of 1850 was being hotly debated, but he died before the compromise was finalized.
After attending a Forth of July celebration in 1850, Taylor fell ill with a fever and died of cholera five days later. He served as president for 16 months.
Our Favorite YouTube Video Clips on President Zachary Taylor
These are appropriate for children and provide a nice overview of Zachary Taylor's time during his presidency.
Looking for more lessons on Presidents or all of my unit studies and lessons?
- President's Day Unit Study - I posted links to each of my lessons on individual Presidents here. In each lesson I included fun worksheets, children's books, YouTube clips, timelines, and recipe ideas. On this page I also included our favorite books and YouTube video clips that cover all of the Presidents of the United States.
- Fun, FREE Hands-on Unit Studies - Looking for all of my lessons and unit studies? Over the years I have posted over 35 science and social-studies based unit studies, compromised of more than 170 lessons. For each lesson I have included activities (with photos), our favorite books and YouTube video clips, lapbook links, and other resources. I posted links to all of my unit studies and lessons on this page.