No problem. Below please find the list of 5 interesting places in Vancouver that would be suitable for children.

1.	A Day at the Beach – Vancouver is known for its lovely beaches and has 11 miles of beachfront coastal property. Most of the beaches have washrooms, lifeguards, and well-lit parking. Spanish Bank East Beach has 8 sand volleyball courts where you and your family can enjoy a volleyball game. Unless a beach is designated as a “quiet beach” it has amplified music. Some beaches, such as Kitsilano, have an Olympic-sized swimming pool and a huge kids' playground.
2.	Kids Market on Granville Island – Kids Market has plenty of arcade-type games, shopping, and food. It is housed mostly inside an old renovated factory but has some outdoor play areas with a lovely pond next door.
3.	The Aquabus on Granville Island – This is sure to be a kid-pleaser. The Aquabus offers 25-minute and 40-minute cruises around False Creek. During your cruise, you will visit interesting places like Science World and the Vancouver Aquatic Center. Your kids will not only love this but it is pretty economical as well just in case you’re on a budget.
4.	Stanley Park – This is one of Vancouver’s best-known and loved parks because it encompasses the seawall, the Aquarium, and even has a water park. The kids will love exploring Stanley Park. It offers many thrilling activities such as a miniature train, a swimming pool, and plenty of picnic sites. Stanley Park is well known for its art events and fine dining. You’ll never run out of exciting activities for the whole family at Stanley Park.
5.	Capilano Suspension Bridge – The Capilano Suspension Bridge is one of the most famous in the world. Millions of people have walked across this bridge, and it is one of British Columbia’s most popular tourist attractions. This amazing bridge stretches 450 feet across and high above the Capilano River. From this spectacular suspension bridge, you can view the beauty of the rainforest all around you. This would be a fun, exciting way to spend several hours with your kids and could also be an opportunity to teach them about rainforests.
