The first thing I remember is floating in the water in a clear plastic bag, surrounded by dozens of my brothers and sisters. We were all brought to a place that had a lot of different types of animals, where we waited anxiously for what felt like forever to be chosen by a human to take us home. 

One day, a small blonde boy came into the store with his parents. His eyes lit up as he saw me and my brothers and sisters swimming around. He pointed to our tank and exclaimed, "Mommy, Daddy, I want that one!" 

Well, my dreams came true that day as his parents nodded, and soon enough, I was placed into a fishbowl in the boy's bedroom. He named me Goldie, and we quickly became the best of friends.

At first, I found it all to be confusing. His room was filled with toys, books, and colorful posters. There was always noise and movement, and it was a little overwhelming. But after a while, I grew used to the constant movement and noise, and I found myself enjoying the company of the boy and all of the life he brought.

Every morning, the boy would wake up and greet me. He would sprinkle food into my bowl and watch as I darted around to catch it. Sometimes, he would tap on the glass, and I would swim up to say hello. Other times, he would sit beside the bowl and just talk to me.

Over time, I watched the boy grow bigger. He started to read books to me, and I would listen. He would also show me his latest drawings, which he proudly displayed on the wall. He even brought me a new decoration for my bowl: a small castle with a hollow center. I could swim inside the castle and explore a new world. I felt like the boy must: a king in my own little kingdom.

As the years passed, the boy grew up and started packing for college. I was so sad he was leaving, but on the day he was leaving, he grabbed me a put me in his car. He told me that he was going on a new adventure and he couldn't possibly do it without his best friend - me! I can't wait to see what college brings. Stay tuned for our next chapter!
