You’ve heard of the mage’s famed Arboretum, of course, but being inside it is breathtaking. Most outsiders are not allowed even near the grounds, so you’re appreciative that Cora can give you this tour. 

You pause at the gold-detailed entrance overlook, overwhelmed by the experience. Overhead, enormous geometrically-patterned beams curve, supporting the clear crystal dome. Colorfully-plumed birds fly in flocks, squawking and trilling, their rainbow feathers trailing behind. A smell like honeysuckle fills the air.  Rich, emerald ivy coats everything, yellow flowers are in full bloom, and small orange birds chirp happily as they build nests in the leaves. 

Cora pauses. “It’s certainly an experience the first time,” she smiles, giving you time to take it all in. 

You look down through the transparent floor. Hundreds of feet below your balcony, there are rows and rows of enormous racks descending as far as you can see. In sharp contrast with the exotic birds and plants, these seem filled with…grass? You’re intrigued. Why would the creation mages be growing grass?

“Is that grass?” You wonder, aloud. 

“It is, Demontail grass, the bane of farmers everywhere,” Cora replies, “Come, let me show you.”

You descend lower and approach one of the gigantic grassy walls. It’s indeed Demontail grass, the quick-growing, hardy grass that overran many fields. The wall is completely smothered in green, the grass firmly rooted in small holes in the granite racks. Cora removes her silk glove, and places her bare hand into the thick, grasping mass. She looks at you. “There is no magic without consequence. Each crop that we save, the spring rituals; all take their toll. Nature balances itself, and we focus it here -- the Arboretum is the locus. Watch.”

Cora closes her eyes.  “Minorrenti, rellion,” she incants. In the middle tile, a sprout appears from nothing, blooming into a bright red flower.  You watch, enthralled. 

Cora opens her eyes. “Now look at my hand,” she says, nodding to her right. You look over. Her bare hand is resting in a circle of now-dead, drooping brown grass. “It takes life to make life,” she says softly. “We are not so much creators, as curators, shifting the focus to the life we deem important. Better to choose the mana of Demontail grass, than have an errant spell sap it from something that can feel pain.”
