The day had gone much like any other, with patrons sitting around the tavern, talking about the harvest, their wives, or anything else they wanted to socialize about. Ale was shared, toasts were raised, and the atmosphere was quite rustic and charming. However, this day the tavern was a little more packed than usual; a traveling bard had come to visit the village. He worked by playing music for tips and a free night's stay. The bartender was happy to have him, he needed for little, was polite, and played his lute well. The bard was happy for the hospitality, and the chance to play his music for an audience. 

But occasionally, with so many people and with so much alcohol around, tensions would rise and a fight would be inevitable. Two big men, both who worked with lumber for the village, seemed to lose their sense of reason and civility, as they both stood up and started accusing each other of something. At first, they were mostly ignored, as people were known to get a bit rambunctious around this time. But then one of the men slammed his fist right down the table, splitting it in two. Everyone stopped to stare at the arguing men, and even the bard stopped his tune as all eyes were clearly on these two. The shouts started to get louder, although nobody had a clue what had gotten them so upset in the first place.

Just then, the bard recalled a song his mother played for him as a child, that always brought calm to his heart. And so, he started to strum a new tune, one that filled him with a sense of nostalgia, and that started to draw the attention of the tavern goers once more. The shouting men didn't respond at first, but after a few seconds their shouts stopped, and they looked over at the bard as he played a beautiful, almost otherworldly melody. The anger drains from their faces, replaced by tears that start forming in their eyes, and they sat down in their chairs, enthralled by the melody. Finally, the bard finished his song, and the whole tavern, including the once-angry men, applauded the performance. The bard gave a bow, the men looked over at each other and forgave each other with a handshake, and peace returned to the tavern once more.
