I admit that Dusty Baker is a living legend. He had a pretty solid playing career, winning one World Series. As a manager, he won a World Series too, and has also racked up over 2,000 wins.

Yet, I can’t shake the feeling that he gets too much credit. I bleed Cubby blue and I was never happier than when Dusty finally left the team. For me, those early 2000s years were the best years to be a Cubs fan and it was Dusty who ruined the era.

The players we had were all quite good and there was a huge buzz going into each season. Names like Sammy Sosa, Kerry Wood, and Mark Prior spring to mind and defined the team back then. The first year Dusty did lead them to a winning record and the postseason but after 2003 it was all downhill.

The team had the talent but they didn’t have the right manager. He misused the pitchers constantly and Mark Prior, one of the most promising pitching prospects in decades, had his career cut short due in large part to overwork. The same can be said of Kerry Wood who faced a similar fate. Baker became known for putting his pitchers under tremendous workloads and it just wore them down until they broke.

The Cubs were set up for years if not a decade of success with some of the best arms in the game and he destroyed them. He was not even very good with managing relievers, always preferring to stick to the old-school approach of going with his gut.

This is not the right approach for a manager. Even in the early 2000s, analytics were being used by teams to create a competitive advantage but Dusty refused. At one point he even made public comments that walking was bad because it clogged the bases. He just did not create an atmosphere conducive to success.

In the end, he only lasted 4 years with the Cubs and I am very glad for that. He spoiled the team’s chances of post-season success and it took them a decade to recover. I won’t forget Dusty at all, but I also won’t give him credit when the negatives under his leadership far outweigh any of the positives.
