Here is a list of some of the unique and high-quality coffee shops in Oklahoma City. Each of these is unique from the other, and not one is the same as the other. 

1. Coffee Slingers. Coffee Slingers is a famous Uptown coffee shop that many business professionals love to gather at for fun business meetings. It is also a fantastic location to study or work remotely, and they have plenty of sitting for groups or just individuals. The coffee is fresh and roasted within the coffee shop itself, which helps keep their product always fresh and new. They also have non-dairy options such as oat milk and soy milk options. If you are looking for a shop mixed with class and rustic merged, this is a great location. 

2. Elemental Coffee. Elemental has the best ambiance that expresses Oklahoma City the best. With a twist of industrial and hipster aesthetics, this coffee shop gives a unique look. Elemental also has some of the best intense espresso options, which are helpful for those who need a good pick-me-up in the morning or after lunch. Elemental also provides non-dairy options, although their coffee without added milk or sugar is full of flavor on its own. 

3. The Red Cup. If you are someone who is looking for something extremely unique and nothing like any other coffee shop, the Red Cup is the best. With a mix of edgy and grandma's farmhouse, Red Cup gives a fun aesthetic that you will never find in any other coffee shop. Along with this, Red Cup also serves breakfast options including Vegan/Vegetarian foods with tofu and soy-based protein. This is a great place to go to meet a friend for a long chat or just looking to have a great morning coffee. 

4. Clarity. Clarity is a perfect coffee shop for those looking for a pick-me-up in Midtown. Not only do they have great quality coffee, but everyone talks about how great the location is. This is a perfect location for those looking for their first Oklahoma CIty experience, or if you are just taking a break from work from the Business Center. They also offer many different non-dairy options, which is a big plus for those who are lactose intolerant.
