Astronomers have been using the Hubble Space Telescope to find intermediate-sized black holes in a globular star cluster 6,000 light-years from Earth. These elusive black holes are about 100 to 100,000 times the mass of the Sun.
Intermediate black holes often form the center of dwarf galaxies. Data from other telescopes such as the Chandra X-Ray Telescope generated several candidates for intermediate black holes in dense star clusters at the edge of other galaxies. Other intermediate black hole candidates exist at the edge of our Milky Way. These black hole candidates show signs of having masses that are tens of thousands of times the mass of our Sun. One black hole candidate was discovered in the Omega Centauri globular cluster in 2008. However, astronomers need more data to confirm that they are intermediate black holes or formulate an alternative explanation for the candidates.
Astronomers can use Hubble Space Telescope's capabilities to search for intermediate black holes in the globular star cluster, known as Messier 4. Astronomers such as Eduardo Vitral of the Space Telescope Science Institute praised the precision with which the Hubble Space Telescope can make the required obervations.
"You can't do this kind of science without Hubble," Vitral said.
Eduardo Vitral's research team already discovered an intermediate black hole that is 800 times the mass of the Sun. They plan to publish their findings in a paper that will be published in the Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society.
It is impossible to directly view a black hole. However, the Hubble Space Telescope can observe the motion of objects that may be moving close to a black hole. The research team used 12 years' worth of Messier 4 observations to discover the intermediate black hole. 
The researchers' modeling of the data produced by the Hubble Space Telescope ruled out alternative theories for the behavior of these objects, such as multiple smaller black holes orbiting one another, neutron stars, or white dwarfs. A theoretical collection of small black holes would have been packed too closely together to avoid merging with other black holes or being punted out of the cluster by gravitational interactions, for instance.
Vitral acknowledged that intermediate black holes are elusive. Most known black holes are either small -- "only" several times the mass of our Sun -- or huge black holes like the one at the center of the Milky Way Galaxy. Astronomers also estimate that there are as many as 100 million small black holes in the Milky Way Galaxy. These small black holes often form from large stars that exploded. Large black holes typically have masses of millions or billions of times the mass of the Sun.
However, with our current understanding of physics and data from the Hubble Space Telescope, an intermediate black hole is the most likely explanation for the object discovered by Eduardo Vitral's research team.
