The philosophers of old created a unique diet of vegetarianism that also lets people eat fish. Whether you're trying the pescatarian diet as a gateway to pure vegetarianism or veganism, or you've observed the diet your whole life, today's food prices and food culture can be frustrating. We have so much information about all the wonderful dishes and varieties of food from all over the world, international markets and internet retails to get unique ingredients, and amazing local restaurants that offer fantastic glimpses into food possibilities you've never dreamed of before, but, as any pescatarian can tell you, it can still be hard to find accommodating dishes or restaurants. 

For instance, you may have gone your whole life without trying the flavor sensation of chili since most chili dishes contain beef or other warm-blooded meats. But now you can enjoy all the incredible flavor profiles of chili thanks to a dish called Singaporean Chilli Crab! Packed with protein and loaded with salty-sweet goodness, this dish combines stir-fried mangrove crab with the rich and spicy zing of chili and tomato sauces.

This sweet and sensuous dish is best enjoyed at the Palm Beach Seafood Restaurant in Singapore. The eatery's owners practically invented the dish back in 1956, and their successful restaurant became world famous for this incredible dish. There might be some contention over the origin of the dish: did it originate in Singapore or Malaysia? Who knows?! But one thing's for sure - this dish could be enjoyed all across the world! You might even be able to find it at local Singaporean or Southeast Asian restaurants, so ask around!

Looking for flavors that hit closer to the southern American chili you had as a kid before you made your diet switch? Luckily, you can make all kinds of substitutions for Singaporean Chilli Crab, and you could even name your new creation off of the local cuisine that inspired your twist! Try it with beans, sour cream, and potatoes (diced or french-fried). If you're not from Oceanic countries, Hawaii, or Florida, you can always swap mangrove crabs for local varieties too. Those with shellfish allergies or people who don't like cracking open hard shells can even sub out real crab for imitation crab to enjoy all the same flavor without the risk and hassle. 

If you're a long-time member of the relatively small pescatarian club, you don't have to feel excluded anymore. As a bonus for newcomers, it can be so much easier to switch diets when you can incorporate all the same flavors you enjoyed your whole life, so don't throw out chili night! If you want to spice up your life or bring the wow factor to your next potluck or family outing, try Singaporean Chilli Crab; your meals may never be the same!
