Merry Christmas to all of our family and friends! We have had quite a busy year here in the Fahrer household. Even though we haven’t been in touch often enough, we wish you the very best this holiday season and hope all of you are doing well. 

We wanted to share some Fahrer highlights with you all to keep you up-to-date and connected with our family. We encourage you to do the same!

Our oldest boy, Mark, is excited to play center on the school’s basketball team. However, not quite as excited as he is to be working extra hours at WalMart to pay for my car after he crashed it. Don’t worry, though! Keep your cards and letters home, he and Ashley (his new girlfriend) are doing just fine. As a matter of fact, I think she got a job there, too, so they can spend even more waking moments together.

We also couldn’t be prouder of our little fashionista, pink-haired Tina. She has landed a role in the current school play, Our Town. This is an amazement to all of us because previously, her favorite hobby was to scroll through social media while locked away in her room. Our Town, or even our house, was surely a mystery to her before the stage called.

Our youngest, Bella, is our little entrepreneur. We are convinced she’s stashing her babysitting and dog-walking money away for something big. Will she buy us a new house? A new car? New siblings? 

Meanwhile, David and I have been busy leading our normal lives with kids who, clearly, have minds and dreams of their own. David’s bowling team squeaked out a near-loss and escaped a disastrous sip of beer out of a smelly bowling shoe by landing 6th out of 7th place. And, while he throws a shiny black ball down an alley, I’m taking our dogs for walks in the blinding snow and getting creative with home cooking. 

Despite all of this, or maybe because of it, we are never far from cracking a smile and spreading holiday cheer!

Want more updates? Can’t get enough Fahrer news? Stay tuned for next year’s issue, coming in a mere 12 months to a mailbox near you.
