Although current scientific evidence and belief does not support it, there is some merit to the idea that the universe as we see it is contained within a gigantic black hole, one that is so big that it contains all the stars, galaxies, and matter that we see around us.

One consideration in support of this theory is the observation made by Hubble's Space Telescope that confirmed recently that the expansion of the universe - caused by the Big Bang - is neither slowing nor remaining constant, but is instead accelerating. Current hypotheses about the cause for this acceleration include the presence of an exotic form of energy, called dark energy, which is causing the speeding up of the expansion of the universe. However, scientists have yet to find any evidence that such dark energy exists.

In the black hole theory of the universe, it could be argued that the accelerated expansion of the universe is leading all matter in the universe toward a black hole singularity since any object that falls into a black hole experiences increasing acceleration when falling toward a black hole's singularity - its center.

Another observation in support of the universal black hole theory is the fact that a large portion of the universe's mass seems to be missing and unaccounted for. While dark matter has been posited as the missing piece of the puzzle, it is also plausible that the unaccounted-for matter that is missing could be in the form of a black hole singularity that exists somewhere in the universe but which we cannot readily see yet due to large distances between it and the instruments we use to observe the universe. Since the bulk of a black hole's mass exists as a single point within the black hole when gravity compresses a great amount of mass into it, it could be argued that the majority of the mass of the universe exists as a singularity within the black hole universe in which we reside.

Overall, we may not be able to find the answers we seek even with extensive study into the observations we make of our universe. With current technology and the limitations imposed on us by the sheer size of the universe, we can only rely on indirect observations of phenomena to infer what is really happening in our universe.
