Sure! Here are some ideas for starting a home-based business without a major investment:

1. Fido's Fitness: If you love dogs, why not start a dog-walking business? With few overhead costs and the flexible schedule of your choosing, this can be a lucrative opportunity for anyone with a love for animals. 

2. Home Sweet Treats: Calling all bakers! A home bakery can turn your passion for baking into a profitable business. No matter if it's for special occasions or just to satisfy a sweet tooth, everyone loves a delicious treat from a local bakery. 

3. The Learning Curve: If you have expertise in a certain subject or field, home tutoring or online tutoring can be a low-risk and promising avenue to explore. With distance learning on the rise, you can reach students anywhere with an internet connection. 

4. Global Goods Galore: Import/export businesses can come in all shapes and sizes. You’ll be importing artisanal crafts or exporting goods to other countries. It's an opportunity to connect with people globally and turn a profit. Just make sure you research the necessary permits and regulations before diving in.

5. Garden Ninja: With your knack for gardening and landscaping, this business venture can provide an extra hit of green to your wallet. Offering lawn care services, garden maintenance, or even landscape design can be started with low investment costs and provide high-profit potential.

6. Become a Resume/LinkedIn Profile Writing Guru: As a social-media-savvy person, consider capitalizing on your expertise in marketing yourself online. By offering services in resume and LinkedIn profile writing, you can help others market themselves better for their dream job. With low startup costs and endless streams of potential clients, this is a low-risk, high-gain business idea.

7. Painting Business for the Artistic at Heart: Put your painting talents to good use and start a business venture that is both creatively rewarding and profitable. From painting houses to creating murals, there are many niches you can explore in this business that requires minimal startup capital and offer great profits.
