1. SCIENCE FICTION: Time travel is possible, but it's costly. Your protagonist has purchased the means by which they may travel through time, but they only have the ability to do so three times. Once they arrive at their third destination, they're stuck. They have a plan to return to their present time with the third passage, but something goes terribly awry. Now, they must find a new way to get back or accept this place in time as their new home. 

2. ROMANCE: A prom-night promise is broken, and years later, the wound still festers. First, write a scene from prom night where the promise is broken. Then, jump forward ten years, showing how the broken promise has affected the couple's lives. Have one of the characters confront the other about it. 

3. HORROR: An abandoned farm is for sale -- and cheap! A young couple purchases the farm, planning to bring it back to life. However, in the process, they bring more than just the farm back to life, and the sinister reasons the previous owners' abandoned the place are revealed. 

4. MYSTERY: A pair of twins were born twenty years ago and offered for adoption. They were adopted by different families and never crossed paths growing up. Now, one twin has learned of the other's existence, but there's a danger in this revelation. What happens when the twins meet again for the first time since birth? 

5. FANTASY: A family of wizards is responsible for safeguarding the realm. But their biggest threat has just made a reappearance after a century of peace. How will the wizards work together to defeat the threat? And how will they ensure the realm will be safe for all time?

6. POETRY: Write a free-verse poem about nature -- but it cannot focus on the seasons or the sky. It must focus on something minuscule, something often overlooked when people write about nature. 

7. HISTORICAL FICTION: Set in Regency-era England, a long-lost family member returns, upsetting the new family dynamic. Two brothers now vie for the inheritance that only one can receive. Where was the long-lost family member all these years? Why have they now returned? How will the family move forward without growing apart?
