Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM) is a widespread attack of inflammation in the central nervous system (CNS) believed to be caused by an infection or occurring after vaccination. It usually occurs in one episode but may reoccur. There is diffuse inflammation in multiple areas including the brainstem, spinal cord, and subcortical cerebellum. Symptoms of ADEM typically include encephalopathy (Including confusion, irritability, and aggressive multiple sclerosis resulting in somnolence to coma) as well as multifocal deficits, fever, and meningismus (Headache, photophobia, and stiff neck). Imaging detecting ADEM will consist of large (Meaning greater than one to two centimeters), multifocal, bilateral, asymmetric, and hyperintense lesions. These lesions are typically seen in the supra/infratentorial white matter on MRI FLAIR or T2-weighted images but also may be seen in gray matter, especially the thalamus and basal ganglia.

Acute Optic Neuritis (AON) is a retrobulbar inflammation of the optic nerve that occurs on an acute basis. It may be associated with various neurologic conditions including MS, ADEM, NMO, or lupus; it can also occur spontaneously. It is usually unilateral and presents with lessened visual acuity, desaturation of red color, visual field deficits, and afferent pupillary defect. Symptoms typically include headache, painful eye movements, dim vision, and central visual blurring, and may produce complete loss of vision. About imaging, an MRI will frequently show gadolinium enhancement of the optic nerve.

Transverse Myelitis is another condition that normally presents as a CIS but may be connected with MS or ADEM. It involves spinal cord dysfunction regularly owing to inflammatory lesion(s). It generates unilateral or bilateral sensory and/or motor deficits such as weakness, sphincter dysfunction, and paresthesias. It can sometimes present more severely, including urinary retention and paraplegia. When imaged, it will show gadolinium-enhancing lesions spreading over one or more segments on MRI.

Neuromyelitis Optica (NMO) and related neuromyelitis optical spectrum disorder (NMOSD) are inflammatory conditions principally involving the spinal cord and optic nerve in the central nervous system. Features include postrema clinical syndrome, acute myelitis, optic neuritis, acute brainstem syndrome, symptomatic cerebral syndrome with NMOSD-typical lesions of the brain, and acute diencephalic clinical syndrome or symptomatic narcolepsy with NMOSD-typical diencephalic MRI lesions. NMO occurs more often in non-Caucasians, particularly Asians. When considering NMO and NMOSD, it is important to rule out Sjogrens, SLE, sarcoid, or other vasculitis. In addition to the previous features listed, symptoms may also include intractable hiccups, nausea, and/or vomiting.
