In the glow of the convenience store parking lot, two samurai were preparing for battle. Both unsheathed their weapon, one in red and the other draped in blue. They stared at each other, wondering who would make the first strike. The two focused so hard that you could feel the tension between them. The only thing illuminating them are the fluorescent lights coming from the store. People that went into the store were kind enough to go behind them to not interrupt this grand struggle.

One hour has passed, and both samurai have not moved from their spots. You can see how much they care. One samurai is giving off the energy of a ferocious tiger, ready to pounce at a moment's notice. The other is embracing the spirit of a deadly bear, swinging its claws with terrifying speed. The battle has long since started since the two animals have been fighting for them (in their minds.) The only thing disrupting this gigantic clash is the ring of the sliding doors opening as people enter and leave the convenience store that these two warriors are next to. 

Two hours later and the samurai are starting to get exhausted. Neither one of them moved an inch since pledging to do battle. The mind games between the tiger and the bear have been tiring for them both. The weight of the armor is starting to make both of the warriors succumb to its heavy demeanor. One passerby notices the two and starts recording on their cellphone, believing that this was an orchestrated promotion for the store or something. One samurai sheathes his's sword as if he's motioning to end this fight in one blow. The other samurai sees this and does the same with a smile on his face. No words have been spoken between the two, but they both understand. The eerie quietness filled the air with a sense of tightness. One pin could be heard from miles away. 

"Ding!" The sound of the convenience store door can be heard again. At that sound, both samurai dashed at each other at blinding speed. You would think that lightning bolts came out of both of those men's feet. A few seconds later, both men ended up opposite of each other, swords in hands, unsheathed. Neither collapsed.

"Ding!"
