As public health progresses with the transition from NHS to local authorities, one issue for those to consider within the sector is how the two could continue to work together in the future. However, what about the roles that other organisations can play in reducing inequalities and improving community health? Joint working between local schools, social services and police teams can also make a difference.
Virginia Pearson, joint executive director of public health at Devon County Council, says: "For us, it's about expanding the reach of what we do, through other organisations; being able to access a greater range of clients and intervene earlier." She claims that an integrated approach "is at the very core of the way that Devon works" in public wellbeing.
The team there have commissioned a three year food for life healthy eating in schools programme, to encourage healthy eating, cooking and physical activity. A project leader was recruited to work across schools in deprived areas in Devon, working alongside the council. They were responsible for submitting regular progress reports to the public health team, and running projects such as an awards scheme designed to recognise improvements at different schools.
"It's not just about commissioning NHS services, but working with schools, looking at an evidence base and tracking progress," says Pearson.
The Devon multi-agency safeguarding hub (Mash) is another way that local services have been working together. Professionals from different agencies including police, probation teams, fire services, ambulance services, health teams, education professionals and social workers, share information to ensure they can identify potential harm, and intervene where appropriate.
The most difficult challenge, says Pearson, is gaining complete trust of other agencies: "It's about generating a high level of confidence in partnerships, so partners know they may be making an investment, and are aware that some of the benefits may be realised by another organisation, but it's the right thing to do".
In Strathclyde local police teams have been working with the NHS Lanarkshire to target messages about alcohol and sexual health to young people starting courses at local colleges. PC Alan Mulholland believes that successful joint working is less about evidence bases, and more about a "joined-up vision".
"We came up with the Play safe, home safe message to local teenagers after some brainstorming. I go to their [NHS] office, they come to mine, and we think about ways we can promote different things. It's really down to personalities – working with people who have the same vision, with everyone understanding the thinking behind the projects."
Ultimately outcomes can drive a project forward, Jake Eliot, policy leader at the National Housing Federation, suggests however. A partnership between Amber Valley Housing (now Futures Homescape) and Derbyshire County PCT in a Health trainer programme led to reduced admissions to hospitals.
He explains: "Nine Amber Valley Housing neighbourhood support co-ordinators working at sheltered housing schemes were trained to provide support and put residents in touch with more specialist health agencies. The service offers tailored advice, motivation and practical support to residents wanting to lead a healthier lifestyle, and the programme is designed to prevent cardio-vascular disease and falls by encouraging people to take more exercise, adopt a healthier diet and give up smoking."
He adds: "The white paper talked explicitly about the purpose of the new public health service being used to improve the health of the poorest the fastest. If government is serious about this, it should be working with agencies such as social housing. Alternate services and providers offer a channel and route to reaching client groups who experience severe health inequalities who may struggle to access mainstream services."
Nevertheless there are some logistical issues that need to be considered when different services work together. Mulholland says services need to be careful that they do not overlap: "If there's a message that we can help promote, then we will – for example offering advice about sexual health when we're policing at night. If it's a criminal issue, we'll run it. If it's health, we'll help, but ultimately NHS services will run with that.
"Through just doing that, we'll pick up what's going on, and we have more information to share. From a police element, we can then get other partners to come on board. Every organisation runs along the same themes for the same greater good. People naturally have to work together for greatest good of community."
The healthcare network is hosting its next Public Health Dialogue event on embracing partnerships in London next month.
This article is published by Guardian Professional. Join the Guardian healthcare network to receive regular emails and exclusive offers.