Math is an important subject in school and everyday life. It not only helps us understand and calculate numbers, but also helps us on logical thinking and referencing. Sometimes math can be boring. It is great if we can make math fun for kids, so they will enjoy learning this important subject. Luckily there are many fun math games available, be it online, or an app. How to choose math games for your kids? Here are some good math games we came across over the years. We put them into buckets by kids age and learning purpose, such as math facts practice, word problems.
Cool Math Games for Kids – 45 Math Game Apps for Kids
In general, math games for younger kids are more general in nature and cover a broad areas within math. Math games for older kids tend to focus on certain specific math skills. When appropriate, we break those apps into groups based on learning purpose, such as math facts practice, logical thinking.
Clicking on each app name will take you to a page with more information about that app. We hope this list of math games for kids is helpful.
Math Games for Preschool kids:
TeachMe Preschool, include subjects beyond math, with good math coverage
Zorbit’s Math Adventure : takes kids to space adventures while learning numbers, counting, shapes, and more
Math in Action : has 4 sections in the app: Sorting, Addition, Subtraction, and Transformation
Learn Math with Gozoa : learn fundamental math while playing games
Peg + Cat Big Gig : learn math while playing music
First Operation: based on Montessori principles
Intro to Math: introducing math concepts using Montessori principles
Learn Math with Beluga, common core aligned, starts with preschool, will add contents for elementary school and up
Jazzy 123 : learn math musically
iLearn Boing: Savannah Adventure : covers multiple early math areas with fun games
Lola’s Math Train : learn fundamental math via taking a train ride
Montessori Numbers : another Montessori math app helping kids learn about numbers
Dinosaur Train Classic in the Jurassic Jr. : great for young dinosaur fans
Little Digits – Finger Counting : count fingers on iPad – how fun!
Math Games for school age kids covering general math areas:
Montessori Math: Add and Subtract Large Numbers
Splash Math: also available on website that can be accessed on computer or app. Common core aligned.
Marble Math Jr : also test out fine motor skills and strategic thinking, designed for kids in Grade K-2
Marble Math : similar game play as Marble Math Jr, with math problems for kids in upper elementary school
iTooch Math: a series of apps with one app for each grade
TeachMe Grade1 to 3 : one app for each grade with good math coverage
Patterns by EdNinja : learn shapes, numbers, patterns
Mathemagics: mental math tricks
Lola’s Fruit Shop: Sudoku : learn to play Sudoku
Math Games for Math Fact Practice
Math Evolve : addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division
Madagascar Math (Free): addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division
Fetch Lunch Rush (Free): a scavenger hunt game, kids not only practice additions, but also get moving around
Bugsy’s Math Quest: multiplication and division facts
Bugsy in Math Kingdom: addition and subtraction facts
Addimals: single digit addition
Oh No Fraction (Free): fraction comparison
MultiFlow: practice multiplication
Baseball Multiplication : multiplication
Math Mathews: addition and subtraction
Bubble Math : addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division
Math Vs. Zombies : addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division
Speed: practice skip counting
Free the Balloon (Free): skip counting games
Math games teaching logical and critical thinking
Math Land (Free) for school age kids
A+ Click (Free) for kids from preschool to high school
Sushi Monster (Free): reversed math thinking on multiplication and addition
Bolt : build math equations with given numbers, can be played by multiple players simultaneously
Math Games embedded in stories and word math problems
Jack and the Beanstalk: for school age kids. Kids solve math problems to move the story forward.
iLiveMath series: a series of apps focusing on different subjects, and kids solve math problems related to real life subjects
Mystery Math Town : solve mysteries with math problems
Wild Kratts Creature Math: solve math problem while learn about wild animals
Hope this is helpful for your finding the right math game app for your child. If you like more hands-on activities to help kids learn math and related subjects, like science engineer and technology, check out STEAM Kids. It is an eBook written by a group educators and engineers with well designed STEAM (Science Technology Engineer Art Math) activities for kids. There are 52 activities in the book, one for each week of the year. Each activity has extension ideas for kids who are interested to learn more. The material lists and shopping lists are very helpful when you plan the activities. The step by step guides make it easier for parents and teachers.
This list collects best apps and tools for math practice. For math learning, please visit Best Math Learning Tools for Kids.
You may also like to check out these 9 free math websites offering free math practice for kids