It was late at night, but you always did your best work at night. Besides, this case has been giving you nightmares, and the less you slept, the better. It's the 1920s; you are John Graves, a private detective that stumbled onto a case that even has the police stumped, the hunt for the Pietown Killer. At first, it was just your average disappearance case for a missing wife, and you expected it to end like they usually do by finding out that they left for a new lover. But on that day two weeks ago, you found the sight of a vile murder instead. Now, the case has consumed you, and you've gathered every shred of evidence you can from public sources and whatever the police are willing to give you, which isn't much. You feel like you're being stonewalled in every direction you search, as you've never had such resistance from your usual resources before. Whoever the Pietown Killer was, they must have deep connections and an overarching influence that could keep small-time folk from getting too close. 

You take a shot of whiskey, your drink of choice, and review your options. The latest body was found at The Drink Hole, a dive bar that serves cheap swill and is in a rougher part of town. The police kept you from interrogating the bar owner at the time, but now that they've moved on, perhaps it would be a good time to revisit and get his side of the story. You also had your connections with the authorities, a policewoman named Barbara who owed you a favor, and you might be able to get a bit more information on why you're being stonewalled for information. It was risky as it could get her into trouble too, but time was of the essence if you were going to put a stop to these murders. Whatever decision you made here would be crucial, as there was no telling how much time you had before the Pietown Killer struck again. With that in mind, what do you do?

1. Go down to The Drink Hole, and interrogate the bar owner.
2. Go down to the police station, and get information from your officer friend Barbara about the case.
