It was a regular morning in the village. Maya woke up at the sound of the first cockcrow, stretched, and drank a glass of water. Being the first to awake, Maya went out to the corridor and shouted "Good morning!"
	
Surprisingly, her voice sounded thicker than normal. She doubted if she was the one who shouted.
	
"Good morning!" She shouted again and her voice came out as thick as a man's.

Maya's family members began to step out of their rooms to the corridor to begin their daily activities. Surprisingly, most of them just passed by and gazed weirdly at her. It was strange.  Maya couldn't understand why she felt like a stranger in her family.

Suddenly, someone tapped her from behind. It was her grandpa.

"Who are you?" He asked. "And who are you here to see?”

"It's me Grandpa, Maya," she answered. Clearly, her grandpa didn’t recognize her.

"Maya? More like this young boy has had a drink," he said sarcastically and laughed a little.

"Young boy." That phrase lingered in Maya's head. She wondered why her grandfather didn't recognize her. As she thought, it began to make sense why her family didn't recognize her, why her voice sounded masculine when she shouted earlier, and why her grandpa called her a boy!

Maya ran to her room to view her reflection in the mirror. She could hear footsteps chasing after her as they assumed she was an impostor. Maya locked the door behind her the moment she got into her room.

She looked in the mirror and couldn't recognize the person she saw. Her pajamas were the same, but she wasn't. Her hair was short, her shoulders were broader and her chin seemed chiseled. The person in the mirror looked like a boy.

Maya slapped her face to ascertain that it wasn't a dream. She reached out to the reflection in the glass and the reflection simultaneously did the same. It was confirmed, the boy in the mirror was her and it wasn't a dream.

Maya let out a scream that shook the house. "Ahhh!"

The persistent knocking on her room's door stopped and the house became still. She didn't know how she had changed into a boy, but she was certain this was going to be the weirdest day of her life.
