In addition, BLOCker-Sequencing can be combined with our COLD-PCR technologies to provide ultra-sensitive DNA mutation
detection allowing us to look for DNA mutations
in a patient's blood sample rather than requiring a tumor sample.
3 percent of the Alzheimer's patients they studied had the mitochondrial DNA mutation
that Wallace investigated, while only 0.
If DNA mutations
caused by excessive sunbathing can promote skin cancer in humans, how do plants manage to get away without harm?
COLD-PCR preferentially amplifies genomic DNA mutations
in comparison to normal, wild-type sequences.
He wonders whether immobile or feeble sperm -- which normally don't stand much chance of penetrating the egg's inner sanctum -- might be more likely to harbor serious DNA mutations
than their more vigorous counterparts.
Transgenomic's SURVEYOR Nuclease is a proprietary mismatch-specific endonuclease that efficiently detects any mismatches in double-stranded DNA and cleaves at the site of DNA mutations
Even more compelling, genetic analysis of mitochondria in the blood platelets of Alzheimer's patients reveals DNA mutations
that appear capable of disrupting normal mitochondrial metabolism.
6, which allows researchers to quickly and easily find DNA mutations
and Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs) in their sequences.
Discovery Services Team Employs High-Sensitivity Technologies to Explore Links Between Mitochondrial DNA Mutations
Furthermore, he stated, "By combining PGI's technologies of pooling and CDCE with Beckman Coulter's genetic analysis platforms, rapid and cost effective automated discovery of DNA mutations
of low frequency will be possible for large populations.
The idea that DNA mutations
cause disease is common knowledge today largely thanks to one study published in 1978 by Y.
The fact that the intratumoral DNA mutations
vary considerably (DNA analysis of the same tumor from different locations within the primary tumor) and intertumoral DNA analysis (DNA samples of the same type of tumor from different patients) also varies significantly should make it clear to the most casual observer that we are barking up the wrong tree.