David Mahone was a regular boy who lived in the rural areas of England. He lived with his parents, John Mahone and Lisa Monroe. David loved to go outside and explore the countryside, which was full of lush fields of crops and animals. In the distance, there was always a forest, which his parents always told him not to enter because there were poisonous plants and vicious animals. David being a curious kid, decided he was grown enough to 'challenge the almighty jungle' not knowing what awaited him.

After school on an odd Thursday afternoon, he ventured into the forest without telling his parents. As he entered, the atmosphere almost changed from thick fog to a more visible and bright environment. He suddenly heard loud voices, which sounded like they came from a human. He decided to check the sound out, thinking it was another group of kids who were also curious. He walked through the forest, being cautious and amazed by the scenery. 

All of a sudden, he saw what looked like a monkey sleeping on the ground. Being curious, he decided to try to poke it with a stick. "What are you doing," screamed the monkey. David had never seen a monkey before, especially not a talking monkey. "Were you sleeping?" asked David. "No, I've hurt my left foot," replied the monkey. David was still in shock to hear a monkey talk but, surprisingly, he did not take it too seriously. 

David decided to help the monkey with its injury, even though the monkey looked hostile, because it was clearly a person like David who had hurt it. After a few minutes, the monkey felt better and thanked David for his assistance. The monkey later explained what happened in the forest and how he injured his left foot. 

David heard the story and was left in tears to hear what humans had done to the monkey and the other animals in the forest. He later learned that his parents also contributed to this monstrosity. Learning this, David felt a little angry towards his parents, but he was happy he was able to find out the truth. Then, the monkey said, "You are the chosen one."
