It is the root and cause of physical, psychological and social disability for millions of people, meaning that it has an immense effect of their lifestyle, and it is often poorly managed.
The pain occurs in the lower back, with radiation into the leg, which can make the normal life almost hopeless. The best way to find a way to effectively treat it is to begin from its cause and its characteristics.
The root of sciatica pain is in the lower back, and extend down through the buttock, thigh, and into the lower leg and foot. The syndrome occurs when a nerve or nerve root is compressed or pinched in the lower back, leading to pain, numbness, and weakness into the leg. The nerve and the nerve root can be pinched on multiple locations.
All health care professionals suggest that initially, conservative care should be performed, and surgery should be only considered as a last resort for this issue. It is at this point where health care professionals, including chiropractors and physiotherapists, come in.
1.Lumbar Spine Traction and Decompression Therapy
This therapy is often performed when the patient has not experienced beneficial effects from other kinds of treatments. It includes manual and instrument- assisted traction therapy to aid spread the lumbar vertebrae and allow disc material to become re-absorbed into the outer disc material.
2. McKenzie Exercises
Chiropractors and physiotherapists offer McKenzie exercises as being effective in decreasing leg pain and centralizing the pain (bringing it into the lower back).
3. Heat/Ice Therapy
This therapy can provide beneficial effects in the early stages of sciatica. It uses heat packs or ice packs to decrease pain and inflammation at the root of the problem. Ice helps to lower inflammation and swelling, while heat loosens the muscles.
4. Acupuncture and Traditional Chinese Medicine
Various Chinese medicine methods and acupuncture has proved to be able to help patients in this case. Acupuncture relies on the use of small needles inserted through the skin and into muscles at specific points along the meridian channels.
The needles used cause micro-trauma to the muscles and thus stimulate the release of hormones called endorphins. These hormones reduce the sciatica symptoms and soothe nerve and muscle pain.