Explain how the therapist might use systematic de-sensitisation to help Hamish to overcome
Identify and outline key features of two psychological approaches to psychopathology.
“Abnormality is very difficult to define. It can be hard to decide where normal behaviour
ends and abnormal behaviour begins.”
Discuss two or more definitions of abnormality.
Identify one definition of abnormality and explain one limitation associated with this
Describe systematic de-sensitisation as a method of treating abnormality.
Knowledge and understanding of the psychodynamic
approach to abnormality.
AO2 = 6 marks Evaluation of the psychodynamic approach to abnormality.
Explain one weakness of systematic de-sensitisation.
definition of abnormality that could describe Diane’s behaviour. Explain
limitation of this way of defining abnormal behaviour.
There are various types of psychological therapy for treating abnormality.
Outline what is involved in psychoanalysis.
Outline what is involved in systematic de-sensitisation.
Outline and evaluate the biological approach to psychopathology
Abnormality can be defined as ‘the failure to function adequately’.
Outline and evaluate this definition of abnormality.
Total for this question: 3 marks
The following statements refer to different approaches to abnormality.
statements that describe the psychodynamic approach.
Holding unrealistic and irrational beliefs about oneself
and the world.
Behaviour is caused mainly by the unconscious.
Behaviour is shaped by forces in the environment.
There is conflict between the id and the super-ego.
The human mind is an information processor.
Abnormality is caused by unresolved childhood problems
Outline the biological approach to abnormality.
What advice should the doctor give concerning the disadvantages of this type of
psychological therapy that Hugh could consider and explain why it might
One definition of abnormality is deviation from social norms. Identify and explain
definition of abnormality.
Evaluation of one definition of abnormality