The doctrine of the trinity is so ephemeral and so complex that the average Christian does not even begin to understand the doctrine. If asked to define it, he would probably provide a definition of the trinity, which the church has long since declared to be heresy.
Clearly, the doctrine of or belief in the illusory nature of the crucifixion was perceived by Ignatius to be a threat to what would much later become the orthodox position of the Christian church regarding the crucifixion. As it would take some years for such a belief to become widespread across the vastness of the Roman Empire, it can be deduced that the origin of the doctrine of the illusory nature of the crucifixion must be dated well back into the first century CE, and quite possibly right back to the time of the crucifixion itself.
For what reason is the cross considered a holy object in Christianity while simultaneously being the place of Christ’s torture – as you believe? Is it not the remembrance of an offense? Is it not a symbol of the crime and its instrument? Furthermore, do you not see that the crucifixion, as connected with Christ has no historical or religious basis to which it can be authentically attributed? And how conceivable is it that for three days the universe could continue without a god (Jesus) in control and maintaining its stability?
In a shocking survey of Anglican bishops in London, it was found that more than half of England’s Anglican bishops say Christians are not obliged to believe that Jesus Christ was God, according to a survey published today. The poll of 31 of England’s 39 bishops shows that many of them think that Christ’s miracles, the virgin birth and the resurrection might not have happened exactly as described in the Bible. Only 11 of the bishops insisted that Christians must regard Christ as both God and man, while 19 said it was sufficient to regard Jesus as “God’s supreme agent”. One declined to give a definite opinion.
Frequency of citation
Did you know that Muhammad is mentioned by his name in the Quran ONLY 4 times, whereas Jesus is mentioned 37 times and Moses 177 times!!
The so-called ‘son’ of God
If we examine the New Testament in order to find the basis upon which this belief is founded, we do not find any statement that can be attributed to the Messiah (Jesus), where he makes any such claim. We are, on the contrary, surprised to find that the New Testament contains what actually amounts to a rejection of this belief. It proclaims unambiguously and with utmost clarity that there is no God other than God and that the Messiah is but a Messenger of God sent to the Children of Israel (the Jews):
Jesus states in the Gospel of Barnabas 94:1: “And having said this, Jesus said again: ‘I confess before heaven, and call to witness everything that dwelleth upon the earth, that I am a stranger to all that men have said of me, to wit, that I am more than a man. For I am a man, born of a woman, subject to the judgement of God; that live here like as other men, subject to common miseries.'”
100% plagiarism in the ‘Holy Bible’
Isaiah 37 and 2 Kings 19 are identical word for word. Yet they have been attributed to two different authors, centuries apart, whom the Christians claim have been inspired by God. Who is copying whom? Who is stealing from whom? The 32 renowned Bible scholars of the Revised Standard Version say that the author of the Book of Kings is “Unknown” yet they expect everyone to regard these as the Words of God!!
There is a surprisingly steady stream of conversion from Judaism to Islam. There is even an organization called “Jews for Allah.” Prominent Jewish converts of the last century include Leopold Weiss (Muhammad Asad) and Maryam Begum (Maryam Jameelah), who married the famous Indian Muslim scholar Abul A’la Maududi. Both were prolific authors and wrote dozens of books.
Children are pushed to church
“When you’re young you get taken to church by your parents and you get pushed into religion at school. They’re trying to put something into your mind. Obviously because nobody goes to church and nobody believes in God. Why? Because they haven’t interpreted the Bible as it was intended. I didn’t really believe in God as l’d been taught it. It was just like something out of a science fiction novel. You’re taught just to have faith, you don’t have to worry about it, just believe what we’re telling you.”
The name Jesus
This unique name has gone out of currency among the Jews and the Christians from the 2nd century after Christ. Among the Jews, because it came to be a name of ill – repute, the name of one who blasphemed in Jewry; and among the Christians because it came to be the proper name of their God. The Muslim will not hesitate to name his son Eesa because it is an honoured name, the name of a righteous servant of the Lord.
No two copies are exactly alike
“In copying the inspired originals by hand the element of human frailty entered in, and so none of the thousands of copies extant today in the original language are perfect duplicates. The result is that no two copies are exactly alike.” Now you see why the whole “foreword” of 27 pages is eliminated from their Bibles. Allah was making them hang themselves with their own erudition..
“The whole Bible contains sixty-six books written by forty different authors over a space of about fifteen centuries.” It is clearly said in the book that: Jesus Christ himself wrote nothing about Christianity. “The Gospels do not give a complete history of the life of Christ. They are rather memoirs.”
Who is Jehovah?
Astonishing as it may sound, it is an admitted fact that prior to the sixteenth century, the word “Jehovah,” was unheard of. Whenever the origin of this word appeared in its true Hebrew form in Jewish Scriptures (read from right to left as in Arabic) Yet, Huh, Wav, Huh; or YHWH. these four letters were preceded by a substitute word “Adonai,” to warn the reader that the following word was not to be articulated. The Jews took meticulous care in repeating this exercise in their “Book of God” six thousand, eight hundred and twenty-three times – interpolating the words “Adonai” or “Elohim.” They sincerely believed that this awesome name of God was never to be pronounced. This prohibition was no ordinary affair: it called for a penalty of death on one who dared to utter it, and this taboo has been more successful than all the “DO’s” and “DON’T’s” of the Ten Commandments put together.
In essence, it is an easy chance for the Jews to prove that the Quran is false – that it is not a divine revelation. All they have to do is organize themselves, treat the Muslims nicely for a few years and then say, “Now what does your holy book say about who are your best friends in the world – the Jews or the Christians? Look what we Jews have done for you!” That is all they have to do to disprove the Quran’s authenticity, yet they have not done it in 1400 years. But, as always, the offer still stands open!
Recently, the leading intellectual in the Catholic Church – a man by the name of Hans – studied the Quran and gave his opinion of what he had read. This man has been around for some time, and he is highly respected in the Catholic Church, and after careful scrutiny, he reported his findings, concluding, “God has spoken to man through the man, Muhammad.”
“It is scarcely surprising… as the churches of the world are emptying, the mosques of Islam are filling up, for in this age, as for the last fourteen centuries, the knowledge about Jesus to which only the Muslims have access, is far more accurate and far more reliable than any of the perversions of the original teachings of and accounts about Jesus which still exist today – and which are all that today’s believing Christians, whether Unitarian or Trinitarian, have – and in this age, as for the last fourteen centuries, the only way to truly follow Jesus, Prophet of Islam, peace be on him, is by following the way of Islam.”
Out of the total of 27 Books of the New Testament, more than half is authored by Paul. As opposed to Paul, the Master has not written a single word of the twenty-seven books. If you can lay your hands on what is called “‘A Red Letter Bible,” you will find every word alleged to have been uttered by Jesus – in red ink and the rest in normal black ink. Don’t be shocked to find that in this so called Gospel of Jesus, over ninety percent of the 27 Books of the New Testament is printed in black ink!
Many Christian leaders of the past advocated the inferior status of women. The Apostle Paul called for women to keep silent in the presence of men and forbade them to be teachers of men. Martin Luther equated girls with being weeds!
Christian countries’ laws!
The laws which exist in the ‘Christian’ countries of the West today – the laws governing birth and death, the formation and dissolution of marriage, the rights over property within and outside marriage, or in the event of divorce or death, adoption and guardianship, commerce and industry and all the rest – are not to be found in the Gospels. The laws which define what constitutes criminal behavior and the various penalties for such behavior, are no longer derived from the Bible. Murderers are no longer executed, for example, and adulterers are no longer stoned to death. Some laws, such as those which legalise usury in all its forms, flatly contradict what has in fact always been forbidden by God. Most of these laws are not laws which have been revealed to man by God.
That Jesus, was sent specifically to the Tribe of Israel that is, to the twelve tribes of the Tribe of Israel, who were the descendants of the twelve sons of Jacob, who was also known as Israel. The teachings of Jesus were intended for those who claimed to be following Moses, but who no longer had access to his original teachings. Thus Jesus was given knowledge of the original Torah which had been revealed to Moses, and he always emphasised that he had come to uphold the law of Moses and not to change it even by one jot.
The word ‘father’
According to Theodore Zahn, the article of faith up until about 250 AD was, “I believe in God, the Almighty.” Between 180 and 210 AD the word ‘Father’ was added before ‘the Almighty’. This was bitterly contested by a number of the leaders of the Church. Bishop Victor and Bishop Zephysius are on record as condemning this movement, since they regarded it an unthinkable sacrilege to add or subtract any word to the Scriptures.
Jesus came to bring war
The ‘God’ of war. Jesus said: “Think not that I am come to send peace on earth: I came not to send peace, but a sword.”
According to a Jewish practice – if one man dies leaving no offspring behind, then the 2nd brother of the deceased husband takes her to wife, to give her his seed. But when he fails and dies, the 3rd takes her on; and so on and so on. Not sure if they are still practising that nowadays.
12 verses – Gone!
Note that John chapter 8, begins with verse 12. Can you imagine any chapter in any religious Book beginning with verse 12 as the first verse? Verses 1 to 11 are expunged as a fabrication by the 32 Christian Scholars of the highest eminence, backed by 50 cooperating denominations in their ‘Most up to date Version of the Bible’ the Revised Standard Version, first published in 1952. The translators claimed to have had access to the ‘Most Ancient Manuscripts’ from which they learnt that the story about the adulteress was a fabrication.
Born Again Christian
‘Born-Again’ is the latest cult among the Christians. Billy Graham claims that there are 70 million such cultists in America. Immaculate people, veritable angels! Yet in that nation over a quarter million ‘gays’ gathered in San Fransisco last June on a pilgrimage, led by 50 lesbians on motorbikes. In New York, there are only one million more women than men and of the ‘men’ it is said that one third are sodomites! Overall there are 10 million ‘problem drinkers’ (meaning drunkards), in the USA. If all this is true with 70 million veritable angels (‘Born-Again’) in their midst, then it gives a lie to Paul’s “a little leaven leaveneth the whole”(1 Cor. 5:6).
He claimed no divinity
There is not a single statement throughout the Bible, in all its 66 volumes of the Protestant versions, or in the 73 volumes of the Roman Catholic versions, where Jesus claims to be God or where he says ‘worship me’. Nowhere does he say that he and God Almighty ‘are one’ and ‘the same person. The ‘claimed divinity’ was invented by early Christians.
The human mind can’t help reasoning that since the ‘begotten son’ of an African will look like an African, and that of a China man as a Chinese, and that of an Indian like an Indian: so the begotten son of God aught naturally to look like God. Billions of beautiful pictures and replicas of this ‘only begotten son of God’ are put in peoples hands. He looks like a European with blonde hair, blue eyes and handsome features like one I saw in the ‘King of Kings’ or ‘The Day of Triumph’ or ‘Jesus of Nazareth’. Remember Jeffrey Hunter? The ‘Savior’ of the Christian is more like a German than a Jew with his polly nose. So naturally, if the son is a white man, the father would also be a white man (God?). Hence the darker skinned races of the earth subconsciously have the feeling of inferiority ingrained in their souls as God’s ‘step children’. No amount of face creams, skin lighteners and hair strengtheners will erase the inferiority.
The begotten ‘son’ of God
Begotten is an animal act, belonging to the lower animal functions of sex. Do Christians attribute such a lowly capacity to God? Although this pernicious word ‘begotten’ has now unceremoniously been thrown out of the ‘Most Accurate’ version of the Bible, the Revised Standard Version (R.S.V.), its ghost still lingers on in the Christian mind, both black and white. Through its insidious brainwashing the white man is made to feel superior to his black Christian brother of the same Church and Denomination. And in turn, the black man is given a permanent inferiority complex through this dogma.
Jesus in the Quran
a) Mary, the mother of Jesus, was a virtuous woman, and honored above the women of all nations. b) It was God’s own Revelation to mankind. c) Jesus was the ‘Word’ of God. d) He was the Christ that the Jews were waiting for. e) God will empower Jesus to perform miracles even in infancy. f) Jesus was born miraculously, without any male intervention. g) God will vouchsafe him Revelation. h) Jesus will give life to the dead by God’s permission, and that he will heal those born blind and the lepers by God’s permission.
Mary in The Quran
There is a Chapter in the Quran, named Maryam (Mary), named in honour of Mary the mother of Jesus Christ, peace and blessings of Allah be upon them both; again, such an honour is not to be found given to Mary in the Christian Bible. Out of the 66 books of the Protestants and 73 of the Roman Catholics, not one is named after Mary or her son. You will find books named after Matthew, Mark, Luke, John, Peter, Paul and two score more obscure names, but not a single one is that of Mary!
Since none of the Gospels are written by people who personally saw and heard the events and words which they describe, it is hardly surprising that their respective accounts of particular events often differ and at times even contradict each other – and that even highly significant events in the life of Jesus are not described in all of the Gospels.
Sins or Bible’s fabrication?
“Every time I had picked up the Bible in my life, I had come across some really strange and actually dirty passages. I could not understand why the Prophets of God would do such abominable things when there are plenty of average people who live their whole lives without thinking of doing such disgusting and immoral things, such as those attributed to Prophets David, Solomon, and Lot, (peace be upon them all) just to name a few. I remember hearing in Church that since these Prophets commit such sins, how could the common people be any better than them?(Erin Fannoun)
Did Jesus write the Bible?
No, Jesus did not write the bible that was revealed by God. Not even was it written immediately after his departure. He did not order or desire at any time in his life to write anything on his behalf. Therefore, the Bible which is in circulation today is not a representation of Jesus’ teachings.
The authenticity of God’s teachings
“As I began reading English translations of the Quran, I became more and more convinced of the truth and authenticity of Allah’s teachings contained in those 114 chapters. Having been around Muslims in my formative years, I knew well that they were not the bloodthirsty, barbaric terrorists that the news media and the televangelists paint them to be. Perhaps this knowledge led me to continue my personal research further than another person would have.” (Adam Gadahn)
The ‘son’ of God!
The Christians misunderstand God’s Word and called Jesus the son of God. This is the beauty of the Quran; it asks you to reflect and reason, and not to worship the sun or moon but the One Who has created everything. The Quran asks man to reflect upon the sun and moon and God’s creation in general. Do you realize how different the sun is from the moon? They are at varying distances from the earth, yet appear the same size to us; at times one seems to overlap the other. Even when many of the astronauts go to space, they see the insignificant size of the earth and vastness of space. They become very religious, because they have seen the Signs of Allah. (Cat Stevens)
The striking difference between Islam and every other religion is that Islam is the only religion that makes a strict distinction between the creator and the creation. (Bruce Paterson)
To become a Catholic
You need to study for nine months. What if I died before I became a Catholic because the priests wouldn’t let me become a Christian! Then what?
Lack of knowledge
The biggest problem with non-Muslims, is their lack of understanding and lack of knowledge as to what Islam is really all about and who the Muslims are supposed to be. I pray for them all and ask Allah to forgive the Muslims for not showing a better picture to everyone.
Ban the book!
George Bernard Shaw said that the Bible is “The most dangerous book on Earth, keep it under lock and key.” Keep the Bible out of your children’s reach. But who will follow his advice?
The word ‘Messiah’ comes from the Arabic and Hebrew word ‘masaha’, which means to rub, to massage, to anoint. The religious significance is “the one who is anointed” – priests and kings were anointed in consecration to their offices. Messiah translated Christ does not mean God. Even the heathen Cyrus is called ‘Christ’ in the Bibe. (Isaiah 45:1)
The nature of the revelation which Jesus received is not contradicted by any historical record which states otherwise. There is no record of Jesus being presented with inscribed tablets as happened with Moses, for example, or of his receiving a series of revelations like Muhammad, blessings and peace be on all of them, with certain disciples being appointed to record these revelations as they occurred – but not any of Jesus’ s own words – in order to ensure that the revelation was preserved exactly as it was revealed.
Christ is not a name
There are thousands prophecies in the Old Testament regarding the coming of a Messiah (the term ‘Messiah’ is translated as ‘Christ’). There is not one single prophecy where Jesus is mentioned by name. And not a single Prophecy where it says that the name of the Messiah will be Jesus, and that his mother’s name will be Mary, that his supposed father will be Joseph the carpenter; that he will be born in the reign of Herod the King, etc. etc.? No! There are no such details! Then how can Christians conclude that those ‘thousand’ Prophecies refer to Jesus?!
Muhammed in the bible
Muhammed is mentioned by name in the Song of Solomon 5:16. The Hebrew word used there is Muhammuddim. The end letters IM is plural of respect majesty and grandeur. Minus “im” the name would be Muhamud translated as “altogether lovely” in the Authorised Version of the Bible or ‘The Praised One’ ‘the one worthy of Praise’ i.e. Muhammad!
There were no Arabic Bibles in existence in the 6th Century of the Christian Era when Muhummed lived and preached! Besides, he was absolutely unlettered and unlearned. No human had ever taught him a word.
History’s great leaders
“People like Pasteur and Salk are leaders in the first sense. People like Gandhi and Confucius, on one hand, and Alexander, Caesar and Hitler on the other, are leaders in the second and perhaps the third sense. Jesus and Buddha belong in the third category alone. Perhaps the greatest leader of all times was Mohammed, who combined all three functions. To a lesser degree, Moses did the same.”
The Gospel of Barnabas
None of today’s officially accepted Gospels – or, for that matter, the Gospel of Barnabas, whose authenticity continues to be attacked by the established Church because its contents contradict official dogma on several fundamental issues – are capable of being objectively authenticated.
Paul the traitor
Paul is the most controversial figure in Christianity. He was considered to be a traitor to Jesus’ thought by the latter’s family and by the apostles who had stayed in Jerusalem in the circle around James. Paul created Christianity at the expense of those whom Jesus had gathered around him to spread his teachings.
After the adoption of the Trinity, the Pauline Church ordered all Gospels written in Hebrew to be destroyed. Edicts were issued stating that anyone found in possession of an unauthorised Gospel would be put to death. This was the first well-organised attempt to remove all the records of Jesus’s original teaching, whether in human beings or books, which contradicted the doctrine of theTrinity.
Paul in his letter to the Corinthians admitted the centrality of this doctrine to the entire body of Christian faith: “Tell me, if Christ is preached as raised from the dead, how is it that some of you say there is no resurrection of the dead? If there is no resurrection of the dead, Christ himself has not been raised. And if Christ has not been raised, our preaching is void of content and your faith is empty too. Indeed, we should then be exposed as false witnesses of God, for we have borne witness before Him that He raised up Christ…” (I Corinthians 15:12-15)
In the fourth year of the Emperor Zeno’s rule in 478 AD, the remains of Barnabas were discovered, and a copy of the Gospel of Barnabas, written in his own hand, was found on his breast. This is recorded in the Acta Sanctorum, Boland Junii, Tome II, pages 422 450, published in Antwerp in 1698. It has been claimed by the Roman Catholic Church that the Gospel found in the grave of Barnabas was that of Matthew, but no steps have been taken to display this copy. The exact contents of the twenty-five mile long library of the Vatican continue to remain in the dark.
All the Hebrew and early Greek versions of Mark’s Gospel have been destroyed, and people can only speculate as to how much of the Gospel was changed or altered during these transitions from one language to another, although it has now been generally accepted that the final sectionwas tacked on to the end of the basic work at a later stage in order to round it off.
They never met Jesus!
Luke, Matthew and John never met Jesus. Luke, who wrote the Acts of the Apostles, was Paul’s personal physician. Matthew was a tax collector. John Mark, whose Gospel is the earliest of the four accepted Gospels, was the son of the sister of Barnabas.
How accurate are the Gospels?
“There can be no hope of going back to the original text itself,’ there is still the possibility that on the whole all the Gospels – including The Gospel of Barnabas – in their present form do contain a certain degree of accuracy and truth. It is possible to read all of these Gospels and find elements of what must be true in all of them – but it is impossible to claim that any of them are entirely accurate or to rely completely and unreservedly on any one of them.” (Ecumenical Translation)
The Gospel of Jesus
The one Gospel which we do not have is the Gospel of Jesus, the original revelation that he received, in the original language in which it was revealed so that the accuracy and authenticity of any translation of that original text could always be ascertained and assessed simply by referring back to that original text whenever the occasion might arise. According to the Gospel of Barnabas, the revelation which was given to Jesus was never preserved as a written text at any stage, but was more in the nature of a well of wisdom which was placed in the heart of Jesus by the angel Gabriel, and from which he could draw as he needed. This makes all Gospels today merely a collection of stories of what people heard about Jesus.
It does remain a great pity that there is no complete original authentic text of the Gospel of Jesus, which has been verified beyond any reasonable doubt, in existence today.
Hiding Barnabas from Christians!
A microfilm copy of the Gospel of Barnabas in the Library of Congress was obtained, and a fresh edition of the English translation was printed in Pakistan. A copy of this edition was used for the purposes of reprinting a revised version of the Gospel of Barnabas thereafter. The new English edition, understandably, has caused the present Christian Church a certain degree of irritation – for if the contents of the Gospel of Barnabas are true, then it clearly follows that most of the versions of Christianity which exist today – and accordingly the various Churches which promote them – do not have very firm foundations.
This is because the Gospel of Barnabas confirms that Jesus was not God, nor the ‘son’ of God, and that he was neither crucified in the first place, nor subsequently ‘raised from the dead’ thereafter. Accordingly virtually all the established churches, however near or far they are to each other, have united in their various efforts to discredit the English version of the Gospel of Barnabas by discrediting the Italian edition from which it was translated.
Traditionally, the upper classes i.e. the clergy, monarchy and nobility celebrated Christmas Day on the 25th December. The next day, the lower classes were permitted to celebrate Christmas and they used to exchange Christmas presents in little boxes. Hence, the term Boxing Day. The twentieth century saw the introduction of new feudal traditions such as ‘Trooping the Colour’; the Christmas broadcast to the neo-colonies of the Commonwealth by the Governor of the Church of England – the Queen; and the Armistice Day ceremony. Royal weddings were moved from the privacy of Windsor to the public domain in Westminster Abbey and St. Paul’s Cathedral.
15 million dollars
The Publishers of the (Bible) Revised Standard Version, made a net profit of 15 million dollars on the first edition alone. The authors of these anonymous books are either ‘Unknown’ or are ‘Probably’ or ‘Likely’ or are of ‘Doubtful’ origin. “What a miserable price in exchange for eternity!”
More than 700 statements!
In the first five books of the Bible – Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers and Deuteronomy -there are more than 700 statements which prove not only that God is not the author of these books, but that even Moses himself had no hand in them:
- “And the Lord said unto him. Away, get thee down …”
- “And Moses said unto the Lord, the people cannot come …”
- “And the Lord said unto Moses, Go on before the people …”
- “And the Lord speak unto Moses, saying …”
- “And the Lord said unto Moses, Get down, charge the …”
It is manifest and apparent that these are neither the Words of God nor of Moses. They indicate the voice of a third person writing from hearsay.
Old and New Testaments
Nowhere does the ‘New Testament’ call itself the New Testament, and nowhere the Old Testament calls itself the Old Testament. And also the word “Bible” is unknown within the pages of the Bible. God forgot to give a title to ‘His’ books!
Why “according to”?
Why does every Gospel begin with the introduction According To … According To … Why “According to?”. Because not a single one of the vaunted four thousand copies extant carries its author’s autograph! Hence the supposition “according to!” Even the internal evidence proves that Matthew was not the author of the first Gospel which bears his name.
The book of Matthew
“Early tradition ascribed this gospel to the apostle Matthew, but scholars nowadays almost all reject this view. We still conveniently refer to the author as “Matthew”. ‘Conveniently’ because otherwise every time we made a reference to ‘Matthew’ we would have to say ‘The first book of The New Testament’ Chapter so and so, verse so and so. And again and again ‘The first book …’ etc.” (J. B. Phillips, A prebendary of the Chichester Cathedral, England).
What is in the bible?
“What a book is the bible in the matter of variety of contents! … whole pages are taken up with obscure names, and more is told of a genealogy than of the day of judgment. Stories are half told, and the night falls before we can tell where victory lay. Where is there anything (in the religious literature of the world) to correspond with this?”
A beautiful necklace of words and phrases undoubtedly! It is much ado about nothing, and rank blasphemy against God Almighty for authorising such an embarrassing hotch potch. Yet the Christians gloat over the very defects of their book, like Romeo over the “mole” on Juliet’s lip!
“There are claimed contradictions that theologians have not resolved to every atheist’s satisfaction. There are textual difficulties with which scholars are still wrestling. Only a bible illiterate would deny these and other problems”. (The Plain Truth, July 1975).
Unknown authors! Why?
- Genesis: Author is one of the “five books of Moses.”
- Exodus: Author is generally credited to Moses.
- Leviticus: Author is generally credited to Moses.
- Numbers: Author is generally credited to Moses.
- Deuteronomy: Author is generally credited to Moses.
- Joshua: Major part credited to Joshua.
- Judges: Author is possibly Samuel.
- Ruth: Author is not definitely known, perhaps Samuel.
- First Samuel: Author is unknown.
- Second Samuel: Author is unknown.
- First kings: Author is unknown.
- Second kings: Author is unknown.
- First chronicles: Author is unknown, probably collected and edited by Ezra.
- Second chronicles: is likely collected and edited by Ezra.
- Ezra: probably written or edited by Ezra.
- Esther: Author is unknown.
- Job: Author is unknown.
- Psalms: Author is principally David, though there are other writers.
- Ecclesiastes: Author is doubtful, but commonly assigned to Solomon.
- Isaiah: Mainly credited to Isaiah. Parts may have been written by others.
- Jonah: Author is unknown.
- Habakkuk: Nothing is known about the author nor the place or time of his birth.
Reliability of the Bible?
The contents of the earliest Greek manuscripts of the four officially accepted Gospels are in fact just as capable of having been ‘forged’, albeit during an earlier period, as are the contents of the Italian manuscript of the Gospel of Barnabas. We just do not know. ‘There can be no hope of going back to the original text itself,’ there is still the possibility that on the whole all the Gospels – including The Gospel of Barnabas – in their present form do contain a certain degree of accuracy and truth.
It is possible to read all of these Gospels and find elements of what must be true in all of them – but it is impossible to claim that any of them are entirely accurate or to rely completely and unreservedly on any one of them.
God challenges you
In chapter 4 verse 82 “Quran invites the non-Muslim to find a mistake. As a matter of fact, the seriousness and difficulty of the challenge aside, the actual presentation of such a challenge in the first place is not even in human nature and is inconsistent with man’s personality. One doesn’t take an exam in school and after finishing the exam, write a note to the instructor at the end saying, “This exam is perfect. There are no mistakes in it. Find one if you can!” One just doesn’t do that. The teacher would not sleep until he found a mistake! And yet this is the way the Quran approaches people.” (Dr. Gary Miller)
“And the Lord said to Moses, ‘Say to the people of Israel, When either a man or a woman makes a special vow, the vow of the Nazirite, (one separated or one consecrated) to separate himself to the Lord, he shall separate himself from wine and strong drink; he shall drink no vinegar made from wine or strong drink, and shall not drink any juice of grapes or eat grapes, fresh or dried. All the days of his separation he shall eat nothing that is produced by the grapevine, not even the seeds or the skins.”.
Jesus never drunk alcohol, yet almost all Christians drink alcohol and ignore his teachings.