Translates words or phrases from French, German or Spanish to
English and English to Spanish, French, German, Italian, or Portuguese
using machine translation technology. Allows the user to get the
"gist" of the message.
The Internet Acronym Server
This site can be used to look up the meaning of an acronym (abbreviations
constructed from the first letters of several words, such as ADA for
American Dental Association). You can also type in a word to get a list
of acronyms that are associated with it. Sponsored by University College,
Cork in Ireland.
Explorers Picture Dictionary with Links
Enchanted Learning, a producer of children’s educational websites,
provides this picture dictionary of more than 1,800 illustrated dictionary
entries. Most entries have links to additional information, activities,
and child-friendly, related websites. There are links to English-French,
English-German, English-Portuguese, or the English-Spanish versions.
Merriam-Webster has put their Collegiate Dictionary and Thesaurus online,
along with word games, contests, and other features.
Merriam-Webster Medical Dictionary
Sponsored by the National Library of Medicine, this site includes
links to encyclopedias, glossaries, and dictionaries of medical terms
in English as well as eight European languages.
For those times when you can remember the meaning of a word but not
the word itself, the OneLook Reverse Dictionary can help. The site indexes
hundreds of online dictionaries, encyclopedias, and other reference
sites for words that have definitions similar to the words you search
for. Developed in 1996 by Robert K. Ware, president of Study Technologies.
Oxford English Dictionary |
Definitions, pronunciations, and word histories. Usage of modern and historical words traced through 2.5 million quotations.
Enter any word and this site, using published reference books, provides
rhymes, synonyms, antonyms, definitions, related words and more for
virtually every word. Even includes examples of how the word was used
in Shakespeare’s works.
Wordsmyth: The Educational Dictionary-Thesaurus
Wordsmyth is an American English Dictionary with an integrated
thesaurus. It includes 50,000 headwords along with interactive, hyperlinked
synonyms. Many additional features are included such as crossword solvers,
anagram solvers, and vocabulary quiz makers.
Return to top
Snap Shots enhances links with visual previews. Learn More
February 13, 2012