For students at Barakat’s schools in Afghanistan and Pakistan, education is not only about reading, writing and arithmetic; it is about learning how to think, question and speak for change. Through quality education, our students gain access to opportunities – not only for economic mobility, but also for meaningful engagement with society. They gain the skills they need to actively participate in the construction of strong, healthy, just communities. To be thoughtful citizens. This aspect of education is especially important within groups that have traditionally lacked a public voice in society, such as girls and women: for these persons, building capabilities in critical thinking can truly open minds to the injustices and possibilities of life.
When the students from our schools and literacy programs were asked about the importance of women’s education, their answers reflected this remarkable work that goes on within Barakat’s schools. Here are a few of their responses:
Barakat: Why do YOU think education for women and girls is important?
“Education is a basic human right and educated women are the need of the society” – Mastoora, 18, Afghanistan.
“Every woman has the right to be literate” – Farida, 22, Afghanistan.
“Women are as important as boys are” – Ishaq, 16, Pakistan.
“Our country needs more literate women, and education is an absolute right for women. Education is an important tool in rebuilding our country” – Ameda, 20, Afghanistan.
“Women should become as educated as men – Aziza, 30, Afghanistan. Education is the best way to fight poverty” – Enjilah, 20, Afghanistan.
“Education is the way to have a good life” – Nasima, 20, Afghanistan.
“It is a basic teaching of our religion that education is obligatory for men and women” – Mohib, 15, Pakistan.
“A society that aspires to progress needs educated women “- Rokhshana, 35, Afghanistan.
“An educated population, men and women alike, is at the root of a developing society” – Salmat, 36, Afghanistan.
“An educated public is the basic ingredient of democracy” – Zulfia, 35, Afghanistan.
“Only education can let women know what respect they deserve” – Rozika, 14, Pakistan.