Of course. Here is your list of 5 beautiful and scenic locations in San Francisco.

1. Strawberry Hill
This hidden gem is located in the Golden Gate Park area near Huntington Falls. Strawberry Hill is a natural island formation that rises 430 feet in the air and is situated in Stow Lake. The natural beauty of this area is the real attraction here. Visitors find plenty of wildlife in the form of squirrels, birds, and ducks. There’s a beautiful waterfall, along with a unique Japanese temple. You can rent a paddle or row boat and be sure to bring a picnic lunch and your camera.

2. Twin Peaks
This area was once known as “Los Pechos de la Choca” or the Breasts of the Maiden. At 922 feet high, Twin Peaks offers remarkable views of the entire Bay Area. Though many do come to enjoy the spectacular 180-degree vistas, there are numerous other opportunities to explore the indigenous flora and fauna. 

3. Palace of Fine Arts
Located in a lovely area of San Francisco, the Palace of Fine Arts combines all the natural beauty of this area with some highly eclectic architecture. It’s located in the Marina District and was originally built to house works of art for the Panama-Pacific Exposition of 1915. In addition to the breathtaking architecture, the area is surrounded by pristine lagoons and lush foliage. 

4. Shakespeare Garden
This is a well-known destination for couples who want to exchange their wedding vows in an extraordinary garden. This quaint garden is tucked away near the California Academy of Sciences and can easily be overlooked. This serene, but small park features brightly colored trees and flowers, along with wide pathways for roaming.

5. Yerba Buena Gardens
This lovely oasis in the city offers all the best features of both worlds. Visitors will enjoy colorful trees, flowers, and waterfalls, as well as upscale galleries, theaters, and museums. Among the shops and restaurants are many activities for people of all ages. Revel in a local theater production complete with ballet dancers or visit the Children’s Creativity Museum.
