Advanced Composition discussion
“Anemia, an easily reversible feature of end-stage renal disease, is an independent risk factor for clinical and echocardiographic cardiac disease, as well as mortality in end-stage renal disease patients.” (Robert N. Foley, 1996). Anemia in End stage renal disease patients can be easily managed. With the help of Epogen medication, the disease process is decreased. Patients suffer less cardiac diseases added to the renal disease. This will allow the patients to continue to be healthier than without the epogen. With the patients healthier less other medications will be needed. Patients with added heart disease are on multiple medications. Cardiac disease also includes more expensive procedures like cardiac caths, bypass surgery, and valve replacements. Pacemakers are common to help cardiac patients heart stay in rhythm. Not only is the expense more costly for sicker patients, the patients can no longer enjoy life as much being sick. Quality is poor. The quality can become so poor that walker, wheelchair, oxygen tank are now needed to go or do anything. Now the patient with extra medical conditions no longer qualifies for transplant. This patient will always be dependent on dialysis. Now with the cost of epogen saved through decreasing the dose, patients are sicker and costing more.
Yes I think the bullying is a coping mechanism set in from the home experience, and now it might be just automatic. The person may not realize it is wrong at all anymore. This is very dangerous. Unremorsfulness is a sign that it is leading from mal-adaptive behavior to psychopathic behavior. It could continue to worsen especially if no one speaks up about the bully. The child being bullied might be too scared to say anything. The adults need to observe and put a stop to it however possible.
I wonder do the people that are not able to get the narcotic turn to other drugs or street drugs? Will these cause seekers to go to multiple physicians and pharmacies? Could this lead to the premature deaths we hear about that overdosed on multiple medications?