1.	Air fryer blueberry pound cake - This recipe makes a basic dessert out of blueberries. 
2.	Berry coffee cake - This recipe is easy to throw together with a berry of your choice. 
3.	Berry frozen pops - If you have water, berries, and popsicle molds, you can easily make this recipe.
4.	Berry smoothie - This is one of the most basic ways to make a quick meal with strawberries and blueberries.
5.	Blueberry blini - With a few baking ingredients and blueberries, you can make this pancake dish.
6.	Blueberry buckle - If you have blueberries on hand, you can whip up this crumbly, delicious dessert.
7.	Blueberry cobbler - Making a cobbler is one of the best ways to use up leftover blueberries.
8.	Blueberry compote - This sugar syrup concoction is easy to make with blueberries.
9.	Blueberry jam - Homemade blueberry jam just requires a few basic ingredients to cook on the stove.
10. Blueberry lemon muffins - For a breakfast treat, you can use up your blueberries to make lemony muffins.
11. Blueberry muffins - Blueberry muffins are a classic blueberry baking recipe.
12. Blueberry quick bread - You don't even need yeast to make this berry bread.
13. Blueberry sauce - A simple blueberry sauce is a good way to use up leftover blueberries in your fridge.
14. Blueberry scones - To pair with tea, make some blueberry scones with simple baking ingredients. 
15. Blueberry sorbet - If you have a blender or food processor, you can make this blueberry dessert.
16. Blueberry strawberry muffins - If you have leftover blueberries and strawberries, you can make these muffins.
17. Blueberry waffles - Blueberry waffles are a sweet and tart treat to make with blueberries.
18. Mixed berry pancakes - If you have blueberries and strawberries to use up, top them on your pancakes. 
19. Strawberry bundt cake - A bundt cake goes well with strawberry flavoring. 
20. Strawberry jam - Strawberry jam is simple to make with a stove and leftover strawberries. 
21. Strawberry muffins - These are as easy to make as blueberry muffins with a different taste.
