Michael tapped his feet on the wooden floor in rhythm. One-two-three-four, one-two-three-four he tapped, keeping time to an unheard song. He opened his eyes widely, then stood up from his bed and walked to the piano at the other end of the room.

Michael could not hear the music, since he was born deaf. The sheet music on the piano might as well have been written in Greek because he had never heard a note in his life let alone knew what sounds they corresponded to on paper. But he was guided by an internal song, a melody that played in his head that manifested itself as toe taps and a renewed effort to match the song to piano keys.

Fingers tapped keys as he tried to discern between the vibrations of one key and another. He reasoned that the keys were higher in pitch from the lowest at the left of the keyboard, to the highest at the right. Michael scribbled on his notepad a series of words and other shorthand he invented when he first started his journey into music at 12 years old. Michael dreamed of becoming a professional musician when he attended a concert with his parents where the pianist was playing music (which he could not hear, but could feel as vibrations in his seat). The vibrations were in a specific rhythm that caused Michael to "feel" the music as it was playing, and it subsequently filled his mind with many pictures and colors; he wanted to mimic that feeling by learning more about music and playing his own songs.

Now, Michael's wife came into the room and took a seat. She listened intently as Michael stroked the keys in a stylistic, deft manner, the sounds filling the room and creating a tapestry of rhythm and melody. As soon as Michael finished, his wife, Helen, smiled and clapped. "That actually sounds fantastic, Michael," she said to him in sign language. Michael smiled back and nodded his head. "Do you think the record label will like it?" he gestured back with his hands. Michael was creating a song that he could take to Interesting Records, hoping to get a deal for an album and become a household name in the process.

"Yes, of course!" Helen signed. "You are amazing." 

Michael, with a sigh of relief, mouthed "Thank you."
