Direction (Q. Nos. 1-10): Study the situation given below to answer these questions.
Although he was born in a little village near the coast and had gone to school in the nearest seaside town. Mr. Smith was not a lover of the sea; even when walking along the sands, he was always afraid of being cut off by the tide. He was not a very good swimmer, so perhaps this accounts for it.
After working for some years in London he was transferred to a coast resort, and of ourse, the family outings were often made to the beach. One day his children pleaded to go out into the bay in a boat. The sun shone brightly, there was little wind and the water was calm. So Mr. Smith hired a boat and with his two children rowed out into the bay. Of course they were tempted to go farther than they had intended, past the protecting cliffs and out to the open sea. At first all went well,but when they decided to turn back they encountered difficulties. A strong breeze had sprung up and the currents here were rather treacherous.
Mr. Smith rowed hard, but it seemed they were making little progress. The children, were waving to attract the attention
of the people on the beach. Just then a motor boat appeared from the direction of the bay. Their plight had been noticed and the boat had come to their rescue.
A line was soon attached and they were towed back round the cliff to the shore. Mr. Smith's dislike of the sea was not diminished by this experience.
1.Mr. Smith was nervous of walking along the sands because
(a) he had no love for the sea
(b) there the sea was infested with deadly monsters
(c) he feared that the tide may cut him off from the land
(d) the sea was too deep even near the coast
2.What accounted for his dislike of the sea?
(a) He was not a good swimmer, he feared that he might get drowned in the sea
(b) The protruding cliffs made navigation dangerous
(c) He was accustomed to comfortable city life
(d) Many a tragedy had occurred in the past near the sea coast
3.What did the children plead for?
(a) Climb the cliff to have better view of the bay
(b) Go to a coast resort
(c) Taken for a picnic on the beach
(d) Go out into the bay in a boat
4.Mr. Smith was tempted to go farther away from land than he had intended because
(a) he enjoyed rowing in the bright sunshine
(b) the sea was calm, there being little wind
(c) his children wanted to go far out in the sea
(d) he encountered no danger while rowing the boat
5.Wha difficulties did they encounter when returning to the shore?
(a) The boat they were rowing in suddenly developed a leak
(b) Sea monsters surrounded the boat
(c) Treacherous currents developed as a result of strong winds
(d) The engine of the boat stopped functioning
6.Why did the children wave?
(a) They were bidding good bye to the people on the shore
(b) To attract the attention of the people on the bank to their plight
(c) They had a joyous ride in the boat
(d) Their boat was sinking
7.Why did the motor boat appear?
(a) It was on patrol duty
(b) It happened to be out fishing in the sea
(c) It came out of the bay to join its mother ship anchored in the deep sea
(d) The crew of the boat having noticed the plight of the Smiths, came to rescue them
8.How did Mr. Smith and children get back to the shore?
(a) The crew of the motor boat helped them to mend the leak in their boat
(b) With the help of a line they were transferred to the motor boat
(c) By attaching a line to their boat, the motorboat towed them back to the shore
(d) A few men from the motorboat joined the Smiths in their boat which they quickly rowed to the shore
9.How many children were with Mr. Smith?
10.A suitable title for the above situation is
(a) The Smith family
(b) Mr. Smith and the sea
(c) An enjoyable trip to the sea
(d) Dangers of the sea