It is often said that American kids are not as well educated as our kids were in the past. From both sides of the political aisle we are told that the modern educational system is failing us. There is broad disagreement on how to improve the situation. While some say we need to spend more money others say we are spending too much money. Money aside could there be another side to what is happening today?
Indeed there are studies that indicate that American students receive lower average test scores than do students in some other countries. These studies imply that today’s American children are not receiving as good an education as they did in the past. Some say that today’s student is “Dumber” than in the past. Others argue that while many kids do get it, many of them are too distracted by their I=pods, cell phones and whatever else is out there.
While one may find it difficult to argue with these studies there is another side that we need to examine. The reality is that kids today are wiser and more sophisticated than ever before and here are several reasons why.
Not too far in the past, students in kindergarten used to learn counting numbers and the alphabet but did not learn how to apply operations to the numbers or how to read words and sentences. The students learned how to count things and how to write their own name but math operations and reading were not taught until they were in the first grade.
In most schools today our kindergarten students are taught these first grade skills. They are taught how to add numbers together and are provided with games and other tools that teach them how to solve simple math problems. It seems amazing that tiny and adorable kindergartners are developing math skills that students in the past were not taught until a year later.
The same thing is happening with written language skills. Today’s kindergartners are not only taught how to write their own name but also how to write and read simple words. Further, the kindergartners are taught how to put together simple sentences, and as a fun project they learn to draw pictures, write sentences about their pictures, and put them together in a book form to take home to their amazed parents.
One of the tools used by kindergartners to learn simple math and word skills is the computer. The young students make regular trips to the school’s computer lab where they sign on to the computer with their name and a password and then navigate to a fun math program or an equally fun language program. The students are thrilled because the programs are presented in the form of games. The students think they are just playing games but really they are learning sophisticated math and language skills that students in the past did not learn until a later age.
Further, students in past generations learned fundamental math and language skills through rote memorization and recitation. Today’s young students learn the skills through the more sophisticated method of applying critical thinking and problem solving, which makes them much wiser and more sophisticated than students of a similar age in past generations.
Not only is the Elementary School curriculum today pushed to a younger student but the same is happening at the Middle School level and at the High School level. Students in past generations used to graduate from sixth grade to attend Junior High School as seventh, eighth, and ninth graders. In many schools today Middle School now encompasses sixth, seventh, and eighth grades. Where students in the past would step up to the more sophisticated world of High School in the tenth grade. Now students in the ninth grade join the faster paced High School environment and curriculum.
For these reasons I disagree that our educational system is the failure that many would have us believe. I further disagree with placing labels such as “Dumber” on today’s students. Today’s student does go about learning things differently. In many ways they are actually becoming wiser and more sophisticated at a younger age than did students in past generations. Everyday living requires more wisdom and sophistication today than in the past and the educational system has changed to meet the needs of today’s students. Perhaps a better way to classify students would be the motivated and the lazy!