Okay, that’s no problem! Here’s the list of the books within the Harry Potter series that you requested: 

1. Harry Potter and the Sorcerer’s Stone: A boy who lives with his aunt, uncle, and cousin, who don't treat him well, finds out on his eleventh birthday that he’s a wizard and has been accepted to the Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry. There, he meets many friends, including Hermione and Ron, and together they fight against a dark wizard and try to discover the mystery of his parents' deaths.
2. Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets: Harry, Hermione, and Ron take on a second year at Hogwarts and have to find out what kind of monster is petrifying students around the school. 
3. Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban: When Sirius Black escapes from the prison of Askaban, Harry assumes he’s out to kill him, as he betrayed Harry’s parents years before. But it turns out that Sirius is a much different person than Harry expected. 
4. Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire: Every few years, Hogwarts, as well as other schools of magic, compete against one another in the Goblet of Fire. And when Harry’s name gets called, even though he is too young to compete, it becomes clear that the Dark Lord, Lord Voldemort, who wants to kill him, put his name in on purpose so he could get him alone. 
5. Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix: Harry finds out that there is an order of witches and wizards called the Order of the Phoneix that is set to protect the world from Lord Voldemort. Harry and his friends join the adults in order to fight an incredible battle in the Ministry of Magic, where one of the main characters dies. 
6. Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince: Harry learns about Voldemort’s past while also finding a potion book that makes him an expert potion maker. With a potion, he learns about Tom Riddle’s Horcruxes and that he needs to destroy them. This begins Harry’s mission to destroy them all and kill Voldemort once and for all. 
7. Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows: Harry continues searching for the Horcruxes in the hopes of destroying them all. The series ends with a giant battle between Harry and Voldemort and, essentially, good and evil.
