The California Crop Weather report from the National Agricultural Statistics Service’s Sacramento Field Office released June 25, 2012.
The week of June 18 began with near to above normal temperatures statewide under the influence of high pressure.
A long-lived, low-pressure trough pattern developed for Northern and Central California as a Gulf of Alaska low pressure disturbance moved into Northern California’s coastal areas. This system brought sharply cooler temperatures and breezy conditions by the middle and latter part of the period with high temperatures in the Central Valley in the 70’s to lower 80’s.
Precipitation with this system was mainly light for interior portions of Northern California but the Northwest Coast had rainfall totals exceed an inch around Eureka and Crescent City.
Meanwhile, the Southland had dry conditions with a somewhat cooler onshore pattern which developed late in the period.
The desert areas experienced triple-digit high temperatures throughout the period.
Nearly two-thirds of the California wheat crop was harvested by week’s end.
Alfalfa was cut, raked, and baled.
Cooler temperatures throughout the week temporarily slowed the pace of cotton development. More than a third of the cotton crop was squared by week’s end. The crop was monitored for pests since gusty winds aided insect movement across fields.
Nearly all planted rice fields have emerged.
The cotton and rice crops were rated mostly good to excellent.
Plum, prune, peach, apricot, and nectarine fruit developed. Harvests continued for plums, plumcots, peaches, apricots, and nectarines in the San Joaquin Valley. In the Sacramento Valley, the harvests picked up for stone fruits.
The cherry harvest was winding down across the state. Apple fruit developed. Kiwi flowered. Figs leafed out and set fruit. Jujubes bloomed.
Table grapes in the Coachella Valley were harvested. Other grapes developed fruit. Vineyards were sprayed for weeds and powdery mildew.
The pomegranate bloom was finishing and fruit developed. The olive crop progressed well. Blueberries and strawberries were picked and packed.
The harvests of Valencia oranges and lemons continued. The late Navel orange harvest was wrapping up.
Almond nuts developed as hull split approached.
Coddling moth sprays in walnuts were complete for the first generation as growers waited for the second flight to start.
Pistachio shells hardened.
Kern County reported carrot, organic vegetable, and watermelon harvests.
In Tulare County, early-season vegetables including eggplant, squash, and cucumbers were harvested while other vegetable varieties grew well.
Fresno County reported carrot, onion, and garlic irrigation and fertilization while dehydrator onions were prepared for harvest.
In Stanislaus County, eggplant, cabbage, broccoli, greenhouse tomatoes, garlic, onions, herbs, and squash were harvested. Tomatoes, peppers, cantaloupes, and honeydews grew well in the heat.
In San Joaquin County, onions were harvested along with early varieties of watermelon.
Sutter County reported fresh melon crop emergence and tomato transplants grew well, while the garbanzo bean and onion harvests were ongoing.