Lester Flatt Bluegrass & White County Heritage Museum
An amazing trove of local history including a special section for the granddaddy of bluegrass, Lester Flatt. Learn about the Revolutionary War Soldier, surveyor, and frontiersman, John White, whom the county is named for. See artifacts from the many water-wheel powered mills that once operated in the area. Discover the areas involvement in the Civil War from the many gun powder producing salt-peter mines, to the battle of Dug Hill, and the home place of notorious guerrilla Champ Ferguson who became the model character for the movie “The Outlaw Josey Wales.” From 1806 to present, this museum houses many memories of our local heritage.
Rock House Historic Shrine & Old Stage Rd Museum
Imagine a time when it took four days to travel by stagecoach from Nashville to Sparta. A serpentine dirt road was the major artery from east to west and there were only a handful of “inns” along the route. One of the last original stagecoach stops in America still stands in White County, just outside of Sparta. Built to protect the wealthy from highwaymen and other looters, the accommodations were “Spartan” at best. You will particularly enjoy seeing how the building transitioned to a fortress at night. Known to have housed Andrew Jackson, James K. Polk, and Sam Houston over the years, the building is well preserved. Over 90% of the roof is still crowned by the original hand-wrought cedar shingles which are approaching two centuries old. Step back in time.
Bon Air Coal Mine Museum
Long before refined petroleum, hydroelectric or nuclear power, the nation ran off of black gold – – coal. The Cumberland Plateau was rich with bituminous coal and a black gold rush was on. To siphon the mineral, railroads were built, shafts were sunk, and a decades-long industry was established. This museum not only reflects the wealth that was created, but it also celebrates the meager existence of the families who moved to the area to mine the coal; some from as far away as Czechoslovakia. At the time, Czechoslovakia was buried in famine and dozens of Czech families moved here to improve their standard of living by spending their days in dark, dangerous mines. This museum also celebrates Earl Webb, the Wrigley won pro baseball player who dug his way out of coal mining to become a pro baseball star. The museum is housed in the last remaining railroad section house on the Cumberland Plateau.
American Legion Veteran’s Museum
Rotary Veteran’s Park