Genetically modified food. There are many different type of GMOs that can confuse the mind. GMOs can affect genetics in animals also. For instance genetics use gmos to change a pig's DNA to made it glow in the dark by intersecting a gene from jellyfish. Tomates have had their genes altered to make them resistant to frost and freezing. There are also apples that don’t turn brown and potatoes that don’t bruise. The biggest use for GMOs though has been in large scale agriculture. With almost 90% of most major crops being some way genetically modified. There are still many more uses for GMOs that are all safe for human use and consumption.
How safe are GMOs? This topic has two main different point of views. People usually have a very hard time agreeing with each other. There is the one side that says it is totally 100% safe and then the other side that says it is not safe at all. There are people that say GMO crops are hurting our environment. There have been some cases were GMOs have been linked to allergic reactions. There are other major countries that banned GMO products because they think they are unsafe. The world health organization has come down to the conclusion that genetically modified products are indeed safe for human consumption it today's world.
GMO labeling. In 2015 the FDA gave a ruling that requires additional labeling of foods made from genetically engineered sources only if their materials are different. Like a nutritional profile that is different. There also is no scientific justification that requires special labeling of foods the had GMO ingredients. There have been many studies done around the world by many independent and large scientist have done multiple studies and they all have one thing in common. They all say that genetically modified products are safe for human consumption.
My opinion. I believe that all GMO products are safe. Growing up on a farm that uses GM plants and feed to feed the animals with it is just a simple know fact to me that GMOs are safe. People have their own opinion some say that GMOs are safe and some say they are not. It just depends if u grew up around them or not.