Well, my grandfather was an inventor, so I guess you could say that inventing is in our blood. I figured, if no one else was going to invent a dishwashing machine, I guess I'd have to do it myself. But I'm getting ahead of myself. I'll start at the beginning.

In 1850, a man named Joel Houghton patented a wooden machine with a hand-turned wheel that splashed water on the dishes. Joel made a great effort, but every housewife knows that gently splashing water on dishes is not enough to get them clean. Then, in the 1860s, a man named L.A. Alexander invented a machine that allowed a user to spin dishes on racks through a tub of water. A mild improvement, maybe, but still not enough to get the job done. 

Meanwhile, I married William Cochran in 1858. The next years were a wild ride as William became a very wealthy merchant of dry goods and a politician in the Democratic Party. In 1870, we moved into a mansion! At one of our dinner parties, the servants chipped a few of our heirloom china dishes, and I was fed up. I knew there had to be some kind of alternative. Plus, I remembered what it felt like to wash dishes for hours every day as a housewife - and I didn't want one more woman to have to waste her time standing at the sink. 

I had a few ideas for a dishwashing machine, but I wasn't motivated to take them further until my dear William died in 1883. He was a man troubled by the drink, and he left me with numerous unpaid debts. I had to figure out how to continue on and find a way to support my family. I finished designing my dishwasher model and received a patent in December 1886. My dishwasher is the first one that uses water pressure instead of scrubbers to clean the dishes. 

I unveiled the design at the World's Fair in 1893. I thought housewives would jump at the chance to purchase one, but it ended up being restaurants and hotels that bought my invention. I started a company to build my manually operated dishwasher, and later on, it became a brand that you've probably heard of - KitchenAid.
