Student Health Checklist
Being a college student warrants a quick health check in order for you to remain healthy all school year. By following a few simple strategies, you can “rock on” in school, work and your social life.
Get involved in regular cardio exercise
for 30 minutes five times a week such as walking, swimming, running or any other activity that increases your heart rate.
De-stress by deep breathing and stretching exercises
two to three times a week. Spring for a DVD of yoga or get involved in a yoga class.
Get plenty of sleep!
This is very important in every aspect of your life!! As a college student, it is recommended that you log six to eight hours per night.
Take time out every half hour to stretch, walk around, or deep breathe if you are working at a computer.
Drink plenty of water.
Dehydration can make you more vulnerable to illness and infections, therefore, it is important that you down plenty of non-alcoholic fluids. And if water isn’t your thing, juice, tea, and other beverages will work as well.
Utilizing your BFFs.
Having the right friends and someone to talk to and count on is extremely important for your mental health. Seek out groups and activities that will attract new friends who will be supportive of you and vice versa
Eat your fruits and veggies.
A good rule of thumb is to make sure that half of your plate is filled with fruits and vegetables as these foods are bursting with nutrients that help keep infection and diseases at bay.
Fight the flu.
Get a flu shot to avoid being laid up this year for a week with fever and sickness. This vaccine is made available to each residential student and all Gallia County students in mid- October here at URG. Being a college student, you often are in close quarters with roomies and classmates, so make sure you get that flu shot!!
Back off the alcohol.
Alcohol has empty calories and is a risk factor for accidents, injuries and regrettable risky behaviors. Once you turn 21, try sticking to the recommended daily limit of no more than two beers or glasses of wine for men and one for women.
Kick the bad habits!
Rub snuff, smoke cigarettes or do other drugs? STOP!! All these can impose serious health threats so start kicking those bad habits today. Talk with your healthcare provider for assistance or check out your local health department