Arenberg-Nordkirchener, Ardennes , Malakin, Aralusian, Araboulonnais , Arab-Haflinger and Arabo-Friesian
The Arenberg-Nordkirchener is dangerously close to extinction and are listed as critically endangered with their numbers in the teens.
These animals are a fairly recent breed (during the 20th century) and originally come from wild horses of Munster, Westphalia crossed with Lithuanian brood mares. the goal was to create a durable riding pony that was friendly, tough and able to cover long distances with a smooth stride.
Average height 12.9 – 13.7 hands Durable and healthy Elastic ground covering gaits
Dry, expressive head Sloping shoulder Well shaped croup Correct, clear foundation
The Ardennes type draft horse is one of the basic sources of the heavy draft breeds that exist today and they are a true cold-blooded breed.
Descendant from the Solutrian horse that roamed during the Paleolithic period, the Ardennes has continued relatively unchanged since the last ice age.
These animals were shaped by the land and climate as well as the needs of war. Since the days of Julius Caesar they have been used as tireless cavalry mounts.
There are stud books for the Ardennes breed in many different countries in Europe and in the UK, although they all breed similar animals and accept each others bloodlines.
Average height 15 – 16 hands Hardy with a great deal of endurance Very strong and able animals Built thicker than any other draft animal
Head is heavy and broad with a straight or slightly convex profile Ears are small and pointed Body is broad, muscular and compact. Legs are short and sturdy with strong joints Feet are small for the animals size, but well made and strong Feathered fetlocks
Also called the Ardahan, the Malakin is the only heavy breed of horse in Turkey. All of the other equines are hotblooded & built for life in the desert.
This breed goes back almost 150 years and was brought to the eastern parts of Turkey by immigrant Turks from the Caucasus. The animals were a cross betweenArdennes, Percheron, Shire, Clydesdale, Orlov among others with native Russian horses. When they reached eastern Turkey the resulting crosses were then crossed with the Anadolu breed (and later more Ardennes to improve stock).
Also called the Hispano-Arab, this is a relatively new breed achieved by crossing the high energy Arabians with the noble Andalusians in equal parts, creating a beautiful and intelligent cross.
These are two of the older and most acclaimed breeds on the planet, so their cross is a logical one. The resulting animal is beautiful with high action, notable athletic ability and fine confirmation. The Aralusian is animated and spirited with the strong Arabian motion and drive and the presence and determination of the Andalusian.
Due to the different bloodlines, there are not distinct physical characteristics. Mane and tail are long and flowing in both breeds.
The Araboulonnais is a relatively new French breed recently developed by crossingArabians to the large, robust Boulonnais.
The origin of the Araboulonnais began late in the 20th century because it was thought that the beauty and pep of the Arabian would blend wonderfully with the gentleness and soundness of the large Boulonnais.
The resulting cross was an animal that was more refined than the Boulonnais but much larger and heavier than the Arabian. They were created for riding and trekking and prove to be energetic and athletic mounts with a tendency to be resistant to disease.
Average height 15.2 – 15.7 hands
This breed is new and still not clearly defined characteristically.
Riding horse Trekking horse Agriculture work Pleasure horse
Although this cross breed was met with some resistance, some Haflinger breeders thought that Arabian blood would refine the breed and increase their athletic ability.
The first three generations were approached with the goal of creating foals that better the original breed. The breeders were successful and the resulting crosses displayed a definite refinement of the breed and an increase in their ability.
After many years of cross-breeding, the physical characteristics of the Haflinger breed persist, but have been slightly refined into a more elegant mount. The result is a small riding horse with rectangular shape and Arabian features.
Average height 13.5 – 14.5 hands Correct, strong foundation
Short head with concave profile Large, alert eyes Well-mounted neck Deep, oblique shoulder Long back with slopes croup Slim legs with large joints
Approachable and kind Easy to handle with a balanced temperament Makes a great children’s mount
Pleasure horse Show horse
The Arabian blood was first added to the Friesian breed during Spanish invasion of the Netherlands during the late 16th and early 17th century.
Local Friesian farmers were forced to use Spanish stallions who carried Arabian blood. The resulting cross was an incredibly athletic animal that is found in the ancestry of the Orlov Trotter and the Morgan.
Later, during the 1960′s breeders attempted to further enhance the Friesian bloodlines by adding more Arabian blood to selected Friesian mares. Their goal was to enhance strength, endurance and lung & heart volume while retaining the physical characteristics of the Friesian.
Smooth gaits Incredibly tough with high endurance
Should retain most of the physical characteristics of the Friesian horse