1. Roof condition - This is an important thing that some first-time buyers may not think about. The first thing you want to know is how old the roof is and what it's made of. Upon learning what the roof is made of, you want to research how long that material lasts and compare that to how old the roof is. This will give you a better idea of how long it has left. Another good thing is to check if the homeowner has a roof certification letter. This letter entails the estimate of the lifespan of the roof typically over the next 2 - 5 years. If you're not confident doing your research, then hiring someone to do a roof inspection would be beneficial. This can often be confused with being bundled into a home inspection, so you want to make sure to hire someone that specializes in diagnosing roof conditions.

2. HVAC condition - It will be good to ask about the type of heating and cooling system the home uses, also be sure to ask how old it is. A typical unit will last somewhere around the timeframe of 10-25 years, hence the importance of asking how old it is. If the unit is missing, shows signs of water damage, has suspicious-looking cracks, or weird sounds and rust, then that's a sign the unit most likely will not be in good working condition. If you still have concerns after checking for those signs then a home inspection would be recommended as they should be more than capable of finding any major issues.

3. Plumbing - For this, there are three main things you need to look for. You'll want to see how fresh the sewer lines are, for example, if the home is 20 or more years old and you don't have any disclosures from the seller it will be beneficial to get a sewer inspection. There are things such as root growth and pipe disintegration that can cause major clogs and mess up the whole system. Next, you want to see how the toilets look. You want to make sure to check for leaks and also unstable bases along with discoloration. Don't be afraid to flush the toilet while you're at the home showing. The same goes for making sure the showers and sinks are working as intended. The final thing you want to check is the state of the water heater. Typically a water heater will last around 10 to 15 years, and when looking at the unit you may find the installation date written on it. If you notice unusual noises when it turns on or notice rust, it is highly recommended to have a professional look at it.
