Smoking is undeniably bad for your health. It harms nearly every organ of your body. However, your lungs suffer the most. When you smoke, your lungs become loaded with nicotine and tar.
According to The American Lung Association, smoking is a leading cause of preventable death in the U.S., causing over 438,000 deaths per year. Therefore, it is recommended that you stop smoking as soon as possible.
As for the nicotine and tar on your lungs, we have several solutions and detox remedies to cleanse your lungs.
Natural Ways to Clear Your Lungs of Nicotine and Tar
The beta-cryptoxanthin in organic corn is a powerful antioxidant, which protects your lungs from cancer. The yellow corn is rich in beta-carotene, which is necessary for the formation of vitamin A in the body. The beta-carotene which is not converted in vitamin A, acts a strong antioxidant. Moreover, it helps against heart disease.
This is a powerful herb which protects against malignant diseases and promotes the respiratory health. Moreover, ginger eliminates the tobacco smoke, air pollutants and the toxins from the lungs. This natural ingredient improves the circulation to your lungs, thus reducing the risk of many chronic lung diseases. Ginger increases the lung capacity and promotes the function of the lungs.
This plant is full of iron is very important for fighting infections in your lungs. Drinking nettle tea is beneficial for respiratory problems, tuberculosis and asthma. Additionally, this plant relieves joint pain.
This amazing vegetable is amazing for cleansing lungs. Onions prevent growth of new cancer cells and prevent many diseases, including lung infections. Moreover, onions are beneficial for the prevention and treatment of respiratory infections.
Consuming carrot juice, which is rich in vitamins A, K, C, and B, helps your skin. The skin is often damaged due to nicotine. It is able to remove nicotine from your body and takes care of lung health. Moreover, it protects from respiratory infections and reduces the risk of emphysema.
Lung Detox Recipe
This natural recipe is highly effective for lung cleansing.
- 1 liter of water
- 400 grams of onion
- 400 grams of sugar or honey
- 2 teaspoons of turmeric
- An inch of ginger root
Boil the water with sugar. If you chose honey, add it at the end. Slice the onions and grate the ginger root. Then, add them to the boiled water. When it boils again, add turmeric powder and reduce the heat to low. Strain into a glass jar with a lid. When cooled, store in the refrigerator.
Take two tablespoons in the morning, on an empty stomach and two in the evening, two hours after a meal.
Article source: www.healthyfoodhouse.com