Alabama White Sauce - The South

Alabama white sauce is enjoyed as a barbeque sauce, although many people who aren’t from the South wouldn’t consider it one. This mayonnaise-based sauce has a splash of added apple cider vinegar and contains bold pops of heat from horseradish, cayenne, and garlic; it may also be sweetened lightly using sugar or honey. This sauce works best with grilled or smoked chicken, but others appreciate it on many varieties of pork. (Sweetness: 1/5 Spiciness: 4/5)


St. Louis BBQ Sauce - The Midwestern Mississippi Area

St. Louis barbeque sauce has a tomato flavor like other sauces, but in this recipe, the source of the tomato comes from ketchup. This sauce has a thin consistency and a sweet and sour flavor profile with an occasional kick of spice. This sauce pairs well with grilled chicken, smoked pork ribs, and pork chops. (Sweetness: 2/5 Spiciness: 3/5)


Memphis BBQ Sauce - The Southern Midwest

Memphis barbeque sauce is a fairly popular sauce variety that is formed with a more traditional tomato-sauce base and a wide variety of flavorful ingredients and spices like paprika, onion, garlic, Worcestershire sauce, pineapple juice, and liquid smoke. This barbeque sauce is less sweet than others and packs a bit of a twang thanks to added vinegar. Use this sauce with dry-rubbed, smoked ribs or mixed into pulled pork for sandwiches. (Sweetness: 3/5 Spiciness: 1/5)


Texas-Style BBQ Sauce - The Central South

Texas-style barbeque sauce is a sweet and smoky tomato-based sauce that packs a powerful peppery punch. It often contains a generous amount of cayenne pepper, other types of dried pepper, garlic, onions, and celery, as well as a subtle amount of honey or sugar as a sweetener. This spicy sauce is best enjoyed on smoked beef, brisket, pork ribs, and chopped beef. (Sweetness: 2/5 Spiciness: 5/5)


Kansas-City BBQ Sauce - The Midwest

Kansas City barbeque sauce often contains liquid smoke and is the taste that many think of when they picture classic barbecue. This sauce combines rich tomato sauce with mustard, thick sweeteners like molasses and brown sugar, and spices like chili powder, black pepper, and cayenne. This sauce pairs best with smoked pork, including pork ribs and burnt ends. (Sweetness: 5/5 Spiciness: 1/5)


Carolina Gold BBQ Sauce - The Southeast

Carolina Gold barbeque sauce is slightly sweet, slightly tangy, and has a little kick of spice. This sauce contains apple cider vinegar, yellow mustard, brown sugar, or honey as a sweetener, and a blend of spices such as black pepper, cayenne, and garlic powder. This zesty sauce pairs best with smoked, pulled pork. (Sweetness: 3/5 Spiciness: 1/5)
