For people who must undergo therapy or chemo and or radiation, the body is receiving medication that supposedly helps rid of the bad or cancer. This type of medication also does harm to a parts of the body that are still healthy. Unfortunately, many physicians who concentrate on the routine rigorous drug therapies that exist do not prepare a person at least physically in a way that would enable one who has a disease diagnosis of cancer or illness that they need to begin supplements that can assist with the harmful medications that they will be taking. The body itself is subjected to becoming very weak and the cells in the body suffer along with the immune system because medications do not effectively just kill cancer or the diseases cells. They weaken the immune system and the body in general in efforts to rid the body of the cancer. Another harmful effect of treatments used in cancer is the fact that less oxygen is passed throughout the body, because of the decrease in red blood cells. The lack of carnitine in the blood may also contribute to fatigue. Once medications are placed into the body the liver and immune system become compromised. A common cause to many side effects are because the body has not had a change to replenish itself of all the vital nutrients in the body due to not only the disease or cancer but because it is now being subjected to treatments that have very high levels of toxins. It's like getting a double dose of something and in doing so your body will naturally be affected that much more. Once cancer cells die off they too become toxins that they body must get rid off. A way out is needed because the dilemma here is to remove the disease only, or without harming the rest of the body. When drugs, treatment therapies are not for the most part effective in ridding the body of disease, but also to some extent contributes to perhaps new diseases that develop as a result of the ongoing toxic treatments then there needs to be a way to keep the body healthy by pre-treatment and to continue that way of healing during treatment so that other diseases will not occur as a result of any chemotherapy or radiation one must undergo. Disease pre-treatment is a way of excising the disease and replenishing the body as it undergoes more of a duress. Ginger, cinnamon, curcumin, oregano, mushrooms, super foods, Epsom salt, baking soda and perhaps something called PQQ or pyrroloquinolone quinone. PQQ is an antioxidant that will help the body against aging or premature aging that disease and cancer can cause. With all of these combined anyone who has an illness can turn the food and supplements they eat into energy and prevent cell death by removing free radicals that cause oxidative damage. Visit your herbalist and use pre-treatment as a way of prevention...
Blogs are written by