What We’ll Do; Who We’ll Reach
We have a clear idea of what milestones we’ll need to reach to help protect birds and habitat from climate change. Here’s a snapshot.
- 1 million Americans newly engaged on climate issues, demonstrating a greater demand for change
- 100,000 Participants actively involved in our Plants for Birds program, leading to 1 million new native plants in the ground that benefit climate-threatened birds
- $10-12 million Annual budget range to reach full potential
Audubon staff and volunteers at the New York City climate march in 2014. Photo: Patricia Monteiro
Creating an Appetite for Action on Climate
Leveraging our climate science, Audubon will tap into people’s passion for birds to create a greater demand for climate solutions at the local, state, national, and hemispheric levels. Targeted engagement initiatives that mix individual and collective action will bring a million people to the climate conversation over the next five years.
Bobolink. Photo: Joel Sartore/National Geographic Photo Ark
Gathering Data to Drive Effective Conservation
We will employ cutting-edge analyses to better understand and predict how birds will respond to future climate change. We will also engage the public in crowdsourced efforts to test predicted shifts in bird ranges while building local engagement and interest in climate efforts.
BAS birding activities. Photo: Courtesy of Belize Audubon Society
Tackling Climate Change Throughout the Hemisphere
We will create and support a science-based action plan with local partners in 10 countries in Latin America and the Caribbean that builds a resilient set of sites, sound policies, and greater support for action on climate change.
Using Data to Combat Climate Change
Without question, Audubon is on the front lines of using big data to understand issues around climate. And it’s refreshing to hear Audubon talk about ‘five years’ in the future. Five years is a timescale in which you can really do something, and big change needs time and bold steps to get there.