The average American uses around 100 gallons of water every day while most Europeans use only 50 gallons per day and those in parts of Africa that have very poor access to water use only 5 gallons per day. While those living in third world countries certainly do not have access to enough water for the great hygiene habits that those in first world countries do, you might wonder what the difference is between how Americans live versus how Europeans live. What are some ways that Americans can cut down on their daily water usage to protect the valuable resource that you have?
Repair Leaky Faucets
Leaky faucets may not seem that bad, but the waste can quickly add up, totaling up to 50 gallons per day for a minor leak. You may be able to tackle some leaky faucets in your kitchen and bath yourself, but calling a professional from a company like The Clean Plumbers is ideal for ensuring that all parts are installed and secured correctly. Also, watch out for leaking spigots on the outside of your house.
Install Low-Flow Showerheads
You mostly likely use between 10 to 20 gallons of water for every five minutes that you spend in the shower. Cut this number in half by installing a low-flow showerhead. If you need a more powerful burst of water to rinse out your hair, this showerhead lets you do that, but for the majority of your shower you will only need a small amount of water.
Choose Eco-Flush Toilets
Older toilet models used close to four gallons of water per flush. A low-flow toilet uses less than two gallons per flush, saving over 12,000 gallons of water per person per year. Since toilet flushing can account for up to a quarter of your daily water usage, this is a prime way to save.
Put the Dishwasher to Good Use
Surprisingly, newer models of dishwashers are far more water and energy-efficient than hand washing dishes is. Be sure that the dishwasher is full when you start it, however. Additionally, with most newer models, there is no need to pre-rinse your dishes.
Turn Off the Water
One of the simplest ways to save water in your house is to turn off the water when you are not using it. Do not let the water run in the kitchen as you are prepping food. Rinse fruits and vegetables all at once instead of a little at a time. Be sure to turn off the faucet while you brush your teeth.
Most Americans have ready access to plenty of water and think nothing of using plenty of it for a variety of everyday needs. However, if you live in an area that has gone through a drought, you know how precious water is and how much it needs to be guarded as a limited resource. Take some or all of these steps now to conserve water throughout your home.