Mix&Go™ Healthcare Nanoglue
Attaching fragile proteins to synthetic surfaces is often required in modern drug discovery research, life science research and development, as well as for the development of therapeutic and diagnostic products. Depending on the particular method and application, many different synthetic materials – magnetic beads, various plastics, glass, metals, and porous membranes – are used.
The surface characteristics of these materials vary enormously as do the type, size, and number of biomolecules to be immobilised. Maintaining the activity of biomolecules on these synthetic surfaces continues to be an industry challenge. Standard chemistries tend to damage a large percentage of the biomolecules attached to the synthetic surface.
Damage results in reduction or loss of function of the biomolecule requiring the manufacturer to either use a large excess of these expensive molecules or sacrifice performance in their tests.
Mix&Go improves diagnostic tests, and is a cheaper and easier alternative to traditional chemistries such as EDC and NHS. Using a surface coating such as Mix&Go Activation Reagent that relies on coordination chemistry for multipoint binding, antibodies will take advantage of the gentle yet secure binding nature of the reagent, and will retain higher functionality and stability than EDC or NHS Chemistry.
Scientists can also reduce reagent preparation time by 3-4 hours by using Mix&Go instead of EDC or NHS chemistry. In addition, Mix&Go is water based and reduces the amount of hazardous chemicals scientists work with.
Fig. 1 Mix&Go can be broadly utilized in the life sciences, laboratory diagnostic and point-of-care spaces. The range of synthetic materials it can be applied to is much broader than for commercial alternatives thus making it a universal surface coating solution.
A new science
Mix&Go nanotechnology gives scientists a faster, cheaper, easier, and more sensitive assays. Using our technology can also lead to more accurate results and better outcomes for life science companies, giving them the data to choose their next move with confidence.
The characteristics of Mix&Go are also applied to diagnostic tests. The better sensitivity and the faster generated, more accurate results that can be achieved with Mix&Go, lead to earlier detection of disease and improved patient care.