Batu was a regular camel. That's what he was always told. From his birth, everyone in his herd continued to tell him so.

"Oh, Batu," they would say when he walked by. "He's just a normal old camel. Nothing out of the ordinary."

When he was a newborn, Batu thought this was normal. But as time passed, he realized none of the others said the same things about the rest of their herd. He didn't understand why. It wasn't until they reached an oasis full of water that he learned the truth.

Batu had spent many days traveling across the desert with his camel family and, at the sight of water, he became very happy. Finally! A break from the heat and constant walking! With a leap of joy, Batu raced into the water. It was the first time he had ever seen such an oasis, and he was excited to go swimming.

As he jumped into the water, though, he caught sight of a strange creature. Resurfacing with a panic, Batu glanced around to find the creature. There! In the water! It was a camel, that much was sure, but this camel had two humps. Batu had never seen a two-humped camel before and, even though this camel seemed trapped on the water's surface, he was still scared.

Running to his mother, Batu told her about the two-humped camel in the water. Instead of looking scared, his mother sighed.

"That is just you, Batu," she told him. "You are a two-humped camel."

"But how?" asked Batu. His mother, his father, and every other camel in the herd only had one hump. Why was he different?

"When you were just a baby," his mother explained, "we found you alone and brought you into the herd. You are part of our family now."

Batu didn't know what to think. He was adopted? It seemed impossible.

"We still love you, Batu," his mother said. "Just because you are different doesn't mean you're bad."

Batu was still confused, but looking around his herd, he knew his mother was right. Maybe he was different, but everyone in his herd still loved him, and his mother loved him too. It didn't matter what he looked like when everyone loved him anyway.
