What was the deal? What was the new light bulb legislation about, and how were stores still selling incandescent bulbs?
The Light Bulb Legislation
But there was a "new," more efficient incandescent bulb available as the legislation went into effect. A new bulb that, in fact, had been around since the 1950s. It was called a halogen bulb.
Now let's also be clear that the legislation didn't stop the sale of inefficient incandescent light bulbs. They just couldn't be made or imported in the USA. So for a while, you'd still see the old bulbs on shelves. And while they last, you can still get them from Lighting Supply.
You'll also be able to continue buying other types of incandescent light bulbs that weren't phased out through this legislation.
Halogen Light Technology
Halogen technology allows incandescent bulbs to burn more efficiently, producing about the same amount of light on nearly 30% less energy. This is why these bulbs began replacing old incandescent bulbs when the legislation went into effect.
From the user's perspective, there's one small difference between traditional incandescent and halogen light bulbs. Many people love the "warm" (yellow) glow of an incandescent light bulb. It's why some hoarded these bulbs before the bulbs disappeared. Halogens have a similar look, but they burn a little "whiter" to the eye. Not a big difference, but worth noting.
There's one more difference that affects the use of some halogens. This is because halogen bulbs burn very hot. Even hotter than traditional incandescents. So in the case of mini halogens and projection bulbs, you don't want to touch these bulbs with your hands, as this can leave oil residue on the bulb. This can cause oily / non-oily parts of the bulb to heat up differently, which can weaken and eventually break the bulb. Wear gloves when installing these bulbs. This doesn't likely apply, however, to general use halogen bulbs.
The Shapes and Applications of Halogen Bulbs
In the end, there's nothing so new about halogens, except that they've been newly discovered by many people. They've been a reliable lighting source for decades and are widely used, now in many more households than they used to be. But with the era of LED lights upon us, many halogens are being upgraded to the lower temperature, higher efficiency, and longer lifespan of LEDs. Still, with their lower initial cost, high CRI, and incandescent familiarity, halogens can be a great lighting choice for some time to come.