You knock, and the iron door grates open. Before you stands a small, hunched woman, her pocketed shirt full of tools and vials. Crowning her, a black multi-lensed loupe covers one eye, making it appear much larger than the other. "Oh thank you, Inspector," she says happily, extending an oil-stained hand. "I'm Billa. Come in, come in!"

You're ushered into the grand foyer and stop, startled. The house is much, much bigger on the inside. Faded brown stairs spiral around up to the skylight, partially covered by a circular shadow at least five floors above you. But that's not what startled you. On the sofa, calmly licking one paw, is a cat with the largest butterfly wings you've ever seen. 

The spotted white cat looks briefly over, then calmly begins washing the other paw. It idly straightens the golden wings, causing flecks of orange to sparkle. You forget to shut your mouth as the cat flits gently up to the next floor to join several others. 

"What is that thing?" Billa peers through her headpiece at you. "Oh, those? I made them a few years back to solve the mice problem on the higher floors. Those are my, well, I haven't named them yet. 'Butterkittens' just sounded like a dairy cat. I thought 'Caterfflies,' but that reminded me of caterpillars. 'Bats' were taken." Billa jabs a thumb into her chest. "I guess the hardest part was naming them." 

You're taken aback, but it's oddly humorous. You can't fathom the logistics of combining butterflies and cats, let alone making a functional wing. Billa is a genius, though, who can combine species, but she can't come up with a name for her creations. "What about 'Flutterpuss'?" you say. "They are fluttering about. That name has elements of both." She smiles widely. "I love it." Reaching into a pocket, she puts it down on her torn notepad. 

"I could watch them all day," you say. "But I was told this was urgent." Billa's face drops. "Oh, I need your help in getting Oinkly down. I'm afraid he'll get outdoors. I don't want to frighten him off with my Thingamagrabber," "Oinkly?" you question. Billa gestures at the shadowy circle touching the skylight overhead. "Yes, my combination of pigs and balloons was a wild success!!"
