reflection paper (minimum of 3 full pages)
there is 3 powerpoint presentation read them and write minimum of 3 pages double space.
One of the most important components of your final reflection paper is your articulation of why this has been a meaningful learning experience for you. The final paper is not a laundry list. It must include some critical thinking, soul searching and reflection. This includes reviewing, your mid-term reflection paper, not copying, and doing an honest assessment of your learning. Showing up and “putting in the hours” in class does not constitute a learning experience. Include:
a) A detailed explanation of what you have learned and how it relates to you, personally.
b) Specific examples of insight, progress, learning etc.
c) Explanation of difficult or negative experiences and what you learned from them.
d) Description of how you might be “changed” somehow by the experiences.
e) Must include resources and references from the course.“
a reflection paper on literature or another experience, the point is to include your thoughts and reactions to the reading or experience. You can present your feelings on what you read and explain them. You also can use a reflection paper to analyze what you have read. Like any other paper or essay, it should be cohesive and refer directly to the specific passage or quote in the material that inspired this feeling and APA format with cover page.
You can include personal experience in a reflection paper, but do not depend on it; base your reactions and reflections on the material that is your subject…”
the information taken from the slides should be sited as the following
Personal Communication: For interviews, letters, e-mails, and other person-to-person communication, cite the communicator's name, the fact that it was personal communication, and the date of the communication. Do not include personal communication in the reference list.
(E. Robbins, personal communication, January 4, 2001).
A. P. Smith also claimed that many of her students had difficulties with APA style (personal communication, November 3, 2002).
Heterosexism.pptx March 2011.pptx
Section 9 Ageism and Adultism.pptx