Here are some of the most important factors to consider when choosing a college to attend. 

1. Your Perspective - The most important factor to consider when choosing which college you will attend is how the school makes you feel while you're there. It doesn't really matter about their programs, opportunities, and scholarships if you don't feel like you belong. The right college for you will provide an environment that is challenging to you but will also help you realize that your dreams are within your reach. 

2. Internship Opportunities
Having some hands-on experience in the field you are interested in will not only help you learn more about your future career, but it is also a great way to help you discover your passions and expand your network. Check out what internships, hands-on opportunities, research, and opportunities to study abroad the colleges on your list have to offer, and be happy with those that you are most interested in. 

3. Safety 
Not only is safety a priority on campus, but it should also be a major factor when considering the safety of your surrounding area. What types of safety measures does the school put into place? What are the surrounding towns and neighborhoods like? Knowing more about the school's safety procedures and policies when it comes to student safety can be useful when it comes to deciding if the school in question is your best fit. 

4. Academic Support and Career Services Offered 
How a college assists its students with academics is a very important factor in terms of what kind of education you will be getting. There are some schools that offer very little support and only want to provide an environment of independence, while other schools will offer things like free tutoring or writing assistance. Additionally, knowing what the school's placement rates are for jobs and postgrad schools are critical things to consider, because it offers an indication of the overall success and depth of their programs. 

5. Campus Life 
The school spirit and the general atmosphere will set the tone for your experience while on campus. Ask important questions such as "How many students live on campus?" or "What is there to do on the weekends?" These are all questions that will give you a better understanding of college life for students who attend school there. 

6. Athletics and Extracurricular Activities 
If you are interested in extracurriculars such as theatre, music, or student government, or if you love to play sports, college is an excellent time to explore brand-new passions and re-develop old hobbies. The right school for you will have the opportunity for you to do both. 

7. Majors and Minors 
Every school has a different curriculum so you should consider what you want to get out of it while you are there. Are you hoping to take classes that are very specific to one discipline or more diverse experiences? You will also want to determine which majors, minors, and concentrations are offered at each school you're considering.
