Hypertension, also known as high blood pressure, occurs when the force at which your blood presses against the inside of your arteries is too great. Over time, hypertension can increase your risk for cardiovascular problems such as heart disease, stroke, and heart attack, as well as damaging your kidneys. But
Tag: high blood pressure
What is vascular dementia? It refers to a spectrum of cognitive impairments resulting from damage to blood vessels in the brain.
Stroke, either a significant singular stroke or multiple smaller strokes, is a major cause of vascular dementia (VaD), but any disease process that damages blood vessels in the brain
Gout is so painful that its sufferers say you can’t really grasp how bad it is unless you’ve experienced it. A form of arthritis, gout is marked by attacks of severe joint pain, swelling, warmth and redness. Although medication is often used to help manage gout, dietary changes may help,
Could a sugary-drink habit—or the diet beverages you may consume instead—harm your brain? One recent study showed that regularly drinking sugary beverages, like soda and fruit drinks, was associated with signs of brain aging and declining memory. A second study showed that frequently drinking artificially-sweetened (diet) beverages was associated with
A new report from the American Heart Association (AHA) suggests that U.S. heart failure rates are rising. The number of Americans who have the condition increased from about 5.7 million between 2009 and 2012 to about 6.5 million between 2011 and 2014, according to the AHA’s Heart Disease and Stroke
A 2016 study (JAMA Ophthalmology, July) suggests that visual impairment and blindness in the U.S. will double over the next 35 years, as eye diseases such as age-related macular degeneration (AMD), glaucoma, and diabetic retinopathy take their toll. Other 2016 research (Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, May) found that
Dementia causes can be a mystery, but there’s no doubt the condition is too prevalent. About 5.4 million Americans are thought to have some degree of dementia, and its destructive effects on our cognitive abilities come at huge cost to our overall wellbeing—and that of our loved ones.
Whether your goal is to lose weight or to improve your health as a result of a diabetes or heart disease diagnosis, you must begin with your diet. For complete nutrition, make sure your meal plan includes plenty of vegetables, fruit, lean protein, and whole grains. Unfortunately, however, we often
Since gout is often thought of as a man’s disease, many women lack awareness of gout symptoms—foot pain, in particular—which means that many women have gout but aren’t aware they have it.
“Although women are less likely than men to suffer from gout, a woman’s chance of developing gout increases significantly