Grab Your Bags, and Move West!
10) George Washington and the Farewell Address
~ The first American President, who guided the soldiers into war. He also told his people what to do when he wasn't president anymore.
9) Alien and Sedition Acts
~ In 1798, the first Federalist-Controlled Congress passed a couple of laws. These laws controlled what the foreigners were doing in the United States.
8) Thomas Jefferson as President
~ Was a President in the United States. Also at 33 years old, he drafted the Declaration of Independence.
7) The Louisiana Purchase
~ France sold 828,000 square miles of land to America. It also went from the Mississippi River to the Rocky Mountains.
6) The War of 1812
~ During the war America's National Anthem was created on the last night.
5) The Industrial Revolution
~ took place in the 18th-19th centuries.
4) The Indian Removal Act
~ was a law that made
3) Manifest Destiny, the Oregon, the Santa Fe, and the Mormon Trail
~ these are all very historical trails and things
2) "Remember the Alamo"
~ This was a strong saying, during the war between Texas and other places. The Texans hid in a fortress call the Alamo.
1) California Gold Rush
~ The glod rush in california was a very big part in american history. because it killed or helped many people.
~ A Simple Time Line ~
September 19, 1796~ George Washington published his Farewell Address
July 14, 1798~ Alien Sedition act
March 4, 1801~ Thomas Jefferson became President
April 30, 1803~ The Louisiana Purchase
1812~ The War or 1812
1700~ The Industrial Revolution Started
May 28, 1830~ The Indian Removal Act
1830~ Remember the Alamo (war)
1840~ California Gold Rush
George Washington was the very first President. Surprisingly Washington did not attend any college. During the French and Indian War he helped the captain. Then the captain died and the soldiers made George the new captain. George was the captain from now on, he lead a lot of wars,and was a great leader. You may know this interesting fact, that George was just picked to be President. They picked him because he was a strong, humble, courageous, yet calm man. No one debated or voted on who would be president so they just picked him because he seemed the best! George also had no children him self. When he got married to (the new) Mrs. Washington, she had already had two children her self. Washington did end up having two children to care for, but they were not his own.
Breaking News! California has found loads of gold burred under the soil! It has lots of value, and many American are going over now to help their family's in value. The gold will not be there for long, so hurry up and go travel to California.. Pack your wagons and leave before it is too late!
... After The Gold Rush ...
New news for the people of America! The gold rush has broken family's down, and killed many people. Many people have died from explosions or lack of water. Some also died on the way to California. Some people did get very lucky and found gold and made it back safely. Many people lost loved ones from this traveling and mining. Next time make sure you are close to the gold rush, because it is NOT worth the pain and hard work for just a little of money, and no assurance that you will live.
Thomas, was a a very good man. We will all miss him so very much. He will be within our heart, mind, and soul forever. He was a great founding father, and a wonderful leader. I will especially remember him because of all he has done. He has written the Declaration of Independence, and has done so very much for our wonderful country. He was also a great President who helped our county grow and get better over his presidency.
He has many loved ones, and they will always love him and miss him forever. Thomas Jefferson was a great and wonderful man, and always tried his hardest. Jefferson will be put down in history forever! We love him so very much and we will always remember him. God bless you Thomas. God bless America.
~Virginia Peanut Soup Recipe~
2 tablespoons butter
1 medium onion, chopped
6 cups chicken stock
2 tablespoons flour
1 cup heavy cream
1 1/2 cups natural peanut butter
2 teaspoons hot sauce
2 limes, juiced
2 tablespoons chopped peanuts
2 scallions, chopped
Melt the butter in a heavy bottomed pot over medium heat. Add the onion and cook until translucent, about 10 minutes. Bring the chicken stock to a boil in a medium saucepan. Whisk in the flour all at once and cook until the mixture has a toasty aroma. Whisk the stock into the flour mixture in a slow, steady stream until smooth. Add the heavy cream and peanut butter to the soup and stir to combine. Stir in the hot sauce and lime juice and season, to taste. Garnish with the chopped peanuts and scallions.
(found at : http://www.foodnetwork.com/recipes/virginia-peanut... )
~ By the Numbers~
1 Independent country
15 million dollars for the Louisiana Territory
6 months to get the news of the treaty to get to everyone
32 days after the curse of Tippecanoe the president died
3 men in the XYZ Affair
300 family's in the new colonies
12 of fighting the Alamo fell
3 objectives for the war with Mexico
12,000 pilgrims searching for religious freedom
3 deadly trails
~California Gold Rush Map~
The gold fields were where the men and women would go to mine, and try to find the gold. There were also lots of rivers which were good for the men and women to shovel through the water and find little pieces of gold. The rivers were very helpful.