Most Important Historic Sights in China (III)- Bund
Most Important Historic Sights in China: Bund
For foreigners arriving in Shanghai in the early 20th century, the first sight would have been the busy waterfront known as the Bund, where the city's main banks, hotels and trading houses were located. It was an impressive, if thoroughly un-Chinese, sight, but this was to be expected in a city such as Shanghai, which emerged as a foreign concession port after China's stinging defeat in the first Opium War (1839–42).
While the concession ports were an affront to Chinese pride and traditional values, they nonetheless paved the way for important developments in the country's modernization process. If you were a young person looking for opportunity at the turn of the 20th century – whether in business, literature, technology or art – chances were that you'd end up in Shanghai at some point.
After the Communists took power, the Bund, with its obvious associations with unadulterated capitalism, went into deep freeze, only beginning to reemerge in the 1990s. Today, like in the past, it's often the first thing visitors to Shanghai see, though these days most have their view set on the massive skyscrapers on the other side of the Huangpu River.
Most Important Historic Sights in China: Bund – What’s here?
All of the Bund's original buildings still line today's promenade, including standouts like the Peace Hotel (1929), Bank of China (1941) and the Custom House (1925). With each passing year, another edifice is tastefully renovated as a lifestyle destination replete with many of China's most luxurious shops, restaurants and bars. The first to make the leap was 3 on the Bund.
Most Important Historic Sights in China: Bund – Tip
Although you can pop into a few buildings during the day to see the interior, make sure to return at night, when both banks of the river are illuminated. Alternatively, take a river cruise from the docks south of the Bund for a deck-side view.
Most Important Historic Sights in China: Bund – How to get there?
Metro: East Nanjing Rd