American Heritage® Dictionary of the English Language, Fourth Edition
- n. A soft, silvery, easily oxidized metallic element that ignites spontaneously in air when finely divided. Strontium is used in pyrotechnic compounds and various alloys. Atomic number 38; atomic weight 87.62; melting point 769°C; boiling point 1,384°C; specific gravity 2.54; valence 2. See Table at element.
Century Dictionary and Cyclopedia
- n. Chemical symbol, Sr; atomic weight, 87.37; specific gravity, 2.54. A dark-yellow metal, less lustrous than barium, malleable, and fusible at a red heat. When heated in air, it burns with a bright flame to the oxid. It decomposes water at ordinary temperatures, evolving hydrogen, and uniting with the oxygen of the water to form the oxid strontia. It does not occur native. The chief strontium minerals are the carbonate (strontianite) and the sulphate (celestine). Strontium also occurs as a silicate in the mineral brewsterite. It has been detected in the waters of various mineral springs, as well as in sea-water, and in the ashes of some marine plants. Salts of strontium are chiefly used in pyrotechny, imparting an intense red color to flames.
- n. A metallic chemical element (symbol Sr) with an atomic number of 38.
GNU Webster's 1913
- n. (Chem.) A metallic element of the calcium group, always naturally occurring combined, as in the minerals strontianite, celestite, etc. It is isolated as a yellowish metal, somewhat malleable but harder than calcium. It is chiefly employed (as in the nitrate) to color pyrotechnic flames red. Symbol Sr. Atomic weight 87.3.
- n. a soft silver-white or yellowish metallic element of the alkali metal group; turns yellow in air; occurs in celestite and strontianite
- Named in a pseudo-Latin manner for the name of the Scottish town Strontian. (Wiktionary)
- From New Latin strontia, strontium oxide, from English strontian; see strontianite. (American Heritage® Dictionary of the English Language, Fourth Edition)
“But the water may contain other harmful substances, such as beta-ray emitting strontium, which is known for causing bone cancers.”
“The strontium is the secret," said Li - although exactly what it is doing is unclear.”
“One of the procedures is called strontium isotope analysis, a technique that measures the ratio of strontium isotopes in a person's tooth enamel to determine where they grew up.”
“Answer: A drug called strontium ranelate is commonly prescribed in several European countries.”
“Recent health department tests on National Gypsum board found it lacked a compound called strontium sulfide - something found in all of the Chinese drywall samples.”
“When a POS is attacked, when it hits the end of its shields, it goes into 'reinforced mode', and becomes invunerable for a period of time depending on how much 'strontium' it is fueled up with.”
“Other hazards such as strontium are insignificant.”
“A: The non-patentable forms of strontium supplements, such as strontium citrate, should dissolve and deliver strontium to the bones just as efficiently as strontium ranelate.”
These user-created lists contain the word ‘strontium’.
A list of words that are odd or words that I have looked up.
includes words of the "Prodcom list"
A list of chemical elements
I'm wading through Patrick O'Brian's Aubrey/Maturin novels one by one, and someday, I'll wade through them again and list all the words I learned while reading them.
Edit: I started ma...
Looking for tweets for strontium.