Here are five ways a writer can organize their thoughts to create content that is easy to understand. 

1. Chronological Order 
Chronological order is a way to organize ideas as a storyteller or writer. It involves dishing out ideas in the precise order of time from first to last. This type of order is used most often in expository writing or narratives that inform or explain something. It is particularly useful when describing an event or a series of events. 

Consider when you were younger, and you were trying to explain to the principal why you shouldn't be placed in detention. You had to describe the events that led to that problem carefully and in order so that they would understand your point of view. When writing, you do the same thing when you need to help your reader navigate the process and understand the context of the narrative. Some transition words to use when writing in chronological order include first, then, next, last, and finally. 

2. Logical Order 
Logical order is precisely what it sounds like. The framework is used to avoid any confusion for the reader. You will need to organize your ideas in this framework if your reader requires a good understanding at one point before you can move on to the next point. 

Before a teacher talks to their students about Robert Frost's poem The Road Not Taken, for instance, they would need to give an example of what it's like to make a big or difficult decision. That way, the listener or reader will understand the true nature of the poem when they hear it. Some good transitional words or phrases to use for this order include: First, you should understand; keep that in mind while I explain; remember when I said; etc. 

3. Climactic Order 
With this order, you keep the most important part until the very end of the story or piece. You should use it when you want to build up excitement such as in a suspense story, or when writing a list ranking items from worst to best. You want the final point to resonate with your reader and, therefore, save it for the very end. Some transitional phrases to use with this order include: first of all, more importantly, just as importantly, and finally. 

4. Random Order 
This order allows you to put your ideas out there on a whim without any specific or logical reasoning behind them. You can organize your ideas this way when your points all have equal value of importance or they can sit independently with one another in understanding. You will want to use association ideas between points to transition from one thought to the next instead of using transition terms or phrases. 

5. Spatial Order 
With this order, you describe a scene as things are arranged in their physical space by moving from one detail to the next or as viewed from one stationary vantage point. This order is used whenever you want your readers to visualize the space or if you want to improve a scene by causing the reader to use all their senses. Use this arrangement when you want to organize the ideas you are describing in your workspace, like a product use or a place description. It is a great way to slow down a story when it is getting too intense or if you want to pace yourself before revealing a surprise. Add in a few point-of-view descriptions of the setting at the moment. Some transition words to use for this order include, just to the left or right, behind, between, across from, arising out of, etc.
