Why is it that we sometimes get a tune or chorus stuck in our heads and play it over and over again even though it’s driving us crazy?
This is one of those questions that one wonders if there really could be an answer or is it ‘just one of those things’. Well some neuroscientists, pyschologists and evene marketers have something to say on this subject.
Why do men have nipples? – In a Nutshell : Men have nipples because women do.
Eponyms are one of the most fascinating examples of how the English language gains new words. In this article we take a colourful look at the phenomenon some eponyms like : Uncle Sam, Masochism, Martinet & Jezebel.
It would be handy wouldn’t it – photosynthesising all our food rather than having to stop to eat three times a day – so why can’t we do it ?
Identical twins come from the same sperm and egg – and thus have the same DNA – ie EXACT identical genetic makeup. So do they therefore have the same fingerprints? Or to put it another way would twins force Hercule Poirot’s “little grey cells” into overdrive in a murder investigation ?
Eponyms are one of the most fascinating examples of how the English language gains new words. In this article we take a colourful look at the phenomenon some eponyms like : Juggernaut, Lynching, Malapropism, Maverick & Tantalise.
Blushing is rather an odd physiological and psychological response to embarrassment or awkward social situations. Could there be any rational or logical explanation for this? What possible evolutionary reason could there be for such a strange phenomenon.
Pit yourself against some mind bending riddles and see if you can work out what each one is referring to.
If you had to name some of history’s best all time hoaxes what would you come up with ? In this article we look at what , we consider, the top 3 hoaxes of all time (so far).
English is one of the richest languages in the world. At the last count there were estimated to be over 1 million words in the English lexicon. In this article we’ve gathered together just a few of the more unusual ones to see if you know (or can guess) what they mean.
Urban legend has it that if you want to calculate a dog’s age in equivalent human years you should multiply the dogs age by seven. But is this really true ?
Some hilarious text bloopers … courtesy of the iPhone’s auto correct feature ! (plus some parental misunderstandings)
Having a wide vocabulary is always a good thing. In this article we’ve pulled together some of the more unusual words that the English language has to offer us that relate to wintertime.
In wartime nations are often galvanised into frenzied action to innovate and invent in order to try to gain the upper hand in their struggle for survival. In this article we look at some of the seemingly more trivial and rather inexpected things that were invented or developed as a result of the WWI.
Christmas is probably the time of year when there is an overwhelming plethora of traditions and practices that we all enthusiastically embrace. In this article we look at one of the most enduring of British traditions … the Christmas Turkey.