2023 man: (To 11th Century man) What's good, my guy?

11th Century man: I am famished, I desire mutton.

2023 man: What's mutton?

11th Century man: (pauses and looks at 2023 man curiously) Why do you wear those clothes?

2023 man: (looks at his own clothes, which are a neon pink polo shirt, light blue surf shorts, and rubber slippers) What, this? I always wear this. Or an Aloha shirt if I'm working. Wait, where are you from?

11th Century man: What do you mean? I'm of the Norman tribes. My people have lived in England for a century.

2023 man: Dude, it's 2023! You're from the past!

11th Century man: Peculiar...tell me about the future. I want to know everything. Do we finally conquer the West?

2023 man: Oh, yeah...about that...sometime in the 18th Century, a group of your people leave England because your king during that time was imposing too many taxes on the people, and so this group of Englanders decide to sail west to the new land. When we got there, we colonized it and created a new country: America. Over time, we migrated and settled throughout the entire country of America and unified all the lands within, and called it the United States of America.

11th Century man: Fascinating! Does England have any control of America?

2023 man: No, we created our own republic, which over time became a representative democracy. The people have the power to elect officials who will represent them in government, and then the government works for the people to provide things like national defense, general welfare, and other such things.

11th Century man: That sounds like a utopia...something we English had fought hard for when we made our way west. But it seems your people have done it in your own time!

2023 man: How did you communicate with each other? We have electronic devices that allow us to talk to each other all over the world.

11th Century man: We used lit torches as beacons that allowed us to communicate when an enemy approached our lands. We also flew flags and carried sigils that notified others who we were and where we came from.
