Creative Ways to Keep Your Students Engaged

Are your students losing interest in your lectures? Is it tough to get them engaged and attentive during classes? Well, here are some ways to create more interactive and exciting lessons that will engage your students deeply. 

1. Arrange Group Discussions
Organize the students into small groups, and give them a topic to discuss. Encourage them to share their perspectives, ask open-ended questions, and facilitate the discussion during class. After the discussion, you can ask a few students from each group to share their key takeaways from the discussion with the entire class.

2. Brainstorming
You can encourage brainstorming by giving students a problem they need to solve or a question they need to answer. Then ask them to generate as many ideas as they can. Give them enough time to explore various possibilities without criticizing any of the ideas. Afterward, discuss each idea with the entire class and assess their effectiveness. 

3. Regularly Test Students
You should make sure that you frequently test your students. Try pop quizzes or regular assignments. Give them feedback on their results and offer remedial tips for areas with low scores. 

4. See Smartphones and Tech as Tools
We get it; smartphones can sometimes feel like the bane of a teacher's existence. But instead of trying to fight against them, why not incorporate them into your lessons? There are tons of awesome educational apps out there that can turn your students' phones into valuable learning tools. Having them use their phones in class may make them less likely to sneakily check social media while they're supposed to be listening to you.

5. Start with a Warm-Up
Just like athletes need to warm up their muscles before diving into a game or competition, students benefit from a warm-up activity to get their brains engaged and ready for learning. A quick review of a key concept, a thought-provoking question, or even a silly icebreaker game can get your lesson started on the right foot.

6. Use Self-Paced Work
Not all students learn or work at the same pace, so allowing them to move through the material at their speed can be a huge benefit. Personalized assignments or online modules give your students the power to work independently.
