INTRODUCTION TO TECHNOLOGY
MODULE: GETTING TO KNOW TECHNOLOGY
Goal: Examining the historical evolution of technological innovation as a means through which human needs and wants are satisfied.
1. Demonstrate how the evolution of physical, biologically related, and information/ communication aspects of technology led to the shift from an agriculturally-based...to an industrially-based...to an information-based society.
2. Give one example (from each of the three aspects of technology) of an application of a modern tool, device, or method which has evolved from simple beginnings and describe how it has changed daily routines and contributed to human progress.
3. Research examples of technological innovations from each of the three aspects of technology which satisfy needs and wants and model one of these innovations.
MODULE: LEARNING WHAT RESOURCES ARE NEEDED FOR TECHNOLOGY
Goal: Exploring and using the seven basic resources which are necessary for technology
4. Investigate the different forms of each resource category. Select one (or more) resource(s) and
demonstrate how it (they) can be used.
5. Utilize the seven resources to produce a product, transport an object, grow living material, communicate an idea, or utilize the seven resources to implement a process and describe how full access to resources would have led to improved results.
6. Identify technological alternatives which would be appropriate for two nations (with differing nonrenewable resources) to satisfy a given human need.
MODULE: LEARNING HOW PEOPLE USE TECHNOLOGY TO SOLVE PROBLEMS
Goal: Exploring and experiencing how people can solve technological problems by using a formalized problem solving “system.”
7. Design and implement the optimal solution to a given technological problem (which will involve biologically-related technology, information/communication technology and/or physical technology) and use a formalized problem solving method.
8. Identify constraints which prevent a technological problem from being solved. Classify the constraints as those imposed by resource limitations, values, and/or attitudes of people and scientific principles.
MODULE: LEARNING ABOUT SYSTEMS AND SUBSYSTEMS
Goal: Becoming familiar with the structure ,function, components and control of technological systems and gaining an understanding of the similarities that exist among physical, information/ communication and biologically related technological systems.
9. Model a system in biologically related, information/communication and physical technology using the basic systems block diagram.
10. Apply the technological systems model to the safe assembly or construction and operation of a system which encompasses biologically related, information/ communication, and/or physical technology.
11. Add feedback to close the loop in an operable open-looped system and then safely operate the system in order to bring actual results closer to desired results.
12. Identify the subsystems of a modern, complex technological system from each of the three aspects of technology and explain how they have been combined to generate the new system resulting in improved or additional human capabilities.
MODULE: LEARNING HOW TECHNOLOGY AFFECTS PEOPLE AND THE ENVIRONMENT
Goal: Understanding the positive and negative impacts of technology while instilling the perception that people must assume the responsibility for adapting technology to the environment and to the human user.
13. Demonstrate (in one or more of the three aspects of technology) outputs that are desired, undesired, expected, and unexpected.
14. Identify instances of the lack of fit between the technological system and the human user, identify techniques for improving the match between the technology, the human user, and the human-made environment, and demonstrate alternatives in order to improve the match in one or more of the given examples.
15. Identify instances of the lack of fit between the technological systems and the natural environment, identify techniques for improving the match between the technology and the natural environment, and model alternatives in order to improve the match.
MODULE: CHOOSING APPROPRIATE RESOURCES FOR TECHNOLOGICAL SYSTEMS
Goal: Learning how to make informed choices in selecting the proper resources for technological systems and choosing resources from seven resource categories.
16. Identify needed resources and a range of possible alternative resources that can be used to solve a given problem situation in each of the three aspects of technology.
17. Investigate the properties of various synthetic, raw, and biological materials through testing and describe why materials are often chosen on the basis of their properties.
18. Substitute different resource inputs for those originally provided in a functioning technological system, in order to optimize system outputs within given constraints.
19. Use a computer and appropriate computer software to access data about the resources given in a situation relating to one or more of the performance objectives above.
MODULE: HOW RESOURCES ARE PROCESSED BY TECHNOLOGICAL SYSTEMS
Goal: Learning how resources are processed by technological systems to meet human wants and needs and solving problems based on the conversion of energy, information, and materials from one form to another.
20. Perform a variety of traditional and modern material conversion processes within each of the three aspects of technology.
21. Process information and communicate a message using graphic, photographic, or electronic means.
22. Perform a variety of energy conversion processes within each of the three aspects of technology.
23. Process information using computer hardware and software to reach an informed decision on a problem with several variables.
MODULE: CONTROLLING TECHNOLOGICAL SYSTEMS
Goal: Learning how technological systems are controlled in the three aspects of technology by feedback in closed-loop systems or by subsystems such as timers or computer programs in open-loop systems
24. Describe examples graphically of open-loop and closed-loop systems in the three aspects of technology.
25. Demonstrate the use of human and technological sensors to monitor the output of a process.
26. Assemble and operate a closed-loop technological system when given plans and access to necessary equipment.
27. Use a computer to control a technological system when given access to the necessary hardware and software.
MODULE: TECHNOLOGY AND SOCIETY: NOW AND IN THE FUTURE
Goal: Learning the social and environmental impacts of technology on society from a local, national, and global perspective by accessing current and future technological systems.
28. Anticipate the consequences of a new technology using futuring techniques when given an example of a technological system in each of the three aspects of technology.
29. Describe how emerging technologies have created new jobs and made others obsolete in each of the three aspects of technology.
30. Propose alternative technological solutions to a local, national, and global issue and model one of the alternatives.
MODULE: USING SYSTEMS TO SOLVE PROBLEMS
Goal: Learning how to apply knowledge of systems to solve problems in biologically related, communications/ information, and physical technology and to combine various subsystems to provide integrated solutions to realistic problems or challenges.
31. Draw and label a systems diagram which depicts the systems approach solution to a problem in each of the three aspects of technology.
32. Use a systems approach to develop a technological solution to a technological problem.
33. Use the computer as a record keeping device to document progress while developing an optimal solution to the problem proposed in performance objective