Difference between alot and a lot
Alot vs a lot:
Learning English grammar, specially for a non-native speaker can be quite a task. There are certain words in the English language that even linguists themselves often confuse. Then there are words that are misused often that such words often after a long period of usage become a part of our vocabulary and yet, we are unaware of the fact that they may in reality, not even exist. Alot and a lot are two such words that can be quite confusing to many, in terms of their usage and most importantly, whether such words exist or not.
What is alot?
First and foremost, it is important to say that there really is no such word as alot. The term alot may have come in to being as a result of the misuse of the term ‘a lot’ put together and often used in that manner that people may have come to believe that there does exist such a word. Thus with the word alot being practically non -xistant, the closest to the word that one may allocate to that word is ‘allot’ which means ‘to divide something in proportions to specified recipients’. An example where the word ‘allot’ has been used would be
She was allotted a two rooms to carry on her painting project.
A two acre land was allotted to the temple by the government.
What is a lot?
The term ‘a lot ‘ is used usually in order to indicate a large quantity of things that is uncountable or a large amount of substances which exist. It is used as a term which describes quantity. For example one can say that
He has a lot of money.
My mother loves us a lot.
A lot of students were absent that day.
Therefore, ‘ a lot’ is used in order to indicate a numerical account or as an indication of many. It does not matter whether the amount is tangible such as stones, money, water or intangible such as time, heat, love etc. a lot can also be used like any regular adverb. One can say that the way she sings is a lot like her grandmother or he looks a lot like his brother, etc.
What is the difference between a lot and alot?
While ‘a lot ‘ is an informal phrase which is used to indicate a large number of things, no such words exists as ‘alot’. The term ‘alot’ may be resulting out of the misuse of the words a lot which indicates a big amount of tangible or intangible quantity, or a misuse of the word ‘allot’ which means ‘to divide something in proportions to specified recipients’.