Going to eat at a restaurant sounds like a fun night out with your family! 
Here are four ways to keep your kids entertained without electronics while you wait for your food to be served! 

1. See who can make the most creative origami from straw wrappers. 

If you watch people at restaurants, many of them will naturally, often unconsciously start folding and looping straw wrappers while waiting on their food. You can take it a step further by hosting a straw wrapper contest at your table. Craft roses, rings, and wriggly worms, then take turns showing off the creations to the rest of the family. 

Don’t be surprised if your kiddos want to get the server involved because they’re proud of their straw wrapper origami skills! 

2. Ask a lot of fun, silly, interesting questions! 

Kids are naturally inquisitive and imaginative, and they have a lot going on in their minds at all times. Go around the table and ask questions that are fun, silly, and sometimes weird, like: 

•	Would you rather teach a bear to dance or ride a rhinoceros? 
•	Do you think unicorns toot rainbows and glitter? 
•	You’re a superhero. What’s your weirdest superpower? 

The sillier and more thought-provoking the questions, the more engaged and communicative your kids will be. 

3. Play a classic “see and sight” game, like I Spy. 

Remember playing I Spy when you were a kid? It’s where you find something in a room, describe it, and others try to guess what you see. They can ask yes or no questions. This is a fun game because you can tailor it to any age. 

4. Craft pieces of a story from one person to another until you either have your food or a complete story. 

Invoke the power of imagination when you suggest making up a story with your family. Everyone gets to tell a piece of the story in one or two sentences as they go around the table. Stories will get weird quickly, but they can be as short or as long as anyone wants them to be. Keep going around the table until 1) you’ve completed the story or 2) your food has arrived! 

When you go to restaurants as a family, the aim is to share that experience. It’s hard to bond over screens, so use the aforementioned entertainment tips to ensure your family has a great time!
