Importance of Shivratri Puja
Maha Shivratri, the most awaited and important festival of 2017 is falling on 24th and 25th February. Millions of Lord Shiva’s devotee celebrate it with great zest.
Rudra means Shiva, the destroyer of all sins and sorrows. On Maha Shivratri Rudra Pooja, He is worshiped in His ‘Rudra’ form. Lord Shiva is considered the provider of wealth as He has the control over Kuber’s wealth. Along with monetary gains, He also looks after one’s happiness, health, prosperity, grace, peace and so on.
Maha Shivratri is believed to be the night of Shiva or Supreme-Being. It occurs on the 14th night of the full moon during the month of Phalgun. Shivratri Rudra Pooja Vidhi starts with the bath of Lingam with ‘panchayavya’ i.e. milk, curd, honey, ghee, cow dung followed by the offerings of sandalwood paste, bilwa and beetle leaves, dhatura etc. Incense and fruits are also given. Usually, the devotees chant ‘Om Namah Shivaya’ and ‘Maha Mrityunjaya Mantra’.
Wearing of rudraksha on Shivratri is considered very auspicious and beneficial for a devotee as the rudraksha beads are believed to be made from the tears of lord Shiva Himself.
When the above-described vidhi is performed with complete devotion, devotees enjoy the blessing of Shiva in the form of Maha Shivaratri Rudra Pooja Benefits like purification of mind, soul and body, attainment of knowledge and wisdom, satisfaction with worldly pleasures, eliminate all sorts of negativity leading to an upliftment of spirituality and various other.
Rudra means Shiva, the destroyer of all sins. The Laghu Rudra Pooja is considered to be the highest honour given to Lord Shiva after Maha Rudra Pooja.
11 recitations of the Sri Rudram, one of the oldest listing of various names of Lord Shiva, followed by 1 recitation of the Chamakam is known as Ekadasa Rudram. This constitutes 1 Rudra Homam. 11 Ekadasa Rudram recitation makes 1 Laghu Rudram. And 11 Laghu Rudra chanting leads to 1 Maha Rudram. The most auspicious Laghu Rudra Pooja Muhurat falls in the month of Shravan. If it cannot take place in the month of Shravan, then Mondays are believed to be the appropriate days to please the God.
Every Pooja is not made for everyone. One needs to know before conducting it. The Importance of Laghu Rudra Abhishek is suitable for a person suffering from ill effects of the moon, ailments and diseases, unable to find perfect soul-mate and on occasions like Amavasya and eclipses and other. It also helps in improving relationship, good health, career, business, positivity and the like.
Maha Shivratri For Laghu Rudra Pooja is performed by chanting the Maha Mrityunjaya mantra ‘Om Hoom Joom Saha, Om Bhu Bhuva Swaha, Om Triambhakam Yajamahe, Sungandhim Pushti Vardanam, UrvaruKamiva Bandhanat, Mrityor Muksheeya Mamritat, Om Swaha Bhuva, Bhu Om Saha, Joom Hoom Om’, 11,111 times. This leads to the removal of evil effects of the planets, as all the 9 planets are controlled by Shiva. The Pooja is installed by 7 priests with complete ritusla of Abhishek.
Maha Shivratri is a great night dedicated to Almighty Lord Shiva. This day falls on the 13th day of the dark fortnight in the month of Phalgun. One who performs or completes the Shiv Pooja at Maha Shivratri with all its rituals is believed to attain Moksha or Salvation and released from the cycle of birth and death.
Some of the Pooja rituals include waking up early and purifying yourself with holy water, abstain from food and drink for the whole day and night, worshipping Shiva Lingam with Betel leaves, Food, Incense, Bael leaves and Vermilion paste, should wear Rudraksha mala which holds a great importance to Lord Shiva.
Usually, the products used during a Pooja varies from person-to-person. This remains true even in the case of Maha Shivratri Pooja Products. But the major products include milk, rose water, honey, ghee, water and sandalwood paste for Abhishek of Shiva Lingam followed by, bilva leaves, dhatura and vibhuti. It is believed that chanting of ‘Om Namah Shivaya’ at the end of Shiv Aarti is the best way to end Maha Shivratri Pooja.
Numerous benefits are gained by a devotee during this Pooja. Some of the Importance of Maha Shivratri Pooja are the inculcation of honesty, self-discipline, forgiveness and other such virtues. It also leads an individual to a path of spirituality and holiness. Shiva, the Supreme God showers His blessings upon devotees and fulfill their wishes.