DISCLAIMER: Laminine Food Supplement is not a stem-cell therapy or is it intended to replace it.
Our body is made up of cells. We have about 5 Billion to 200 Million-Trillion cells & Billions die everyday. Stem-cell is the one responsible for replenishing billions of cells that die each day. It can multiply or develop (mitosis) into any one of various kinds of cells such as blood, skin, hair, cells, & cell tissues that make an organ.
Stem cell is a simple cell that can multiply & develop into any one of various kinds of cells such as skin, hair, cell tissues. It also replenish billions of blood cells that die everyday. Laminine is not a stem cell therapy or does it contain stem cell. Stem cells are innate in our body.
There are two kinds of stem cells. During our embryonic stage, we have embryonic stem cells or ES that is able to develop and form into various body parts. As fully developed humans, ES begins to dissipate. However, stem cells are not totally diminished. We still maintain stem cells in order to replenish our blood, repair body tissues, or balance our hormones. This is called an adult stem cells.
Adult stem cells have limited abilities as compared to ES. This is the reason why scientist began looking at the possibility of extracting ES from other sources and reintroducing it to our body to repair itself.
In the 1800s, cells were basically referred to as the building blocks of life and that some cells had the ability to produce other cells. Experiments were done in the 1900s and scientist discovered that some cells has the ability to generate blood cells. These cells would be referred to as stem cells from the bone marrow.
In 1968, the first bone marrow transplant was performed successfully treat two siblings who had severe immunodeficiency. By 1997, stem cell culture became so advanced that it was able clone a lamb, nicknamed “Dolly”.
A person who undergoes this therapy (if successful) may be able to recover from all types of diseases or delay aging. Although much has still to be learned, stem cell therapy is seen as the ultimate solution in maintaining a long and healthy life.
To date, there several sources of stem cells. The most common and popular is extracting stem cells from your own bone marrow, and reintroducing it to your body. The process is painful and there are other options where Doctors can get more potent stem cells.
However, scientists are looking at other sources of stem cells that can be directly applied to neuro-degenerative diseases and conditions, as well as find treatments for diabetes, heart disease, and other conditions.
Pluripotent Stem Cells or PSC are called “master cells” because they can produce other cells from our three basic body layers. These are the Ectoderm (Skin & Nervous System), Endoderm (Gastrointestinal, respiratory, glands, liver, and pancreas), Mesoderm (bone, cartilage, circulatory, muscles, etc).
PSC can potentially produce any cell or tissue the body needs to repair itself.
Sources of Pluripotent cells
1. Induced pluripotent cell (Reprogramming the cells in a laboratory using the patient’s own cell)
2. “True” embryonic stem cell (ES cells) – It is derived from embryos (Unused embryos donated by a male and female couple who underwent IVF.
3. Embryonic stem cells made by somatic cell nuclear transfer (ntES cells) – Transferring the nucleus (which contains all of a cell’s genetic instructions) from a somatic cell—any cell of the body—to another cell, in this case an egg cell. The egg is then allowed to develop in the lab for several days
4. Embryonic stem cells from unfertilized eggs – An unfertilized eggs can be “tricked” into developing into embryos without being fertilized by sperm, a process called parthenogenesis. The embryos are allowed to develop in the lab for several days, and then pluripotent stem cells can be derived from them
Sourcing Pluripotent Cells from human embryos remain controversial. However, scientists have begun looking at an alternative that will mimic the same process of healing and regeneration that stem cell therapy provides.
If human embryos contains elements that can develops into a full functioning human, an avian embryo also has elements that can cause its development into a full function hen. This is called the FibroBlast Growth Factor.
Fibroblast growth factors or FGF are a family of related proteins, most of which initiate fibroblast proliferation. It acts in an autocrine or a paracrine manner interacting with its specific receptors, and has been shown to play an important role in tissue formation. FGF has been found to take the role of a “director”, telling stem cells what to do or where to go. Thus Laminine which contains FGF is often referred to as a supplement for a “stem-cell like” or alternative to stem-cell therapy.
When a person undergoes stem cell therapy, his body is first injected with FibroBlast Growth Factor or FGF. FGF plays a very crucial role in order for the stem cell to work. FGF directs the stem cell where to go and what to repair. Without FGF in our body, stem cells cannot function.
● Boost immune system
● Maintain a good memory and learning
● Muscle building and weight loss
● Regulate hormones (Insulin Cortisol Adrenaline HGH)
● Repair of orgasm heart liver pancreas, hair, skin nails
There are cell organs in our body that stem-cells cannot regenerate to an optimum level. For example, stem-cells can regenerate billions each day to replenish dead red corpuscles (red blood), but it cannot easily regenerate the heart or pancreas although it can repair small muscle tissues or nerves. The stem-cell’s limitation thus results in diseases or death. But by taking FGF supplements, scientists are discovering how it equips stem-cells to work effectively in areas that they are weak. Stem-cells also depletes as we age but can regenerate with the help of FGF that fuels Amino-acids, and Amino-acids that fuels the stem-cells.
FGF directs stem-cells. Proteins are the building block of stem-cells, and Amino Acids are the building block of proteins. Our body was created to be able to heal itself through the adult stem-cells we have. However with today’s environment and type of diet, we may need to undergo stem-cell therapy. Anyone who wants to undergo this treatment must be infused with FGF, as preparation. If you are looking for a safe and fast way to have a “stem-cell like therapy”, Laminine will provide the FGF and Amino Acids your body needs to promote repair, regeneration, and rejuvenation of your aging or damaged cells. Some people who have experienced optimum health with the bonus of delaying signs of aging even calls our product, “The Laminine Stem Cell Therapy”.
First hand testimonies on Kidney (CKD) and renal failure
The following is a transcript from a webinar with Nutritionist
Food Supplement to Control Stress Cortisol or the ‘stress
Eating Habit Canada is a huge country with ten provinces and
Updated February 4, 2016 Types of Depression where nutritional
Losing weight has always been linked to the food we eat. While
Food diet that Doctors recommend should be included in a cancer
Lower cancer cells with vitamin and nutrients found in what you
Multiple sclerosis (MS), also known as disseminated sclerosis
How Laminine works against cancer What causes cancer? Cancer is