Hyperglycemia in diabetes
High blood sugar (hyperglycemia) affects people who have diabetes. Several factors can contribute to hyperglycemia in people with diabetes, including food and physical activity choices, illness, nondiabetes medications, or skipping or not taking enough glucose-lowering medication.
Early signs and manifestations: Recognizing early side effects of hyperglycemia can offer you some assistance with treating the condition immediately. Look for: Frequent pee, Increased thirst, Blurred vision, Fatigue, Headache. Later signs and indications: If hyperglycemia goes untreated, it can bring about harmful acids (ketones) to develop in your blood and pee (ketoacidosis). Signs and manifestations include: Fruity-noticing inhale, Nausea and heaving, Shortness of inhale, Dry mouth, Weakness, Confusion, Coma, Abdominal torment.
Get physical. Regular exercise is often an effective way to control your blood sugar. However, don't exercise if ketones are present in your urine. This can drive your blood sugar even higher. Take your medication as directed. If you have frequent episodes of hyperglycemia, your doctor may adjust the dosage or timing of your medication. Follow your diabetes eating plan. It helps to eat less and avoid sugary beverages. If you're having trouble sticking to your meal plan, ask your doctor or dietitian for help.
The numbers are staggering, and it is estimated that there are approximately 175 million worldwide sufferers.According to statistics, 67 percent of women with excessive sweating seek treatment, while only 32 percent of men with the condition do so.In all suffering from the condition the disease was bilateral, the mainly affected locations being: hands (35.7%), legs (21.4%), axilla (17.9), face (10.7%), back (7.1%), chest (3.6%) and abdomen (3.6%). There was no predominance regarding gender, age or BMI. We found a positive relationship with BMI and observed a prevalence ratio of 2.48 higher in overweight students than in normal weight or underweight ones.