Geraldo, a young scientist, was going to give a presentation at a prestigious university auditorium. He was nervous, but he was also excited to share his research with the world. Geraldo had been working on his research for years. He had already published several papers, but this was his first opportunity to present his work to a large audience. Geraldo started his presentation by giving a brief overview of his research. He then went into more detail about his methods and findings. He spoke clearly and passionately, and he could tell that the audience was interested. However, as Geraldo continued his presentation, he started to notice that the crowd was getting restless. People were talking and fidgeting, and some of them were even getting up and leaving.

Geraldo tried to ignore the distractions, but they were too much for him. He could feel his anxiety rising, and he was starting to stumble over his words. He lost his train of thought several times. Finally, Geraldo could take it no more. He stopped his presentation and looked out at the crowd. "I'm sorry," he said. "I can't do this." The crowd then erupted into applause. People were cheering and laughing, and some of them were even giving Geraldo a standing ovation. Some people hooted and whistled. Geraldo was confused. He didn't understand why the crowd was so happy. He felt that his presentation had been a failure. Then, one of the people in the crowd shouted, "We're not laughing at you, Geraldo. We're laughing with you. We've all been there! It’s okay to be nervous, just shrug it off and have a laugh with us!" They knew what it was like to be nervous and to make mistakes, especially as a young presenter.

Geraldo took a deep breath and smiled softly. "Thank you," he said. "I'm so, so glad that you understand." Geraldo then finished his presentation, and the crowd was very supportive. They gave him loud cheers and asked him multiple questions about his research. When he stepped off stage and mingled, some people who had been in the audience shared similar stories of when they were nervous, and gave him a pat on the back.
