S.A.D.D. is an acronym used to described the symptoms/signs/strong behavioral patterns that a nonwhite person is having sex with a white person and/or having frivolous contact with white people (not using the time with white people for constructive benefit).
S- Space for white people.
The nonwhite/victim of racism person will seek space for white people in discussion of racism. Often seeking space for white people who are not racist and have a high problem of not suspecting white people they come in contact with of being racist/white supremacist especially the white person they are having sex/sexual contact with.
The C.O.W.S. w/ Dr. Eddie Moore, Jr.
"Your definition sounds like it is not leaving space for white people who don't practice racism or is working against racism" Dr. Eddie Moore, Jr., after hearing Gus T. Renegade/Victim of Racism definition of racism/white supremacy.
A- Abstract thought and speech.
The nonwhite/victim of racism "They won't talk about racism as if it's live and experienced everyday" but they will talk about it as if it's "out there". They will use words like institutional racism as if institution's are not buildings and are run by the people inside them.
The C.O.W.S. w/ W. Kamau Bell
Victim of Racism known as W. Kamau Bell used the abstract term Halls of Power six times to describe the system of white supremacy.
D- Defend white people/Divided loyalties
Defend White People/Defend making white space
The nonwhite person will ferociously defend white people and that space they make for white people in discussion of racism. They will often experience from Cognitive Dissonance when they start to think about pondering that the white person they are sleeping with might be a racist/white supremacist.
The C.O.W.S. w/ Cynthia McKinney
A victim of racism called in after Cynthia McKinney left defending the space for white people.
D- Divided loyalties.
A metaphor of divided loyalties.
The nonwhite person will be on the battlefield of countering racism/white supremacy and instead of going full charge at their enemies, they will be discouraging nonwhite persons from fighting, causing conflict and confusion within the tents making it easy for the white supremacists to come slaughter them.