Dental Implants are cutting edge technology for tooth replacement and provide a long-lasting cosmetic and oral health solution for adults who struggle with tooth loss. With a dental implant, a titanium screw is surgically affixed into the jaw bone, taking the place of the tooth roots. After the bone has healed and bonded to the implant, a second stage takes place where an abutment, (the upper half of the implant), is mounted onto the implant itself, and then a crown is seated on top of the abutment, replacing the missing tooth. Implants can also be used as anchors for a fixed bridge or dentures as a way to replace multiple teeth.
A root canal may be needed when the pulp-filled cavity at the root of the tooth becomes infected and the infection must be treated by removing the decaying pulp. During root canal therapy, our dentist will first take digital X-rays to evaluate the tooth damage and use these X-rays as a guide during treatment. Next, our dentist will drill a small hole through the tooth into the area where the infected pulp is located. Our dentist will then remove the diseased pulp, clean the canal, and seal the tooth to reduce the risk for future decay. In some cases, this will be a two-part procedure because we will need to allow the infection to first clear up before we can seal the tooth. During your initial consultation, our dentist will advise you of the expected treatment timeline.
A dental crown is a type of fixed tooth prosthetic used to restore teeth. It is made from various kinds of materials, and can be combined with other dental treatments such as an implant or a bridge. Often times the tooth structure is deteriorated to the point that a simple filling won’t hold up, and so the whole tooth needs to be capped to restore strength and functionality. Also crowns or veneers can be used to reshape, or resurface teeth for cosmetic purposes. The tooth will need to be ground down to where it will fit inside a crown that fills in the space of the natural tooth. Dental crowns can be made of various types of material such as PFM porcelain, E.max all porcelain, and Zirconium Ceramic.
Veneers are thin, custom made castings, that cover the front side of your teeth. Patients choose to get veneers to correct uneven teeth, discoloration, worn enamel, irregular spacing, and chipped teeth. Veneers can last over 20 years and protect damaged teeth from further harm. The process begins with a thorough examination of your teeth, which often includes X-rays and taking impressions of your teeth. We then remove a thin layer of enamel from your teeth and create an impression to send to our laboratory to create a veneer. We may provide you with temporary veneers while your permanent mold is being made. Your permanent veneer’s size and color are given one last adjustment before they are cemented to your teeth. Types of veneers include E.max Porcelain, Empress Porcelain, Lumineers Porcelain.
An efficient and economical method for tooth replacement is the use of removable partial or full dentures. These dental appliances can restore your smile, and can look very realistic. Partial dentures are used to replace missing teeth, when there are still some viable teeth left on the arch. The partial is made to hook onto the existing teeth, and is held in place with clips. A full denture is used when there are no teeth left to hold onto, and usually requires some denture adhesive to hold the denture in place through suction. Implants may also be used as anchors for a fixed bridge.
Composite resin is material that is matched to the color of your teeth and hardened with the use of an ultraviolet lamp. Because the resins are matched to your tooth’s color, they become invisible when applied. We have found composite fillings also provide an excellent seal on the affected area, preventing further tooth decay. The factors that go into our decision to use composite fillings include the size of the area that needs to be filled, the location of the affected area in the mouth (i.e., a tooth that is heavily relied on for chewing), allergies the patient might have, the preference of the patient regarding the use of metals in the mouth, and whether it is necessary cosmetically to have a tooth-colored filling.
Great oral health begins with regular dental examinations and cleanings. Our team of dentists, dental assistants and hygienists provide personalized routine dental examinations. During each six-month checkup, a thorough examination is conducted of a patient’s teeth, gums, tongue, jaw, and neck. If necessary, we may recommend X-rays, an oral cancer screening, or a periodontal (gum) inspection. This comprehensive examination is then followed by a thorough cleaning and polishing.
Having one or more missing teeth can have a serious effect not only on your smile, but also on your dental health. Similar to implants, dental bridges are used to replace a missing tooth, and are supported by the abutment teeth on either side. Both crowns and most bridges are fixed prosthetic devices, unlike dentures.
Extractions / Wisdom Tooth Extractions
Tooth extraction may be necessary when it is not possible to save a tooth due to the level of deterioration. Extractions may also be done when teeth are problematic (like wisdom teeth), or if a patient lacks the budget to save the tooth. When an extraction is called for, our dentists are very capable, and are able to reduce the stress and discomfort of the patient. In the case of a complicated extraction, like a fully impacted wisdom tooth, we call in our specialist.
Individual Bone Graft
There are various types of bone grafts, all of which are designed to build up the bone that is missing. The ridge or socket preservation graft is a type of graft that is done when a patient does not have adequate jawbone for an implant. It is used to fill in the hole from an extraction site, so there is no vacancy around the implant, which would cause it to fail. A sinus lift is for when the patient has suffered too much bone loss for an implant to be placed without building up the bone. A sinus lift is used in smaller areas of a few teeth, in the upper jaw, below the sinus cavity. Thirdly, a sinus graft or block graft is for when there is a lot of bone loss in the sinus area, front of the mouth, or even in the lower jawline. A block of bone material (consisting of artificial bone, cadaver bone, or bovine bone) is screwed into place with small titanium screws. After the bone has healed and integrated into the natural bone, it serves well to hold implants. If a patient is in need of a bone graft, the type of graft, and the material used would be determined by your dentist.