At TheBestSchools.org, we provide students with useful resources for their education.
Here are some of our most popular current resources:
The Savvy Student’s Guide to Study Skills is designed for any student who realizes that there’s always room for improvement. Learning more about the essential academic and life skills discussed in our Savvy Student’s Guide to Study Skills can be your ticket to success.
Savvy Student’s Guide to Online Education is for the students interested in distance learning classes, but ask whether it’s right for them. We’ve covered the most relevant points to consider as you decide if this is a learning tool that will meet your needs.
Savvy Student’s Guide to College If you are thinking about college and feel like you have so many question that you don’t know where to start, we have you covered. Most likely, we’ve answered all the questions you have, plus some you don’t. For students, parents, and teachers, our guides will help the college bound student.
Resources for Art introduces you to an unusual database of high-quality paintings, some by famous and many by little-known painters, that seem to be united by a theme of spirituality or inwardness.
Resources for Detecting and Deterring Academic Fraud links to an article by notorious ghostwriter David Tomar, a.k.a. Ed Dante. Tomar wrote everything from undergraduate term papers to dissertations. He knows the industry and has something for all teachers and profs to consider.
Resources for Early American History The AMERICAN COLONISTS LIBRARY is a comprehensive collection of the literature and documents that most directly impacted the thought and lives of America’s colonists in the 17th and 18th centuries.
Resources for Introductory Ethics links to an article outlining 12 current controversial ethical issues in America. Students and professors alike will find paper topic ideas, summaries, and links to major sources.
Resources for Introductory Logic links to an extensive note packet to supplement 100-level Introductory Logic courses. The material is mostly based off of Copi and Cohen Introduction to Logic, Hurley’s Concise Introduction to Logic, or Geisler and Brooks, Come Let Us Reason.
Resources for Shakespeare links to a database maintained by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, which allows you to access any scene from any play of the Bard’s almost instantly, with just a couple of clicks of the mouse.
Resources for U.S. History leads you to a database maintained by the Library of Congress, which contains copies of all the most famous (and many lesser-known) documents from the history of our country, such as The Declaration of Independence, The Emancipation Proclamation, and many, many others.
Resources for Understanding the Ghostwriting Business links to our article discussing the ins and outs of academic ghostwriting. Learn the players involved, their sales pitches, and the sheer size of the industry. Academic fraud via ghostwriting is a serious problem going, in too many cases, undetected.
Resource for Helping You Stay Organized, with a Smartphone links to our article providing tips to help you maximize the utility of your smartphone. Take control of your semester with the power of your smartphone!
Resources for ADD/ADHD Students links to our article laying out 10 tips to help ADD/ADHD students, or any restless, easily distracted students, succeed. These tips have proven helpful for most students, ADD or not. Most likely, you will find a tip to help you!
Resources for Online Student Scholarships Online students have many of the same scholarship opportunities as traditional students, and in some cases more. As online programs proliferate, more funding opportunities will appear. See what scholarship might await you today!