Send the link below via email or IMCopy
Present to your audienceStart remote presentation
- Invited audience members will follow you as you navigate and present
- People invited to a presentation do not need a Prezi account
- This link expires 10 minutes after you close the presentation
- A maximum of 30 users can follow your presentation
- Learn more about this feature in our knowledge base article
Do you really want to delete this prezi?
Neither you, nor the coeditors you shared it with will be able to recover it again.
Make your likes visible on Facebook?
You can change this under Settings & Account at any time.
Transcript of Main Idea
A. Sloths and tapirs are other creatures that
live in the rain forest.
B. The rain forest is home to many creatures.
C. Monkeys, toucans and macaws live in the
Soccer players learn many skills when playing soccer. Soccer players learn how to dribble and pass the ball. They also learn how to control the ball so they can eventually score. Most importantly, soccer players learn how to work together with their teammates.
A. They also learn how to control the ball so
they can eventually score.
B. Soccer players learn how to dribble.
C. Soccer players learn many skills when
There are many fun things to do at the beach. Swimming is one thing that can be done at the beach. Snorkeling is another thing that can be enjoyed. Playing beach volleyball can be a lot of fun. It is also fun to look for shells. Some people simply like to sunbathe.
A. There are many fun things to do at the
B. It is also fun to look for shells.
C. Some people simply like to sunbathe When you turn on your radio, you may hear music, or you may hear a voice speaking. The person behind that voice is called an announcer. An announcer introduces songs, interviews guests, and gives news and weather reports. Besides spending time on the air talking, announcers also spend a lot of time off the air getting ready for their shows. That way, when the time comes for them to go on the air, they feel prepared and confident.
A. You can hear music or voices when you turn
on the radio
B. Announcers get to talk to guests and
C. Announcers are people who talk on the
radio Snakes are different from other animals. Their eyes are always open, but they cannot see very well. Snakes cannot hear. They have no legs. They move by sliding along on the ground.
A. Snakes are different from other animals.
B. Snakes cannot hear.
C. They move by sliding along on the ground Crunchy, Munchy, Sparkle Stars Cereal!
If your breakfast cereal gives you the morning BLAHS, try Sparkle Stars—star shaped oats covered with powdered sugar! Sparkle Stars are both sweet and nutritious!
Great with Milk…….or just out of the box!
Eat them every morning for a sparkling start to your day!
What is the main reason you should buy Sparkle Stars cereal?
A. They are covered with powdered sugar
B. Sparkle Stars will perk up your morning
C. They taste great with milk The python is one of the biggest snakes in the world. It can be 30 feet long. It can weigh more than 200 pounds. Sometimes it takes many people to hold one python. A baby python might surprise you. It can be three feet long when it is born. That is bigger than other snake babies.
Like all snakes, pythons are born from eggs. The mother python lays 50 to 100 eggs. She curls her body around them. She rests her head on top of the eggs. To keep her eggs warm, she shakes her body to make heat. She might stay with her eggs for as many as 80 days. She only leaves to get a drink of water. Then the eggs hatch.
1. What is the main idea of the first
A. It can be 30 feet long.
B. The python is the biggest snake in the
C. It can weigh more than 200 pounds.
2. What is the main idea of the second
A. She rests her head on top.
B. She curls her body around them.
C. Like all snakes, pythons are born from
eggs. Henry’s Bakery just introduced a new cookie to its product line. Its ingredients include eggs, whole-wheat flour, baking powder, butter and oats. Henry uses all natural, wholesome ingredients in this cookie. He adds honey and vanilla to make it taste good.
The new cookies weren’t a big success at first. When the first batches came out of the oven, they smelled good, but the cookies looked uninteresting. So, Henry added raisins to the top. Now the cookies look as good as they taste!
1.What is the main idea of the first paragraph?
A. Henry’s cookies contain honey and vanilla
B. Henry uses all natural, healthy
C. Henry’s Bakery introduced a new, all natural
2.What is the main idea of the second paragraph?
A. Henry added raisins to the tops of his
B. Henry had to make his cookies look more
C. The cookies smelled good straight out of the
oven The main idea of a paragraph tells the topic of the paragraph. The topic tells what all or most of the sentences are about.