In the middle of a busy park, there was a small pond.  That pond was home to many animals, including a duck named Cathy.  She had plenty of fish to keep her company, and there was also the occasional visit from another duck or a goose as they traveled south.  There was also a very nice green frog named Peter.  Peter and Cathy were good friends.  She even gave him rides on her back if he grew tired of swimming.  At night, Peter would sit on his lilypad and look at the stars.  Cathy often joined him.

It took Cathy some time to realize that she was starting to feel like she wanted to be more than friends with Peter.  It took many more days after that for her to get the courage to talk to him.  She found Peter on his lilypad home and swam up to him.  "Hey, Peter.  How are you?"

"I'm doing well," croaked Peter.  "How are you?"

Cathy sighed loudly and said, "Lonely."

"We all get lonely sometimes, Cathy," said Peter sympathetically.  "Sometimes, though, it's nice to be alone."

"Yeah."  Cathy fluttered her wings awkwardly.  She found herself unsure of what to say next.

"Is anything else wrong?  You aren't acting like yourself."

Cathy jumped, surprised at the question.  Her sudden movement sent water flying everywhere.  Peter blinked as the droplets landed on his face.  "Sorry!  Um... There is someone I want to talk to.  He's nice and patient and understanding.  Maybe a swim together would be nice."

Peter stretched his legs out in the cool water as she spoke.  "Well, you won't know unless you ask him."

Cathy shyly swam over to the lilypad and patted her eyelashes.  "What sort of plans does he have tonight, I wonder?"

Peter shrugged.  "You should ask if you want to know, Cathy.  You're very nice.  I'm sure whoever this guy is, he would be happy to spend time with you."

Cathy stared, shocked that he did not understand her.  "What are you doing tonight?" blurted the duck.

"Me?  Why, I have a roast fly to cook.  I need to get it in the oven if it's going to be done in time for dinner."  He smiled at Cathy, a warm, friendly smile.  He wished her luck in finding company and dove into the water, leaving a sad Cathy behind.
