Is anyone else out there feeling overwhelmed by the clutter in your home?  I am constantly struggling to find space for new things. And if I'm looking for something? I can't find it because of the clutter! I'm not even sure exactly what I have because I cannot see it all. All of those are sure signs that I am a candidate for the next Swedish Death Cleaning Reality show. So, accepting the problem is the first step and I claim it. I am in desperate need of a Swedish Death Cleanse. 

What is Swedish Death Cleaning, you ask? Swedish Death Cleaning is also known as döstädning in Swedish. The basic premise involves decluttering your home and getting rid of possessions that you no longer need to make things easier for your loved ones when you pass away. I know it seems like the idea of death cleaning might be morbid or depressing, but I see it as a helpful and even cathartic exercise. I also look at Death Cleaning as a guide to living a great life in the present - not in the past - with purpose and not letting "stuff" drag you down. 

As you can imagine, Swedish Death Cleaning can be a daunting task, but it also can be an incredibly liberating experience. Focus on what serves you in the here and now and keep just those special pieces that matter to you.  Create a more peaceful living space by limiting possessions to only things that bring you joy and peace. It can also be helpful to think about the legacy that you want to leave behind, and how you want to be remembered. By getting rid of things that you no longer need, you can make things easier for your loved ones after you're gone and yourself as you live for today.

If you're feeling overwhelmed by clutter in your home and constantly struggling to find space for new things like me, then you are in dire need of Swedish Death Cleaning. By decluttering your home, getting rid of the things no longer needed, and keeping only the things that serve you, you can create a more organized and peaceful living space, lower your stress levels, and even make things a little easier for your loved ones when you pass away (eventually). So why not give it a try today?
