Being in a relationship takes work and attention. The fact that you're asking this question shows that you want to put in the effort to have a healthy relationship. Here are some things you can do to mend fences with your spouse and begin to move on:

1. Communication - One of the most important aspects of a relationship, communication ensures the couple is talking to each other, expressing their feelings, and letting the other person know what they were thinking when they decided to do something. Many times problems in relationships are due to poor communication or a misunderstanding between two people, which could have easily been avoided had they opened up to each other about what was going on. In some cases, telling someone something may hurt their feelings, but being honest is the best course of action when dealing with an upset spouse as lying can make things much worse and put a strain on the relationship.
2. Take timeouts - Sometimes being around one another for any extended period can cause feelings of claustrophobia and a sense of loss of privacy. Being around the same person every day, every minute of the day can cause partners to resent each other, especially if they don't have time for themselves to think and process feelings. If you're having problems with your spouse and you feel it getting worse by talking, consider taking a timeout so you can gather your thoughts and have some time to settle your emotions, before you end up saying something that you regret later.
3. See a therapist or counselor - Sometimes the problems between spouses are not getting resolved through communication or timeouts, which is where a counselor can come in and provide some much-needed counseling and guidance to the couple. Having a trained, qualified outside observer who is separate from the turmoil and stresses the couple is experiencing can help to put things in perspective for the couple who are not able to see the forest for the trees.
4. Don't be too proud to apologize - When couples argue, there may be a power struggle between the two where neither of them wants to concede the argument. Instead of letting your or her pride get in the way of reconciliation, apologize for whatever you did wrong and make amends. Or, if your spouse doesn't want to apologize for what they had done to cause the argument, simply forget about it; but before you drop the subject completely, at the very least let your partner know how their actions or behavior made you feel so you don't continue to harbor any bad feelings toward them going forward.
