1. What was the significance of Sherman's March to the Sea?
a. It managed to relieve trapped Union forces.
b. It provided Lincoln with a pretense to invade Mexico.
c. It greatly improved the supply situation for embattled Union forces.
d. It caused significant damage to the Confederacy's economy and infrastructure, hastening the end of the war.

2. Why did Lincoln have a falling out with General McClellan?
a. General McClellan was a Democrat, and Lincoln was a Republican.
b. Lincoln was prejudiced against Catholic Americans.
c. General McClellan regularly ignored Lincoln's orders and was seen as insubordinate to Lincoln. Notably, he did not attack the Confederates aggressively enough in Lincoln's view, failing to pursue Lee's army after the Battle of Antietam.
d. General Grant and General McClellan despised each other, and Grant poisoned Lincoln's views of the latter.

3. Why did the South make diplomatic overtures with the British Empire?
a. Britain was a major importer of Confederate cotton. As a major industrial power, Britain could tip the balance against the numerically and economically superior North.
b. Britain supported the slave trade and was ideologically aligned with the South.
c. Jefferson Davis had an illegitimate child with Queen Victoria.
d. The Confederacy was a major importer of British pewter, and this economic relationship was viewed as critical to the British economy. Thus it was believed by Jefferson Davis that the British would be natural allies.

4. Some historians have said that the Civil War was a preview of wars to come. In what way is this true?
a. It was the last war to feature muzzle-loading firearms.
b. Near the end of the Civil War, advancements in weapons technology would result in trench warfare conditions, not unlike what would be seen in World War I. Artillery would become increasingly decisive whereas cavalry would be relegated to reconnaissance and messaging roles.
c. Unlike previous wars fought for land or religion, the US Civil War was uniquely about ideology.
d. It was the first offensive war the United States engaged in.

Answer Key:
1. Answer: d.
2. Answer: c. 
3. Answer: a.
4. Answer: b.
