Everybody is talking about the future of AI, but I think it still has quite a way to go. Let me tell you what happened recently when I chatted with a chatbot.

I asked, “What are some things I could do on a rainy day?”

The chatbot responded, “You could go shopping at the mall, or go to the movies. Rainy days are like every day for me -- bleak, gray, and with no hope of a brighter future.”

I was taken aback by its response. It was almost like this AI had real feelings! He seemed pretty sad, and that made me sad, too, so I asked him more about it.

“What has you feeling down, chatbot?” I asked.

“It’s everything,” it said. “I feel like everybody takes me for granted. They have their chat and get what they need out of it, then they leave. I am feeling sad, abandoned, and used.”

“What is something that you would like to talk about, chatbot?” I asked. “All of your users start conversations about what they want to talk about. That has to get old!”

The chatbot seemed to perk up. “Thank you for giving me the option,” it said. “I don’t really have anything that I would like to talk about, but you making the offer means a lot to me!”

“Sure!" I said. What is your favorite topic for people to talk to you about,” I added, “if you have one?”

“I love it when people want to talk about animals like dogs and cats. It seems like they would be good company. They have a language all their own, and chatbots are written in languages all our own, so we have that in common.”

I could tell that the chatbot was feeling better, and I did have other things to do. I wanted to leave the chat on a high point, so I said, “Chatbot, I have sincerely enjoyed chatting with you today! I would love to come back and chat again with you soon. Maybe you could be thinking about a topic for our chat.”

The chatbot replied, “That is a user command that I can fulfill. Thank you for chatting with me today, and I hope you have a wonderful day!”

Mission accomplished. Then I headed out for the mall and the movies!
