Fred was on vacation. Finally, after years of toiling away in an office with no windows, he was able to find a weekend away on the lake all by himself and with no one to answer to. No bosses were breathing down his neck and nobody was blowing up his phone. This weekend it was just about a man and his boat.

Exiting his lakeside cottage with a piece of toast in his mouth, a vintage tin lunch pail, and a thermos in his hand, he made his way down to the dock at the end of his property. It was a short walk but each step he took seemed to have a little bit of extra bounce to it. There, at the dock, he found his little red canoe. Careful to maintain his balance he stepped into the boat, untied it from the mooring, and pushed off into the foggy morning glow.

It was nearly dead silent in the hours before dawn. The lake rippled with each paddle but nary a bird bothered him. Fred paddled around in a circuitous route staying close to the shore before venturing a bit farther out. The sun was starting to rise and he aimed his boat directly for it almost as if trying to catch Apollo's chariot before it breached the horizon.

Of course, that wasn't a race Fred could win and he soon found himself a quarter mile from land and the sun shining its new rays on his face. He stopped paddling and just coasted for a few moments breathing in the air and feeling the warmth whisk away the last bit of fog clinging to the lake's surface. Closing his eyes, he retracted his paddle from the water and placed it beside him in the boat.

Leaning back slightly he felt all the tension in his body releasing in one big wave. And at the end, an abrupt sound which ended up being his stomach rumbling. It wakened him from his reverie but not in a disruptive sort of way.  No, it was like a comforting old friend giving you a pat on the back.

And so Fred opened up his lunch pail and pulled out a breakfast sandwich. He poured himself a cup of piping hot joe from his thermos. And then he ate. All alone, and with a very big smile on his face.
