I can definitely suggest some great gluten-free and nut-free dinner ideas for you and your friend: 

1. Sheet-Pan Honey Mustard Chicken. Make a sauce with oil, honey, mustard, garlic, and paprika then pour half over your chicken. Bake for 25 minutes, then add green beans, sweet peppers, and the remaining sauce and bake for 15-20 more minutes. This sheet-pan chicken is not only gluten-free and nut-free, but low-carb as well. 
2. Pressure-Cooker Salsa London Broil. Cut your steak into thirds and place it in the pressure cooker, then add salsa, sweet potato, carrot, and garlic. Lock the lid and pressure cook on high for 10 minutes.  Slice your roast, serve with veggies, and garnish with lime wedges and cilantro, if desired. This dish comes together quickly but has plenty of delicious slow-cooked flavor. 
3. Air-Fryer Chicken Pesto Stuffed Peppers. Cut peppers lengthwise in half, remove the stems and seeds, and heat them in your air fryer at 400 degrees Fahrenheit for 10-15 minutes. While that cooks, combine the shredded rotisserie chicken, brown rice, and pesto in a large bowl. When the peppers are ready, add the filling and return to your air fryer at 350 degrees Fahrenheit for about 5 minutes. Sprinkle cheese on top of each stuffed pepper and bake until melted.    
4. Grilled Summer Sausage Salad. Brush sausage, zucchini, yellow squash, and peppers with olive oil and grill them over medium heat for 5-6 minutes. Remove them to a cutting board, then roughly chop and add them to a large salad bowl with your salad greens, sliced cucumber, and chopped celery. Add your dressing of choice and toss to coat for a delicious and refreshing gluten-free and nut-free meal.  
5. Chicken and Asparagus Bundles. Flatten chicken breast halves, then wrap each one around five asparagus spears and secure them with toothpicks. Put them in a baking dish, add oil, lemon juice, and seasonings then cover and bake for 25-30 minutes. When the chicken and asparagus bundles are ready, combine cornstarch and chicken broth with your pan juices in a small saucepan and heat until thickened, around 2 minutes. 

These are just five ideas to help you come up with a great dinner idea for you and your guest. Keep in mind that it's always best to check nutrition facts and ensure that all of your ingredients are gluten-free and don't contain nuts.
