Hey! I've got some tips to share for anyone looking to change up things around the house and make it more lively. First: you don't need to focus on big changes! There are lots of things you can do that can make a big impact with a small investment. Here are a few:

New light fixtures (even standing or tabletop ones) can easily change the mood of a room, especially with the options at your disposal. Consider dimmable lights, RGB lights, or candelabra fixtures for example. A porch swing or other outdoor furniture can inspire you to spend more of your time outside, making a cozier environment to be in. Both of these are just scratching the surface of some of the relatively low-cost and low-effort improvements you can make at home. Something as simple as changing the layout of a room can make a big difference, too. It can change the way you manage your routine, or your workflow if you work from home in a bedroom office, for instance.

As we go on, I'll talk about things that require more funds or work to do, but they're quite fulfilling to get done, and make for a much better home both for yourself (and any family that lives with you or may inherit it) or if you ever decide to sell.

Something you may not often think of is cabinet accessibility in your kitchen. Surprisingly, it can make a big impact with something so seemingly insignificant, like putting a lazy susan mechanism in your corner cabinets. It makes it a lot easier to get things out since you don't have to strain yourself reaching to the back and over other things stored in them. Other kitchen improvements include updating your appliances. I know it isn't the most compelling option, but it can make a huge difference to have something more modern with better ease of use, and it looks prettier, too! Some people prefer to settle for what's usable though, and that's okay; just remember to pick what most suits your needs.

If you've got a lot of unused space in your lot, there are plenty of things you can do with it. One that can have a surprising impact on the overall quality of the home is tastefully populating your yard with plants such as trees and bushes.  The trees can provide shade, privacy, and places for things like swings or feeders for local birds, and bushes can be super pretty ways of accentuating spaces in your yard. One that's more complicated, but can massively increase the value of your property is adding an addition to your house. It's a great way of adding new functions and square footage, as you can have one or more extra rooms to dedicate to activities or living. Even though it requires a lot of time and work, it's very rewarding with the increase in value and use of your home: I wouldn't recommend it to newcomers, but it's a great longer-term project for experienced home improvers!

Thanks for reading along. I hope these suggestions have given you ideas about how you can tailor your home to fit your needs, especially if these led you to your own creative ideas! I look forward to seeing home improvement being more commonplace, especially since it's such a fulfilling thing to do. Stay creative!
