Here are a few good suggestions on effective ways to freshen up a mattress. 

1. Vacuuming - You can use the upholstery attachment that comes with most standard vacuum cleaners to eliminate dust and germs from eh surface. Before you start to use your vacuum, you should wash your upholstery attachment using warm water. Doing so will get rid of any dust and germs that are present inside the attachment from past use. You should vacuum your mattress surface, the sides, and the areas beneath the seams. Once that is finished, prop up your mattress and vacuum the other side. 

2. Deodorizing - Whenever you deodorize your mattress, you are eliminating any odors left behind by germs, bacteria, and allergens. You can use a few times you already have in your pantry to deodorize your mattress such as baking soda, water and vinegar, or cornstarch. 

3. Promoting Good Air Circulation  - A damp mattress is one that will invite harmful bacteria, mildew, mold, mold spores, dust mites, and others to accumulate on the surface. Even the smallest amount of body sweat can cause these issues to occur. You can prevent a lot of problems with moisture by promoting good air circulation. If you have a ceiling fan over your bed, you should keep it on for several hours after you wake up. Doing this will help eliminate traces of moisture from the surface of your mattress. 

4. Rotate Your Mattress Regularly - Rotating your mattress regularly will help keep the filling inside distributed evenly. It allows you to provide better support and consistent comfort while reducing the risk of dips or sagging in the mattress. Whenever you rotate your mattress, you are ensuring that you use each side equally. It is an excellent way to improve the lifespan and is a general part of your mattress care. 

5. Change Your Bedding Weekly - Changing your bedding every week can be very beneficial. Every week we spend between 49 to 60 hours sleeping and that is a lot of time for dirt, sweat, and oil to build up on our sheets. Proper hygiene is necessary in all areas of our life, including our bedding. Without regular cleaning, unwashed sheets can lead to skin breakouts, asthma, and allergies. To improve your health and your sleep quality, you need to wash your bedding regularly. 

6. Consider The Overall Health Of Your Mattress - Mattresses are not cheap; therefore, the overall health of your mattress is essential if you want your mattress to last as long as possible. You need to consider keeping up its health. From cleaning to prevention, taking the time to care for your mattress and perform some maintenance can help you prolong its lifespan. A few things you can do to improve the health of your mattress include making sure it is adequality supported, using a mattress protector, washing your bedding regularly, and rotating your mattress often.
