What does “cold-pressed” mean?
Cold-pressing is a process that extracts juice, vitamins, minerals, enzymes and phytonutrients from fruits, vegetables and other plant-based foods like nuts and seeds. Jusu’s cold-press juicers use tremendous amounts of hydraulic pressure to slowly extract the nectar from organic produce, while maintaining the integrity of its cellular structure. It’s a much gentler, more gradual process in which little to no heat is created due to the lack of a fast spinning blade (often included in other forms of juicing.) The result is a much healthier, nutrient-rich juice that is vibrant in colour and has a crisp taste.
Why should I drink cold-pressed juice?
Not all juices are created equal. Cold-pressed juice is now considered to be the healthiest of all juices because it provides you with the best quality, plant-based nutrition possible. Jusu cold-pressed juice contains more vitamins, minerals, phytonutrients, antioxidants and enzymes than traditional centrifugal juices. That’s because centrifugal juicing, although still very healthy, creates heat due to a fast spinning blade which starts to break down the proteins within the juice right away. These juices should therefore be consumed within 30 minutes to get all the nutritional benefits. Our cold-pressed juice is always 100% organic, unheated, raw and unpasteurized, which gives it a longer shelf life (or refrigerator life) than centrifugal juice, and its nutritional qualities and fresh taste are preserved for up to three days.
Why does organic cold-press juice cost more than the juice at the grocery store?
Jusu we only use top quality, organic produce to craft our juices, which tends to be priced higher than produce subjected to synthetic pesticides and chemical fertilizers. Each juice also contains 4-6 pounds of this great produce in every bottle—that’s 16-24 servings of organic produce! Cold-pressing is a slow, hands-on process; the juice you see in the grocery store has been mass-produced with a long shelf life in mind. It often goes through a heat process, or irradiation, is pasteurized and has chemicals added back in to maintain colour and flavour. Once these processes are complete, the nutritional value has diminished. This is all done so it can go from manufacturer to truck to warehouse to truck and sit on grocery store shelves for up to 9 months. Jusu juice, on the other hand, is made with a long human life in mind. It’s fresh, organic, nutrient-rich, colourful, and flavourful and meant to have a 3-day shelf life. But the biggest difference you’ll notice is the way Jusu juice makes you feel!
Why don’t you pasteurize your juice at Jusu Bar?
To optimize the nutritional benefits Jusu juice is never heated (pasteurized) and therefore maintains its essential nutrients. All Jusu produce has been thoroughly washed before it is juiced. But, like that of any non-organic or organic produce, fresh raw juice may contain harmful bacteria and may cause illness in children, the elderly, pregnant or lactating women and those with a compromised immune system.
Why does Jusu Bar use certified organic?
There are a few reasons! Mainly, we want to create the highest quality product for our customers and evidence shows that organic crops contain significantly more vitamins and minerals than conventionally grown crops. Likewise, juicing produce that has been subject to synthetic fertilizers and chemical biocides is like consuming toxins in concentrated form. We hope to educate you to drink juice for ultimate health and steer clear of those chemical toxins. All our organic produce has been certified by an agency accredited by the Canada Food Inspection Agency (CFIA). It’s healthier for us and healthier for our environment!
WHAT IS THE SHELF LIFE OF JUSU JUICES, AND DO THEY NEED TO REMAIN REFRIGERATED?
JUSU juice is raw and highly perishable. Refrigerate your juice as soon as you get home. Look out for "drink by" stickers on the bottom of all our bottles.
What’s the best time to drink Jusu juices and mylks?
The best time to drink Jusu juice or mylk is on an empty stomach. This way there is no interruption in the digestion process and all the vital nutrients easily make their way into your cells. Wait 20-30 minutes before eating so these nutrients have plenty of time to work their way into your amazing bod!
Why do you use plastic bottles?
The plastic bottles we use at Jusu Bar are BPA free and made from the most recyclable kind of plastic available (PET). They are also much lighter to ship than glass, which decreases their overall carbon footprint. If you prefer to use a reusable container we encourage you to check out our Juicy Vessels.
What does Jusu mean?
Jusu is a Japanese word for juice
I am allergic to nuts. Should I drink your cold-press juice?
Most Jusu juices are nut-free, but please be advised that they are manufactured in the same kitchen where we make our nut mylks and other nut products.
HOW WILL I FEEL WHILE I AM ON MY CLEANSE?
Each person’s reaction to cleansing is different. While some people feel alert and energized, others feel more lethargic than usual. You may find it easier to stay busy, or prefer to take this time to rest. Listen to your body and take care of yourself! Remember, cleansing has its ups and downs. At some point you will probably experience a decrease in energy. The body is going through a transformation and it takes energy to adapt. If you are tired, allow yourself to rest. This is not permanent, your body will acclimate, and it will soon become more energized.
CAN I WORKOUT WHEN I AM CLEANSING?
You bet! Sweating helps to release toxins. Some may find their normal moderate-vigorous workout routine to be a bit much, so lower exertion exercises such as jogging, yoga, Pilates, walking, or swimming can be a good choice during your cleanse. A far-infrared sauna session each day will also help tremendously with the release of toxins through sweating.
SHOULD I GET COLONICS DURING A CLEANSE?
Elimination is an extremely important part of your cleansing process. If you are having trouble going to the bathroom, or want to increase the benefits of your cleanse, we recommend speaking to a colon hydro-therapist.
I AM ON A CLEANSE AND I CAN’T POOP, WHAT SHOULD I DO?
There are a number of things you can do to speed up bowel movements: Hydration is key! Start by doubling your daily water intake. We like to sip on a cleansing or elimination tea, however here are many herbal remedies to improve elimination (reputable Natural Food stores typically have a selection to choose from).
I AM ON A CLEANSE, AND AM READY TO EAT MY ARM. WHAT SHOULD I DO?
Start by drinking more water in between juices as staying hydrated may help to curb your appetite. If you are still starving at the end of the day, add an additional juice or two to your daily cleanse regime.
WILL I NEED TO WEAR A DIAPER IF I CLEANSE?
Everybody is different. This will depend on your pre-existing level of toxicity. If you are you a heavy alcohol drinker or eat processed foods / lots of red meats you may experience stronger cleansing effects.
CAN I DRINK ALCOHOL WHILE CLEANSING?
SHOULD I DRINK WATER WHILE I CLEANSE?
Yes in between each juice and throughout the day.
CAN I DRINK COFFEE DURING A CLEANSE?
One cup of black coffee a day is OK, but no more than that. To get the full benefits of the cleanse, we suggest removing caffeine from your diet.
CAN I CLEANSE WHILE PREGNANT OR BREASTFEEDING?
We don't recommend it. Please consult your physician first.
HOW DO I PREPARE FOR A CLEANSE?
1-2 days prior to your start date, begin by drinking lots of water and incorporating 4-5 servings of alkaline foods such as fruits and veggies into your daily diet. Good hydration and eliminating processed foods are the best way to prepare your body for a detox.
HOW DO I COME OFF OF A CLEANSE?
Your body can experience a lot of change over several days of juice cleansing. To make your transition back to solid foods safely, it is important to focus on fruits and vegetables with high water content, such as cucumbers, celery, apples, melons, and berries. Later add brown rice and nuts / seeds. Add protein only when you feel ready.
WHAT IF I HAVE A HEALTH CONDITION THAT REQUIRES PRESCRIPTION MEDICATION?
Please consult your doctor before starting a cleanse.
WILL I LOSE WEIGHT DURING MY CLEANSE?
Yes and No. Some will be surprised by their weight loss, others will be disappointed. Weight-loss should not be the focus of your cleanse. Focus on resetting your body, alkalizing your system, and breaking old habits.
HOW MANY CALORIES ARE IN A CLEANSE?
Cleanses range from 1200-2100 calories per day. Calorie intake should not be the primary focus of your cleanse though. All JUSU Juice ingredients are nutrient-rich and full of live enzymes that will support your body’s natural ability to heal.
AFTER I FINISH MY CLEANSE, HOW OFTEN SHOULD I DRINK A JUICE?
We recommend for the first week post-cleanse, 1-3 juices per day. After that, at least 1 juice a day is a great way to incorporate healthy fruits and vegetables into your daily routine.
HOW OFTEN SHOULD I CLEANSE?
This is entirely up to you. As often as once a month. Some people find that cleansing seasonally is great to reset their systems. Others may choose to cleanse annually.
WILL CLEANSING MESS UP MY METABOLISM?
If you transition in and out of your cleanse with proper care and good nutrition, you should experience an improvement to your digestion and overall metabolism.
WHY IS IT GOOD TO CLEANSE?
Cleansing has many physical, mental and emotional benefits. Even if you’re the pillar of health you still absorb toxins from the environment, which include everything from airborne pollutants and cleaning products, to skin creams, hygiene products and food additives. Cleansing gives your body the chance to get rid of these toxins and to create a healthy internal environment that’s more resistant to disease. It also gives your digestive system a vacation from the daily work you put it through. Your body uses the energy usually reserved for digestion to restore cells and detoxify. It’s an empowering way to get your motor running smoothly, efficiently and energetically. For more information on cleansing go to Jusu Cleanses.