Ask any expert and he will tell you that a child’s height can only be determined by his genetics and daily nutritional intake. Soon after the child passes the first year of his or her life, the height is broken down into mini growth spurts. And, as soon as the child reaches adolescence, he or she again starts growing taller. There are many factors that lead to height increase in a child. Nutrition is one of them.
Importance of Vitamin A and D in your child\'s diet. Vitamin D is very important for the child to maintain healthy skin, hair and for the proper growth of bones. There are two kinds of vitamin D: Vitamin D2, which is made by plants and cholecalciferol, and Vitamin D3, which is made by the human body, when the skin is exposed to UVB rays from the sun. Both D2 and D3 help to absorb calcium and phosphorus from the diet to the bloodstream. Egg yolks, butter, fish, milk are the good sources of Vitamin D from the diet.
Vitamin A is good for the eyesight of the child. It also acts as reproductive and effective in the bone metabolism of the child. Carrots, spinach, potato are good sources of Vitamin A.
Importance of calcium in your child\'s diet. Calcium is key in the development of the child, as calcium functions in the overall development of the body such as muscles, bones and even nerve system. Apart from the milk, you can even get calcium from almonds, curd, as curd has more calcium then milk, say approx 40% more and even from broccoli, beans, leafy vegetables, mushroom, eggs, and fish like sardine.
Importance of protein in your child\'s diet. Protein is very important for the growth of the hair, muscles, skin and other internal organs of the body. As our body cannot produce protein, so we have to source it from the food. Children\'s diet should include a combination of good proteins. Look at lean meat, dals, soya beans, chicken, methi with the combination of vegetables and fruits to supplement the requirement of other vitamins and minerals.
Importance of fiber in your child\'s diet. Fibre is important for bowel health, so that the child does not get constipated. Lack of fibre also leads to poor weight gain. It is important for the child to include fibre rich foods, such as fruits like apples, watermelon, vegetables, nuts and have whole meals like salads.
Importance of minerals in your child\'s diet. Minerals are important for the proper development of a healthy brain, good bones and many other developments of the body. The essential minerals for children are calcium, zinc, copper, manganese, potassium, chromium and selenium, iron, which can be obtained through a balanced diet that includes all vitamins and minerals.