History of Architecture and Interior Design from the 19th Century
Chapter 18- Shingle Style and American Arts and Crafts: 1880’s to 1930’s
Shingle style is unique to architecture in the united states. Buildings are picturesque, rambling, irregular, and covered with wood shingles. The American arts and crafts movement follows principles and tenets of the English, but interprets them in a more individualistic way and integrates more diverse influences. Industrialization, urbanization, and immigration were transforming the US at this time.
Shingle Style- Roots of this style are English Queen Anne. The wood shingles, additive or rambling quality, and broad roofs characterize early houses. Designs strive to create order and unity within complex architecture by using shingles to unify irregular shapes and massing.
American Arts and Crafts- Derives from the concepts of Pugin, Ruskin, Morris, and other English design leaders. Within these designers, individuals strived to create their own personal American expression. Therefore, the American movement has more diversity in appearance than English Arts and Crafts.
Characteristics: Both styles are in favor of form, style, and details of the middle ages. Common design principles include asymmetry, irregularity, verticality, and simplicity. Both styles try to catch the essence of the past, but not interpret literally.
Motifs of the period are flowers, trees, foliage, animals, geometric motifs, Gothic details, and oriental images.
Shingle- This uniquely american style incorporates elements of Queen Anne, as well as picturesque characteristics, irregularity, gambrel roofs, palladian windows, romanesque arches, and free flowing space.
Arts and Crafts- America produces a wider diversity of expression arising from a strong emphasis upon regionalism and individuality. Most are honest in structure, have good craftsmanship, and simple in it’s own way. Examples include the Craftsman House, Prairie House, and Bungalow House.
Interiors: Both styles integrate architecture, interiors, and furniture together as a whole. Everything is unified. Some interiors have queen anne and japanese influences, however most characterize the American Arts and Crafts style. Meticulous attention to details and handcrafted work compliment the harmonious concepts of the parts blended into a whole. The room’s character should reflect it’s function and the individuals who use it. Wall papers have a stylized naturalistic, geometric, or abstract pattern. Colors popular at the time are red, yellow, green, ochre, buff, brown, off white, and tan.
Furniture and Decorative Arts: