Grades Pre K-6
If you had only 5 or 10 minutes with a student, what skills could you teach that would give him/ her the best chance to succeed academically and in ALL aspects of life?
Self-Regulation, sometimes called executive functioning, is a critical competency of universal skills necessary for academic success, emotional control and healthy social interaction. Self-regulated children are able to delay gratification and suppress impulses long enough to process consequences of their actions or recognize alternative actions that might lead to more positive outcomes. Helping children learn self-regulation earlier in life will greatly increase the positive impact on their academic performance challenges, anger problems, anxieties, school safety issues, self-esteem struggles, social troubles and more.
In this informative 90-minute webinar, author and consultant Brad Chapin will provide key strategies to use with all students – but especially those who have behavioral/emotional self-control and/or impulse-control issues. The insights, strategies and activities presented in this webinar are based soundly upon the evidence base of cognitive-behavior psychology. They are also consistent with the principles founding the RTI/MTSS, Positive Behavior Interventions & Supports and Responsibility-Centered Discipline movements. These approaches are creative, fresh and engaging in a way that will help create quick and observable changes in young people. Mr. Chapin will provide concrete lessons targeting each of the 3 skill-training areas identified in the Self-Regulation Training System (Physical, Emotional and Cognitive Regulation.)
To augment the PowerPoint™ presentation and activities, each participant will receive a (PDF) resource packet of the presentation with ideas, reproducible forms, activities and other suggested resources.
Brad Chapin, LCP, LMLP
A leading authority on Self-regulation, Brad Chapin, LCP, LMLP is a masters level psychologist with a passion for helping others learn the skills necessary for success and happiness. He is a best-selling author and nationally-recognized speaker in the area of Self-Regulation. He has served as the Director of Child and Adult Community Services for a large mental health center where he supervised 65 mental health field staff. Currently, he serves as Director of Clinical Services for Stormont-Vail Behavioral Health Services.
Bead created the Self-Regulation Training System from a practical, research-based foundation. His strategies have helped thousands of people develop the skills necessary for success in job and academic performance, relationships and overall wellness.
Brad is the author of Helping Young People Learn Self-Regulation (now in its second printing), Helping Teens Learn Self-Regulation, The Legend of the Regulators and the SECRET List – and the soon-to-be-released Helping Pre-K Students Learn Self-Regulation. He has also created several DVDs and additional resources for helping students learn Self-Regulation skills.
To submit a registration form along with a purchase order, click here. We also accept registration forms and school purchase orders by fax, mail or email (email@example.com).