It is normal to shed some hair each day as part of this cycle. However, some people may experience excessive hair loss.
A number of things can cause excessive hair loss:
1. After having an illness or a major surgery, you may suddenly lose a large amount of hair, this hair loss is related to the stress of the illness and is temporary.
2. If your thyroid gland is overactive or underactive, your hair may fall out. This hair loss usually can be helped by treatment of thyroid disease.
3. Hair loss may occur if male or female hormones, known as androgens and estrogens, are out of balance, correcting the imbalance may help stop hair loss.
4. You can have increased hair loss during pregnancy. High levels of certain hormones in pregnancy cause the body to keep hair that would normally fall out and when the hormones return to pre-pregnancy levels, that hair falls out and the normal cycle of growth and loss starts again.
5. Medicines that can cause hair loss include blood thinners, medicines used for gout, high blood pressure or heart problems, vitamin A (if too much is taken), birth control pills and antidepressants.
6. Fungal infections of the scalp can cause hair loss, this can be treated with antifungal medications.
7. Hair loss may occur as part of an underlying disease, such as lupus or diabetes. Blood testing can be done to evaluate for these diseases.
8. If you wear pigtails, tight ponytails, braids, or use tight hair rollers, the pull on your hair can cause a type of hair loss called traction alopecia. If the pulling is stopped before scarring of the scalp develops, your hair will grow back normally. However, scarring can cause permanent hair loss.
9. Hot oil hair treatments or chemicals used in perms or hair straightening may cause inflammation of the hair follicle, which can result in scarring and hair loss.
10. "Common baldness" or male-pattern baldness, also called androgenetic alopecia is the most common cause of hair loss in men. Men who have this type of hair loss usually have inherited the trait. This hair loss typically results in a receding hair line and baldness on the top of the head. Women may develop female-pattern baldness, in this form of hair loss, the hair can become thin over the entire scalp. One medicine, minoxidil or Rogaine, is available without a prescription, it is applied to the scalp. Both men and women can use it. Another medicine, finasteride, is available with a prescription. It comes in pills and is only for men.
If you are experiencing symptoms of hair loss, see your physician for an evaluation.