If you’re concerned about proper health, then you know how important proper dental care is. There are many people who ignore how important it can be and choose to go to the dentist, lancasterfamilysmiles.com, as rarely as possible. But the simple truth is that when something in the mouth is wrong, it quickly spreads through the entire body.
As with so many things involving health and maintenance, the best cure is proper prevention. In terms of dental health, this means doing things such as brushing at least twice a day, using mouthwash after meals if you can and flossing when possible. These things are all well known, and people who have even the barest minimum of desire to maintain their teeth already do them.
For many people, that’s not enough. They want to find foods that cause as few dental cavities as possible. This is an admirable goal, but it’s not as easy as it first sounds.
Cavity Causing Foods
The first thing to keep in mind is that cavities tend to be more a problem of improper care rather than specific foods. That is to say, any type of food will cause cavities if you go long enough without brushing or otherwise cleaning out your mouth and teeth.
However, that doesn’t mean all foods are equal. There are some foods which carry more of a risk than others, and it would be a good idea to avoid or limit these foods if you want to maintain proper dental health.
Sugars and bread products, especially sweet bread products like cakes, can stick to the teeth especially well. They’re also a bit deceptive, in that it would seem as though your teeth are clean after eating something but the sugar lingers on. That sugar can cause some problems down the road, especially if it manages to stick to the area where your teeth meet your gums.
Avoid Hard Candies
Hard candies are a huge problem if you’re trying to avoid cavities. They are essentially large lumps of hardened sugar that you let dissolve in your mouth over time. That’s a sure sign that something is going to break.
Not that you have to stop eating hard candies altogether. Many hard candies are quite tasty, so a desire to continue eating them is understandable! However, you would do well to limit your intake of hard candies as much as possible. If you do eat hard candy, try using mouthwash immediately after so you can wash off the sugar.
Ultimately, proper dental hygiene involves brushing, flossing, and rinsing regularly. If you don’t do that, then it hardly matters what you eat. In addition, genetics play a fairly large part of dental health. Some people are genetically predisposed to having bad teeth. And that’s not to mention how pregnancy can suck the calcium from a pregnant person’s teeth, causing them to become thin and weak.
So if you’re looking for proper dental health, don’t worry so much about the exact foods. Worry instead about properly maintaining the teeth you have.