Blood is one of the most important fluids in the human body that delivers necessary substances and takes away waste products from body cells.
You have rather an exciting but a bit vague assignment – to write an essay on blood. If your teacher has not given any additional instructions, it is pretty clear why you are so puzzled right now.
In this article, we want to offer you several perspectives for writing papers on blood. You can choose one depending on the subject you are writing on.
Perspective #1 for writing essays on blood
The first idea for your paper that comes to mind is to view the topic from a pure biological perspective. Besides, this is exactly what you will have to do if you write this essay on blood for your Biology class.
You should explain the following:
To conclude, an essay on blood donation is not only interesting for the sake of teaching others how blood is used, and explaining the process blood donors go through when giving blood, but it also is interesting to learn for yourself about the process. If you are capable, you should donate blood. According to , someone needs blood every two seconds. Also one out of every seven people entering a hospital is in need of blood. So hopefully the experience of writing an essay on blood donation will be a learning experience not only for those reading your essay but also for yourself.
Free Papers and Essays on Blood Analysis
Did you know that blood makes up more than 7% of the body’s weight? Our body gets oxygen and nutrients through blood. Blood fights against infections and heals wounds.
These and many other interesting facts can be introduced and discussed in papers on blood.
Actually, you can be assigned to write different types of papers on blood: essays, term papers, and so on.
What can you cover in essays on blood?
You can consider the issue of blood donation or write about blood poisoning. Each of these issues is worth considering in essays on blood. Finding necessary information will not be a problem. Either search for it online or visit the library of your university/school/college.
If you are not interested in investigating and disclosing these particular issues, pay attention to the following ideas:
Papers on blood infections
Write about blood infections. Discuss whether blood infections can kill a person. How fast? What causes blood infections? Intravenous use of drugs, co-injections, out-of-doors dangers, and so on – all this can be the reason for blood infection and can be described in essays on blood infections. For example, investigate such life-threatening blood infection as sepsis in your essay on blood infections.
Papers on blood groups
Investigate different blood groups and write about blood compatibility. Why is it important to pass blood-compatibility tests? Tell the reader about its significance in essays on blood groups.
Besides, you can be assigned to complete the following tasks for other courses: