What’s the problem with boredom?
It’s important to get bored at times to guide us to do something more meaningful. How many of us have left a job because it’s got boring?
In normal life we find ways to relieve boredom but for those particularly in hospitals and care homes this can be really challenging and many can get profoundly bored.
Boredom is a negative emotional state associated with a lack of energy, lack of focus, time slowing, frustration, lack of hope and is even correlated with higher mortality rates. The Anti-boredom Campaign aims to raise awareness and acknowledge that prolonged boredom is a suffering. We want to encourage research into the cost of boredom, together with ideas and resources to spark the imagination of those in hospital and homes. Reports suggest over half of adults struggle with boredom in hospital, and for many this can be last experiences of life. By providing opportunities for combating boredom you can bring joy!
Interacting with the world…
We are born curious and wanting to interact with the world. Our lives are normally busy and full of variety. Given the shock and upheaval of illness in this situation you could find yourself sitting in bed, and waiting with time on your mind to worry about an uncertain future. Boredom urges us onto more meaningful activity but hospitals lack options for what to do. In these circumstances many find it hard to focus on reading and TV in hospital can be costly and uninspiring during the day especially. Despite smartphones many of us need more, and can still feel bored in hospital. As adults we are so very aware of our situation and particularly when in hospital this brings understandable worry. Wouldn’t it be a kindness to offer some ‘food for the mind’ to relieve boredom and anxiety, and find focus elsewhere? In a hospital while care is excellent for the body, what about the mind?
Challenging boredom as a taboo for adults…
Children tell us when they are bored but as adults we are expected to be silent and get on with it. For children there are toys, colourful surroundings, schools, play specialists, parents and charities, and already have the ability to play. For adults options are limited in hospital. We may all need a helping hand to acknowledge boredom and find ways to overcome. It takes courage to admit boredom, and something as simple as a pencil and paper, and encouragement and inspiration to overcome. A seed of an idea or maybe a beautiful piece to colour-in can be enough to bring someone during difficult times on a ‘holiday for the mind‘.
We are currently seeking funding for the Anti-boredom Campaign. This new idea has been inspired by Lizzie’s long-term interest in engagement, creativity and the brain, as well as experience through projects in hospitals with adults, as well as with children and adults with dementia.
With great thanks to the following for funding ongoing projects which continue to inspire this work, and for the immense interest and care of so many people involved in these projects:
More to come…
Ideas from the past
“boredom has probably been the biggest problem and enemy”
- The British Medical Journal – ‘Pass me an anti-boredom pill doctor‘ – Dr Lizzie Burns
- The Hippocratic Post – ‘Medicine for the Mind‘ – Dr Lizzie Burns
- BBC R4 – ‘Being Bored: the Importance of Doing Nothing‘ – Phill Jupitus
- The School of Life – ‘How to be Bored‘ – Eva Hoffman
- BBC R4 – ‘The Anatomy of Rest: Does the brain rest?‘ – Claudia Hammond