Jason miraculously survived the mine collapse in a small air pocket. He was initially knocked unconscious, which is why searchers didn’t find him. When he came to, he had suffered a serious concussion, he was dazed, and he had amnesia. He wondered, from the gun he found at his side, if he was a criminal on the run or if he might be in danger. Somehow, he mustered the strength to find a way out through the rubble to fresh air.

Just in case, Jason thought it best to find places to hide during the day and to only travel by dark of night. He ended up catching rides at truck stops until eventually he found a beach. Before the amnesia, Jason had always had a connection to the beach, having grown up in Malibu and learning how to surf as a child. With the amnesia, Jason didn’t know for sure why, but he found peace there.

He picked up random jobs for a while, like straightening beach chairs and bringing resort visitors fresh beach towels. One day he met an old woman named Beatrice, who lived in a condo directly on the beach. She had a good sense about people and immediately trusted him, and she asked if he would like to move in with her and help her take care of her aging husband. Jason spent the next two and a half years taking care of Albert, and within weeks Beatrice was gone, too.

After Beatrice passed away, Jason went onto the internet for the first time. Something seemed intuitive about it, although he had never had an interest in technology before -- just surfing and swimming. He was searching for information on Beatrice’s family to notify them of her death and happened upon a photo of himself along with an obituary mentioning the mine collapse. He saw that he had a wife and two kids and had lived in Capitol City, Iowa. Not remembering how to drive, he again hitchhiked, this time back to find his family.

Upon arriving in town, Jason walked into the nearest diner, and the waitress recognized him and fainted on the spot. When the manager came out, he was stunned to see his supposedly dead son-in-law standing in front of him and very much alive!
