Guide to Using This Book
is divided into four parts that cover the various phases of a wiring
job—from understanding basic vocabulary and principles, to planning,
installation, and finishing. Each part provides the necessary foundation
for the parts that follow.
CIRCUITS, AND GROUNDING
SERVICE EQUIPMENT AND WIRING
special wiring situations and projects
The best way to use this book is to read it through from start to finish
to gain an overall grasp of what is involved in electrical wiring. This step is vital to fully grasp the elements of a complicated trade. Many questions from readers turn out to address topics that are fully covered in the book, but the reader had neglected to read through the book first. The
table of contents at the front of the book provides an overview of the
wide range of material covered. This and the index at the back are your
keys to locating topics quickly and easily.
getting started—the basics
provides basic background necessary to understand the safety, practical,
and legal considerations involved in wiring decisions and practices.
This is essential reading before undertaking any electrical work. The
standards and codes that help ensure safety are explained, and important
safety precautions are offered. Practical goals to consider in the planning
of any wiring job are described in plain language. A bare-bones outline
of how electrical power is measured and delivered to the home provides
basic vocabulary for understanding issues of usage, cost, and conservation
of electrical power.
wires, circuits, and grounding
explains how to choose the right wire types and sizes, electrical devices,
and tools you’ll need for a particular job. Proper overcurrent protection
and the importance and specifics of grounding are emphasized here and
throughout the book. New developments on arc-fault circuit interrupters
are covered. Regulations are given for feeders and the panels they supply.
A simple way is described for using wiring diagrams to design installations
of any size.
installing service equipment and wiring
When you’re ready to start your installation, Wiring Simplified
fits in your toolbox so you can take it right to where you’re working
for ready reference. All commonly encountered wiring methods are covered. The service entrance chapter describes required workspace
around panels and explains how to establish the connection point between
the power supplier’s wires and your electrical installation. Detailed
instructions are provided for selecting and installing boxes and switches
in your circuits; for making the wiring connections at the boxes, switches,
and receptacles; for running cable or raceways; and for testing the
completed installation. You will also find information on how to wire
detached garages and outbuildings. Modernizing an outdated wiring
system is covered in a separate chapter, with many expert hints for
making the job easier. Wiring requirements for a variety of specific
household appliances are listed. The details of finishing an electrical
installation wrap up this professional approach to getting the job done.
special wiring situations and projects
begins with a discussion of the types and wiring requirements of stand-alone
motors commonly used in residences and on farms, with special coverage
of new regulations for motor disconnects. The chapter
on farm wiring covers specialized topics such as constructing the meter
pole, wiring animal buildings, and rural safety issues. In addition
to telephone and doorbell wiring, the chapter on low-voltage wiring
now includes general material on computer network wiring. The last chapter,
on troubleshooting and repairs, is a guide to diagnosing and remedying
common problems such as blown fuses or tripped breakers, broken switches
and receptacles, and lamps and doorbells that don’t work—information
that can be used by people who never intend to undertake an electrical
installation but want to be able to maintain the electrical equipment
they depend on each day.
Park Publishing, Inc.
Softcover, 5 1/2 x 8 1/2 inches, 256 pages, 228 illustrations
44th edition, July 15, 2014