What is the issue?
Dog owners must be very careful when using oil diffusers in their homes, particularly ones containing tea tree oil. Tea tree oil can be lethal for dogs.

What happened to the dog? 
The dog was poisoned by the oils in the owner's diffuser. 

What happened?
The poor dog was left unable to recognise her when she returned from working a late shift as a nanny. 

Did Marrianne Whyte warn other dog owners? 
Marrianne Whyte shared her warning on Facebook.

How many times has her post been shared?
Her post has been shared 1.5 million times.

When did she realise there was something wrong with her dog?
When she tried to wake her dog up, she thought the dog had been having a dream, or been experiencing night terrors.

Had the dog recovered the next day?
 The next day she found that the dog was "still acting weird". Marrianne set off for another shift but had to return home early after receiving a worrying call from her dog sitter because the dog wouldn't come out from under the bed. It was very out of character because he was a happy dog. After returning home early from work Marrianne Whyte found the dog in a confused state.

Did she take the dog to the vet?
She took the dog to the emergency vet. 

What did the vet diagnose?
It was then she discovered that the tea tree oil in her diffuser is toxic for dogs.

What happened to the dog?
There is a happy ending to the story because fortunately, tests confirmed that Marriane's dog hadn't suffered liver damage. 

What treatment did it receive?
The vet gave the dog fluids under his skin to get rid of any toxins.

Are cats at risk from tea tree oil?
 Cats are also at risk of being poisoned by essential oils.

Why is tea tree oil dangerous to cats?
 Cats don't have a liver enzyme called glucuronyl transferase, which is required to break them down. Cats' livers are slower at eliminating these compounds, which can lead to toxic build-up. 

Why is tea tree oil dangerous for dogs?
Dogs, like me, do not lack this enzyme, but we are still sensitive to essential oils and we are liable to become very sick if exposed to them. 

What are the symptoms of poisoning?
Owners can look out for common signs of poisoning as a result of inhalation from an oil diffuser, by watching for laboured breathing, lack of coordination and difficulty walking, drooling, diarrhoea, lethargy, depression, low body temperature, weakness, muscle tremors and vomiting.
