Here are five creative ways you can save money.

1. Join loyalty programs.
Oftentimes, people shop at the same places for regular purchases. An example is shopping at the same grocery store every week. If you are doing this, determining whether the places you shop have loyalty programs that reward consistent customers is well worth your time. These loyalty programs will allow you to gain rewards for future shops. In the long run, this can save you lots of money. If your grocery store doesn't offer a loyalty program, it's worth checking the closest one that does. Weighing up the cost of extra fuel and time to get there will help you to decide if it's worth trying somewhere new. 

2. Use cash-back credit cards. 
If you are responsible with money and do not have problems paying off credit cards, look into getting a high cashback credit card. Like loyalty programs, this will help you get extra rewards for simply doing what you are already doing. Extra money with minimal extra work is always good when trying to save money. Often times you will receive cashback on just about anything, so using your cash-back card for all your purchases and then paying the balance straight off could lead to great returns over a long period. It is essential to remember to pay off your card as the interest you gain through not doing so will likely exceed your cash-back, leaving you worse off. 

3. Cancel subscriptions you are not using. 
Check your monthly outgoings and see if there are any subscriptions you are not using. If you find any, it would be best off to cancel them. This will mean a monthly bill is removed, which is excellent as these monthly bills can add up to a lot over time. The quicker you cancel, the faster you save. Many TV or Telephone will even offer a lower rate to customers considering leaving. This means that contacting and informing them of your plans to leave could mean they offer you a significant discount to stay. Doing this yearly can really help to keep your bills down in the long run. There is no harm in saying you will leave unless your bills go down. They can only say no. 

4. DIY where possible. 
Doing DIY instead of hiring a tradesman can really save you a lot of money. These days it couldn't be easier to find tutorials and how-to videos online for most DIY projects. Ensure you watch these videos before purchasing any materials or tools to ensure you are confident in completing the task to a high standard. If you have a lot of time on your hands, this is one of the best ways to save money as you also learn a valuable skill that you can use as a second income. DIY doesn't just mean working at home, though. It can even mean taking your own coffee or lunch at home instead of buying it out for a higher price.

5. Set up automatic payments for bills. 
Life is tough, and it's hard to remember everything. You shouldn't be charged fees when you forget to pay a bill. But unfortunately, late fees are a fact of life, and sometimes they can damage your bank balance. By setting up automatic payments for your bills, you can ensure you never get charged late fees or accrue interest on any account you may have. An added bonus is that this will save you time meaning you have more to make money.
