[1:59 am. Law & Order finishes its broadcasting program segment and its credits screen rolls. Fading from black, a mystical colorful door, like that of a game show, opens in an all-white office room. Then appears a hyper male with exotic colorful hair in his twenties. He's in an orange, yellow, and purple business suit. He looks like he overdosed on eight cups of coffee. He's clearly a disheveled trainwreck, yet viewers find themselves unable to stop watching.]

Salesperson: "FORGET EVERYTHING YOU KNOW!" he hesitates. "... about writing a book. I'm about to clue you in on the juicy secrets of the best authors of all time."

[The camera pans through a quick slideshow, revealing some interesting titles "Gone With the Wind 3", "50 Shades of Whey: Protein Dream" and "Henry Popper, The Wizard Who Was Also a Boy or Something".]

Salesperson: "Our program has trained some of the top-selling authors of all time. Usually, to reveal our secrets, we would charge a retail price of... you guessed it, sixty-nine, ninety-nine! Almost a seven thousand dollar value! But here at Writers Among Us, we are giving you this information today only, a one-time special limited-time event for absolutely free!"

[On the screen appears the salesperson's outline of industry secrets:
1. Space - who needs it?
2. The Sigma Male Grindset.
3. Let Your Topics Flow.
4. Wing it.
5. Editing is optional.
6. Don't Judge A Book...
7. Real Estate, but for books.]

Salesperson: "Alright, so let's start with the first couple. Space isn't that important. Feel free to write wherever you want. On your bed, in the kitchen, even from your rooftop. Never confine yourself to one space! Secondly, you need the right "grindset" if you want to write. I'm talking, waking up at 4 am, and working until midnight kind of stuff. Anything less is futile."

[The screen fades to black, and he's in a dim-lit room with a somber message.]

Salesperson: "We're out of time today. Millions--possibly billions of people have benefitted from our course. If you want to get serious about writing a book, check into our program, Writers Among Us, today. The program is five minutes of exciting video content with twelve easy payments of $129.99. You will thank us later."
