Call it liquid gold or life-giving nectar, but you cannot deny the importance of breast milk for a newborn. It is the most beneficial thing for a baby.
In fact, so much is its importance that the World Health Organization recommends giving just mother's milk to the baby for the first 6 months of his/her life.
Many mothers, especially the first timers, often worry about their milk supply. Nature has bestowed every mother with a sufficient amount of milk to feed their newborn.
However, some new mothers are unable to produce a sufficient quantity of milk for their young ones.
The dwindling supply in the new mothers could be because of hormonal changes, illness, nutritional deficiency, birth control pills or an improper latching position.
Insufficient milk supply could put your newborn at the risk of an array of diseases such as malnutrition, weak memory, health issues and a host of other issues.
Ayurveda, the ancient system of medicine, has many herbs that can solve the problem of insufficient milk supply in new mothers. Use Ayurveda to harness the potential of various herbs to alleviate diseases.
Also Read: Best Ayurveda Remedies to Treat PCOS
So, here are some of the Ayurvedic remedies to increase milk production in new mothers, have a look at these.
Methi seeds are one of the best remedies recommended in Ayurveda for increasing production of milk. Methi seeds contain a compound called phytoestrogens that help in boosting the function of the mammary glands. Young mothers suffering from the problem of an insufficient milk supply should consume methi seeds.
Soak methi seeds in water overnight. Then, boil this concoction. Strain it and drink it every morning to increase your milk supply.
According to Ayurveda, the ancient system of medicine, cinnamon helps in increasing the flow of mother's milk. It also helps in increasing the flavour of the milk when consumed by nursing mothers. It will help in delaying periods after the childbirth, thereby delaying early conception.
New mothers can consume cinnamon by making a mixture of half a teaspoon of honey and a pinch of cinnamon. You can also consume cinnamon by the way of adding a pinch of it to some warm milk. Consuming it for a month or two will result in increasing the supply of milk in lactating mothers
This traditional Ayurvedic herb has been used since time immemorial to cure the problem of insufficient milk supply in nursing mothers. Shatavari contains a compound that helps in keeping hormones in check and also helps in increasing the production of milk in females.
Drink two teaspoons of Shatavari mixed with water to increase the milk production. You could also buy it in the form of a capsule in any OTC medical store.
Cumin seeds are commonly found in an Indian kitchen and are an integral part of the Indian cuisine. But they are also a highly efficient remedy for treating problems related to the insufficient supply of milk. These seeds are also packed with iron that gives strength to the nursing mothers.
Make a mixture of 1 teaspoon of sugar and cumin powder. Consume this with warm milk every day before going to bed to ensure an increased breast milk supply.
Garlic is an efficient Ayurvedic herb used since time immemorial to increase the secretion of milk in new mothers. This galactagogue herb helps in also increasing the flavour when it is consumed by a nursing mother.
You can consume garlic by the way of adding it to your food every day.