AN INTRODUCTION TO THE NJ CLEAN COMMUNITIES PROGRAM
New Jersey Clean Communities is a statewide litter-abatement program. It is funded by the Clean Communities Act and managed by the New Jersey Department of Treasury and Environmental Protection as well as the New Jersey Clean Communities Council. It isembraced by businesses, community organizations, schools and individuals who work together to keep New Jersey clean.
The Clean Communities Act, passed in 1986, was most recently reauthorized in December 2002. The Act creates a statewide litter abatement program by placing a user-fee on the manufactures, wholesalers and distributors of litter generating products. The user fee generates approximately $14 million each year.
- $4 million is distributed to towns in the form of recycling grants
- $300,000 is distributed to a non profit organization for the implementation of statewide education related to litter abatement
- Of the balance, 80% goes to 559 eligible municipalities, 10% goes to 21 counties, and 10% goes to NJDEP-Division of parks & Forestry
The New Jersey Clean Communities program is a three fold attack on litter. Cleanup; hold at least one day of public lands cleanup by community volunteers. Enforcement; adopt and enforce anti-litter laws, and Education – establish an education program within the community for adults and children.
What is Litter?
Litter is a solid waste that is out of place. It’s the kind of trash found on our streets, highways, lakefronts, parks and school grounds. Litter takes many forms: paper, plastics, metal cans, cigarette butts, glass, food packaging, graffiti and tires.
There are seven sources of litter: pedestrians, motorists, overflowing household garbage, overflowing commercial containers, industrial and commercial loading docks, construction sites and uncovered trucks. Litter is windblown until it gets trapped somewhere.
Even small amounts of litter are unsightly, unhealthy and dangerous. Litter may cause disease, fire, pollution, accidents, poor morale, increased taxes, blighted landscapes, declining tourism and industry, loss of civic pride and morale and a negative public image.
The following steps can be taken to clean up litter. Get involved! Adopt-a-spot (river, road, park or school) to keep clean on a regular basis or organize a cleanup day.
Litter is everyone’s responsibility, so everyone needs to be involved. Businesses, industry, civic organization, schools, and all residents should participate either by representing or supporting our efforts to keep Monroe Township clean.
For more information regarding the Monroe Township Clean Communities Program contact Jackie Wallace at (856) 728-9800 extension 249 or