As I grow tired and more hungry, I know I must find somewhere to stay. I notice a farmhouse ahead, so I decide to stop by and see if they have any extra rooms. I knock on the door and shout, "Hey in there, is anyone home?' I stand alone on their front steps. After a few seconds, I hear a rustle from within the house. Soon, the side door bursts open and the farmer runs out and points a rifle at me. I drop to my knees and plead with the farmer, "No! I like farmers. Don't shoot!" He readies his rifle and shouts, "Are you that salesman who has been running around here?" I hurriedly reply: "No, no, I'm a doctor! I'm clean-cut! Just graduated college!" Just then a gorgeous young lady steps from behind him. She says, "Hey there, I'm Rita." From the looks of it, she's his daughter. I immediately try to calm her dad down by complimenting his farm on how pretty it is. He asks, "What do doctors know about farms?" I respond with, "I was born at the bottom of a wishing well." He studies me before saying, "You must be kinda tired." I reply, "Yeah, I've driven 10,000 miles today." A silence fills the room before the farmer speaks, "There's a bed beneath the stove. You can go to sleep right now on 2 conditions. Stay away from my daughter, and milk the cows in the morning." 

In the middle of the night, I hear something. It's Rita. She says, "You must be dirty after driving all that way. Do you need to take a shower?" I grow uncomfortable. and decide it's probably best I go ahead and get out of here. I can't leave unless the farmer kicks me out, since he's expecting me to milk his cows in the morning. I have to say something that he definitely won't like. I shout out, "I like Fidel Castro and he has a very nice beard!" Rita looks surprised and takes a step back. Soon, I hear a thump from upstairs. It's the farmer rushing downstairs shouting, "What did you just say?" I repeat myself as he swings his fist at me. I duck, causing his fist to swing right into the ice box. Upon contact he shouts, "You better get out of here right now!" He throws a book at my head and I somersault out of the window as he grabs his gun. I land in his garden of flowers before taking off down the road. As I run I glance back to see Rita shouting for me to come back. I can't go back there now. Even if Rita has moved away and now works in the city, That farmer is still out to get me. He is always on the lookout, and if he ever does catch me, he'll probably try to turn me in to the FBI. I might be in the swamp if not for freedom of speech.
