Noble prize Winner Dr. Otto H Warburg , who discovered the real cause of cancer, has found that the root cause of cancer is oxygen deficiency. Oxygen deficiency leads to an acidic state in the human body. Dr. Warburg also found that cancer cells are anaerobic (do not breathe oxygen) and cannot survive in the presence of high levels of oxygen, as found in an alkaline state.
All normal cells have an absolute requirement for oxygen, but cancer cells can live without oxygen – a rule without exception. Deprive a cell 35% of its oxygen for 48 hours and it may become cancerous.”
Our diet plays a vital role in maintaining proper pH levels in the body. PH balance is the balance of acid and alkaline in all fluids and cells throughout your body. Your body must balance the blood’s pH levels at a slightly alkaline level of 7.365 in order to survive. Unfortunately, the typical American diet consists primarily of toxic and acid-forming foods like processed sugars, refined grains, genetically modified organisms, and etc. This leads to unhealthy acidic pH. An imbalanced pH can interrupt cellular activities and functions. Excessively acidic pH can lead to many serious health problems such as cancer, cardiovascular disease, diabetes, osteoporosis and heartburn. If you keep your body in an acidic state for a long period of time, it can drastically accelerate aging. Robert O. Young in The pH Miracle, says, that most health problems arise from being acidic. This is because parasites, bad bacteria, viruses, and candida overgrowth thrive in acidic environments. But an alkaline environment neutralizes bacteria and other pathogens.
Home remedies for acidity
1/3 tsp. baking soda
2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice or organic apple cider vinegar
Mix everything together. The acid/base combination will immediately begin to fizz. Keep adding baking soda until the fizz stops and then fill the glass with 8 oz. water.
Drink all at once. This home remedy will help neutralizes the pH and create an alkaline-forming environment in your body. It will help with stomach acid and reduce acidosis.
The pH Miracle: Balance Your Diet, Reclaim Your Health