“Yes sir? I understand and I will see to it that this gets personally delivered by me.”

The floor manager of the Honey Hotel seemed focused on a phone call and was writing down notes furiously. In one fell swoop, the manager hung up the phone and snapped his fingers in the air. The floor runner rushed toward the manager. This was the runner's first month and every delivery made him uneasy.  As the runner approached the floor manager, he cleared his throat. 

"Yes, sir?", said the runner in a shakey voice.

The manager snapped, "You are going to make a special delivery to the top floor. It should be here soon. Have you been up there before?"

The runner thought for a second, "I don't think so sir, this would be my first time. Also, can I confirm this is going to.....the top?"

"Did you not hear me the first time boy?", asked the manager, "I need you to be extra careful and do not even think about dropping it. When you deliver this, do not make eye contact and address her as "Your Majesty". So many former floor runners made that mistake and..."

The manager suddenly stopped talking and noticed the escorted package walk through the rotating hotel doors. He waved his hands and ran toward it, signed the delivery, and walked back to the runner. The manager handed the package to the runner, "Go. Now!"

The runner gulped, took the gilded package, and said "Yes sir, going now!"

The runner power walked to the elevator and used his ID card to get the first privilege to the next elevator. The runner hopped on and turned around, "Sorry everyone, I have a special delivery so please take the next elevator." During the long elevator ride to the top floor, the runner was captivated by the package; he never saw gold before in his life, let alone used to wrap something!

At the top floor, the runner walked past a sign that read "Queen's Floor". He saw the Queen walk up to him and immediately extended the package out while looking down, "Your Majesty, a package". The Queen took the package and said, "Thank you, you are very sweet", then left.

The runner turned around and in that moment of pride, adjusted his personal name tag that read, "Floor Runner - Hotel Honey - Bee Colony 3"
