I have reviewed the first 2 MathLab apps. I like them being so simple and easy to follow, and the math activities being so diverse and different so kids won’t get bored easily. The first two MathLab apps are for kindergarten and first grade. Now they have a 3rd one in the series: MathLab for 2nd grade. Although it is designed for 2nd grade, any kids in early elementary school or kindergarten should find it helpful.
Like the first two apps in the series, kids can use it in two ways: Expedition and Laboratory.
Expedition is for kids go through the games by difficulty levels. Each level includes all types of math problems, such as addition, shapes, counting charts. Laboratory has 17 groups, and each group focuses on one type of math activity, like addition.
The 17 types of math activities in the app:
Pattern: kids identify the pattern that fits the sequence.
Number chart: kids learn to use chart to display a group of numbers.
Less / Greater / Equal Sign: kids learn the relationship between numbers.
Calendar: kids learn about date and structure of the calendar, and do calculation based on that.
Weekday / Month / Season sequence: an extension of the calendar.
Skip Counting: skip counting by 2, 5, 10.
Add Double: kids will do addition of adding the same numbers together.
Read Ruler / Thermometer / Scale: kids learn how to measure temperature, length and weight.
Make 10: kids have to choose the number that can make 10 when added by a given number.
Expand Number: to learn the expanded form expressing a multi-digit number.
Time Pattern: learn to read time from a clock.
Addition: addition with 2-digit numbers
Subtraction: subtraction with 2-digit numbers
Matrix: learn to classify objects by Color, Shape, 3D Shape, Even/Odd, Digits.
Fraction: identify fraction with graphs of different shapes.
Multiplication: single digit multiplications
Division: single digit divisions.
As previous two apps in the series, I like the different types of the questions. They are not the typical ones you see from school homework. It is great for kids to see some different types questions for the same concepts they are learning at school.
MathLab Grade 2 is available on iPhone, iPod and iPad. It is also available on Google Play and Amazon App Store for Android.
If you would like to check it out or purchase it, please use the App Store link provided below. The cost is the same to you, but iGameMom gets a small percentage. Thanks for your support! Note: The link works for all countries.
For more math games for kids, please check our pick of 45 math games for kids grouped by kids age and learning objectives.