No need a night vision to learn how to draw an owl with such a cute and adorable design! This fun bird can be drawn using only six easy steps and a few basic shapes. It might be a little bit more challenging than the other characters from the same series, but it is still a tutorial that beginners can achieve.
Below is a colored sample of the cartoon owl that you are about to create. As you can see, this fun character is mostly sketched using circles. A few triangles are needed to illustrate the beak and the hair on top of the head.
Great! Now that you are more familiar with the final result, let's start this lesson with the creation of the head. Use a simple oval shape to illustrate this one. For the hair, two thin and long triangles are needed.
Next, you can draw the body using another large circular shape. This new shape must be slightly smaller than the one used to create the head. Finally, you can complete this step by drawing the legs using small straight lines like shown below.
Cool! You can add two oval shapes to represent the wings. These shapes must be narrow and slightly pointed on the ends. Don't forget to draw the tail near the legs using a small curved line.
It's now time to work on the head of the animal. To form the beak, simply use a small triangle. The eyes and the pupils can be illustrated with large circular shapes.
You can complete this cartoon owl by adding details like a large patch around the eyes and the beak. You can also draw a circular shape on the stomach to illustrate the various colors found on this part of the body.
Excellent! Below you can see how the owl looks like once you are done with this tutorial. The character is pretty simple to achieve and most details are simple and made from simple elements.
Cool! Drawing an owl is probably my favorite bird to illustrate. Hopefully you had fun too working on this adorable cartoon character made mostly from circles and curved lines. It's now time to draw your own version and see what you can come up with! :)