If you do not live near the equator, the problem of lack of sunlight during winter time peculiarly can be actual for you, even if it is not visible at first glance. Day of the person in modern world often takes place in the office or just in the enclosed space. No time for walk, no wish to stroll or bad weather does not permit… The light of the sun is increasingly replaced by the artificial lighting. As a result, the lack of sunlight leads to health problems, even very serious,for example, in a change of hormone production.
The connection between the lack of sunlight and vitamin D
It should be noted that the lack of sunlight during winter affects on the production of one of the most important vitamins in the body – vitamin D. And also hits all the systems in the human body: cardiovascular, endocrine, reproductive, immune, nervous, mood and biorhythms, skin rejuvenation, hair and nails.
What is vitamin D and why it is so important? Above all, this vitamin is synthesized by our body exposed to direct sunlight (ultraviolet light) and the lack of it can make serious consequences for human health. People begin to have lack of sunlight condition.
The lack of sunlight during winter and health problems
The most dangerous is a factor which increase the risk of cancer. Research in this area has shown the importance of a sufficient level of vitamin D in the body to reduce the risk of a cancer and to combat various types of cancer. Since the published data by C.F. Garland in esse “Vitamin D for cancer prevention: Global Perspective” are impressive. People who spend enough time in the sun or take calcium and vitamin D inside (1,100 IU of vitamin D and 1,450 mg / day of calcium), for 50% or more reduce the risk of breast cancer, cancer of prostate or bowel.
Vitamin D also has a considerable influence on the immune system, because it stimulates the growth of blood vessels, activates the T-cells which are looking for any invading bacteria and viruses, has anti-inflammatory action etc. Considering the fact that vitamin D has mainly immunosuppressive influence, its deficiency can predispose to autoimmune diseases. In particular, increases the risk of rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, type 1 diabetes mellitus.
Also vitamin D is needed to produce the hormone leptin, which is responsible for the feeling of satiety. Accordingly, if this hormone is small, it becomes difficult to satisfy hunger, a person begins to overeat and gain weight.
How to prevent lack of sunlight condition?
So what to do that this problem would not arise and the level of vitamin D at any time of year has always been the norm? It is necessary to follow a few advices from the lack of sunlight during winter for our body.
– First of all, eat more foods that are rich in vitamin D or use special supplements and eat foods that increase the production of serotonin (chocolate, apples, bananas, turkey).
– Walk as much as possible. Even in cloudy weather on the street a much more sunlight than indoors, which has a positive effect for your health.
– Do sports. Sport exercises increase the level of serotonin, which has a positive effect on the body, even in the winter season.
So, of course, the lack of sunlight leads to health problems if do nothing but you have possibility to exclude lack of sunlight condition from your life!