Lower risk of stroke naturally with these 10 steps!
Did you know that in fact 80 percent of strokes that occur can be prevented? Stroke, as well as other diseases, is very scary because it could happen to anyone and at anytime. Stroke often occurs suddenly. But it does not mean that a stroke can not be prevented.
Here are some steps you can do to prevent a stroke. Natural step that could reduce the risk of stroke, as reported by Care2 (06/01).
1. Know your blood pressure regularly and always check it. High blood pressure is the greatest factor of the causes of stroke, so it is important to know your blood pressure and keeping it stable.
2. Check your heart rate. If you have an abnormal heartbeat that it can increase the risk of stroke up to 500 percent. Make sure you consult a doctor if your heart rate is often irregular.
3. Stop smoking and drinking alcohol. Besides smoking is bad for health, can also increase the risk of stroke by two -fold. If you are not a smoker, you should avoid people who smokes because research from the University of Auckland revealed that passive smokers have a 82 percent higher risk of stroke.
4. Avoid stress. One cause of stroke is stress and depression. If you start to feel anxious and stressed, you should immediately try to get relaxed. You can listen to music, take a walk, or do things that makes your mind become relaxed like meditation.
5 . Do not consume soft drinks. If you have a penchant for drinking soda, you should try to minimize it. Carbonated drinks can also increase blood sugar that can lead to heart disease and stroke.
6. Exercise. Do not forget to always exercise regularly. Being overweight is one of the factors that can make a person affected by stroke. You can run, walk leisurely, or do some cycling. Regular exercise can lower cholesterol, blood pressure, and decrease the likelihood of blood clots.
7. Pay attention to your cholesterol levels. If the cholesterol level reaches 200, you should immediately see a doctor and check yourself.
8. Sleep for at least seven hours, but not more than 10 hours. More than 10 hours of sleep a night can increase the risk of stroke by 63 percent, according to a study at Harvard. If you snore, you should immediately consult a doctor. Because people who snore are more likely to have a stroke, diabetes, and heart disease.
9. Drink plenty of water . Research at Loma Linda University found that drinking five or more glasses of water a day may reduce the risk of stroke by 53 percent. Water can make the blood thinner that prevents blood clots that cause heart disease and stroke. Less drinking can also increase the risk of diabetes and other diseases.
10. Consumption of tomatoes, raisins, bananas, and sweet potatoes. These foods contain potassium which can lower the risk of stroke by 20 percent. Other sources of potassium are vegetables, fish, and dairy products. Additionally, cook your food using olive oil. Cooking with olive oil may reduce the risk of stroke and heart attack.
Those are some steps you can take to reduce the risk of stroke. By doing the above steps you will keep your heart healthy and could avoid a stroke. Good luck !
- 8 Warning Signs of Brain Stroke
- Beware of Strokes in Young People
- Stroke can be prevented by eating spaghetti?
- Mild stroke could cause brain damage
- A Glass of Soda per day Increase Risk of Stroke