When you think of the beach, you think of peaceful, lapping waves and warm sand beneath your toes. If your mind wanders to a natural disaster, you might think of a hurricane or a storm. Wildfires are probably the farthest thing from your mind. This story might change your mind about that though. 

The sun was setting and casting a beautiful golden, warm glow over the sandy beach. Families were packing up their kids, towels, and coolers, getting ready to head home after a wonderful day of swimming, catching waves, and sunbathing. But suddenly, a strong gust of wind picked up and carried with it an ember from a nearby beach bonfire. The spark landed in a patch of dry sea grass on the dunes and ignited a wildfire.

Within moments, the gusty winds caused the flames to spread to the nearby trees and shrubs. In mere moments, there was a raging fire, moving quickly and consuming all of the dry vegetation in its path. The beachgoers ran in a panic, their screams contrasting the peace and tranquility of the beach scene. People ran everywhere but they couldn't get over the dunes to get off the beach.

Emergency crews arrived on the scene within 7 minutes, but it was too late. The flames were too intense, and the wind was pushing them further and further along the beach. The entire dune system was engulfed in flames. The firefighters worked tirelessly in the stiff winds, but it seemed as though the fire would never be contained.

As the fire continued to spread, it crept closer and closer to the ocean. The water acted as a natural barrier, slowing the fire's progress and preventing it from reaching the nearby homes and businesses. But the people on the beach were trapped between the ocean and the fire. The crowds had to enter the water for safety. It was quite the scene.

Hours passed before the firefighters were finally able to extinguish the blaze and the damage was catastrophic to the entire dune system. The once-beautiful beach was now a charred wasteland.

However, something amazing came from the destruction. The community rallied together and volunteers worked tirelessly to clean up and replant vegetation. Slowly but surely, the beach returned to its former beauty. Eventually, the evidence of the fire was only found in the memories of those there that day.
