BRITISH ILLUSTRATOR ROGER PAYNE
Roger Payne is a professional English illustrator. His drawings can be found in school and university magazines, in the newspapers of companies and local governments and in countless books. He made colour and black-and-white illustrations too. At first he signed his pictures using a pseudonym, then using his first name, and after a while his full name appeared on his artworks. Many of Payne’s pictures deals with homosexuality and are openly pornographic, but he made lots of pictures without sexual content.
We, the creators of the site have no problem with homosexuality. We only want to mention that Conan Doyle did not portray Holmes and Watson as gay. ( More information: Common misbeliefs - Sherlock Holmes was homosexual ) No matter what some adaptations suggest, they were friends, without romantic feelings towards each other. Roger Payne also made a very canonical illustration of the duo.
He pictured several famous people, musicians, mythological and historical personalities (for example Winston Churchill). His historical themed illustrations were published in Look and Learn. It was a weekly magazine by Fleetway Publications Ltd., appearing between 1962 and 1982. The aim of the magazine was to help children broaden their knowledge and enhance their imagination. It dealt with various topics, from geological phenomena (like volcanoes) to historical events, and it also contained the comics version of some of the most famous literary works. Look and Learn had some short but popular articles on the greatest detective of the world and on Sir Arthur Conan Doyle. Here we show Roger Payne’s Sherlock Holmes and Doyle illustrations.
The drawings of Roger Payne:
Roger Payne: Sir Arthur Conan Doyle
- The Real-Life Sherlock Holmes
If you want to see more of the works of Payne or you would like to buy them as a poster,
please click here: Allposters.com - The works of Roger Payne
Roger Payne: Holmes and Watson at 221B Baker Street
- Sherlock Holmes in his study
Conan Doyle’s Sherlock Holmes novels and short stories
Sherlock Holmes illustrators