To whom it may concern:

I am writing in protest of decades of your company's sole focus on one protein group:  chicken.

When Colonel Sanders started your company, he clearly had a bias against fowl. What else could explain his decision to single out chicken protein while overlooking valuable other meats like beef and pork from his restaurant's menu? Seafood is also an excellent protein source. Some consider snails a delicacy!

The truth of the matter is that the public perception of chickens has been changing in recent years. You can now find beautiful specimens of my species adorning dishtowels, metal signs, and wall decor. Some clearly enlightened people adopt chickens as part of their families, even dressing them in trendy outfits and accessories. Elaborate coop designs are available online for owners who want to keep their highly-esteemed chickens living a life of luxury.

When making decisions about which species to feature on your menu, KFC is not taking into account the generous contributions cows make to the proper fertilization of the soil. Protecting the environment is a top-of-mind issue for many consumers, and just imagine the goodwill it could garner from your company switching to farming cows!

And let's take a look at pork. Pigs will eat almost any kind of food waste you provide. They aren't particular. You could give them the prior day's leftover mashed potatoes and coleslaw and they'd be, well, as happy as pigs! Pork lends itself to some tasty menu variations, like pickled pigs' feet and pig snouts. In fact, doesn't "Kentucky Fried Pig Snouts" have a ring to it? Plus, there's an added benefit to switching to pig protein:  dogs love to eat pigs' ears, and that would offer you an avenue into a completely new market.

Other proteins have positive selling points, too. Fish can be farmed in ponds capable of containing many fish in a relatively small footprint of real estate. Dig the pond as deep as you'd like. And think about how little space it would take to raise snails!

In closing, I believe Kentucky Fried Chicken needs to revisit its antiquated business practice of selling chicken. There are other wonderful protein substitutes available that are more earth-friendly, offer added revenue streams, and offer a more efficient use of space.

Respectfully,
[Chicken Name]
