Generic Comic: The most important invention ever? The car right? Can go anywhere and transport stuff from one side of a country to another. A place to make out? No.

The airplane. Now can go over water. Vacation, transport stuff…internationally? Get a private jet and it's like "Party On!"...No. This is not it.

The Internet? Can order food and somebody brings it to your home. Please, no.

It is the toilet. Yes, the greatest invention ever is the toilet. 

Can you imagine being one of the first families to have one of these? No more outhouses or whatever else they used before. I don't want to think about it.

And it can make anything disappear. Like a magician. Poof!
…Top secret CIA government documents that you have to get rid of. Flush it down the toilet. Nothing ever comes back from there. If you accidentally flush something down it, who knows how you get it back? It is a mystery.

I feel more secure getting rid of something by flushing it than deleting it. Delete a file off your laptop. Who knows …it is really gone? Flush an incriminating document down the toilet. It is gone for good….no worries.

Now sewers and sewerage…that is the biggest mystery. I don't know what goes on there. How does it work? If you work there, I know one thing that you cannot have. That is a sense of smell!

If you want to work for the sewer department, then you have to pass the one-question interview. Can you smell things? Yes, you are out. No, and you are in. And the pay is probably good because nobody wants to work in that.

If you want to make good money, have a skill that few people have like a Stephen Curry shooter or work a job that nobody wants like sewerage.

But it wouldn't be surprising if there are extra perks for those workers. Maybe something valuable that gets flushed down a toilet winds up in a sewage worker's hands. I don't know. Maybe they have a way of disinfecting stuff to find stuff. Engagement rings, $100 bills, and gold chains.

It is kinda a secret society. Nobody talks about it. Never seen a movie about it. Reporters don't go undercover and report about it. The less you know, the better.
