Please boost your Plan to download papers
Music - Research Paper Example
This paper will discussed country and western music and their kinds. Country Music is a very famous American music style that emerged from the rural Southern side of the United States in 1920s. It is a musical amalgamation of Western Cowboy Music with American Southeastern Folk Music. …
This paper shows some kinds of country and western music such as hillbilly music, bluegrass music, new grass, country pop, cajun music, western swing.
Hillbilly Music is a specific term used to refer a certain group of people who lives in rural and mountainous areas of the Unites States. Hillbilly is closely associated with country music. The term refers to denote the old-country music or bluegrass. Hillbilly boogie was the first musical tune that contained the word, hillbilly. It was composed by Delmore Brothers in the year 1946.
Bluegrass Music is another form of American music which is a subgenre of country music. It is a musical composition of different regions such as it contains musical influence of Scotland, Ireland and England’s traditional folk music on the other hand; it has some musical touch of African American compositions due to the combination of few jazz elements. This kind of music is highly inspired by the music of Appalachia
To sum up the paper talks that new grass is one of the major subgenres of bluegrass music. It is a musical revival and combination of different genres used with each other to create a new kind of music. Electric instruments and other genres especially, rock and roll has played a significant role in creating this type. It became known in late 1960s and early 1970s.
Gospel music defined the personal, spiritual or communal belief related to the Christian life. It gave new dimension to the musical industry and musical compositions
Country pop is a subgenre of country music.
Cajun Music is a symbolic music that represents Louisiana.
Western swing music is a subgenre of ever-green American country music. ...