For those of us who have repented and believed the gospel, we have known the war was raging. We are taught from Scripture that this invisible war is always being waged against us, every day. Paul tells us that this is a war that is spiritual and is to be spiritually waged (II Cor. 10:1-5); our enemy will rage against us, but he will lose. He is raging in Delaware.
In a recent statement, Delaware Governor Jack Markell announced that February 12—Darwin's birthday—will be recognized this year as "Charles Darwin Day" in his state. Markell stated that "Darwin's Theory of Evolution is the foundation of modern biology, an essential tool in understanding the development of life on earth."
The announcement points out something that Christians need to keep in the forefront of their minds. Humanism wants to appear unreligious. Secular humanists want to appear as if they do not have religious convictions. They want to say that since they do not worship a deity, they have no religious conviction. But here is a perfect example that this is not at all true.
Humanists want to have holidays. What is a holiday? It is a day that you set aside as holy, hence the name, "holi-day," or holy-day. And here it is, the humanist holiday: "Charles Darwin Day." This day is organized by the American Humanist Association (AHA).
Their website says.
"The mission of International Darwin Day is to inspire people throughout the globe to reflect and act on the principles of intellectual bravery, perpetual curiosity, scientific thinking, and hunger for truth as embodied in Charles Darwin,"
This statement would be funny if it were not so false. As Darwin's "theory" has been the main contributor to intellectual bigotry in academia over the last half of the twentieth-century. People, even fellow humanists, who question the theory's validity are cast out. These actions stifle the very things that these humanist claims to be promoting with this holy-day.
We also have to recognize the effects that Darwin's theory has had on society. Brian Thomas, Science Writer for the Institute for Creation Research, told Christian News Network:
"We know from World War II that Darwinistic elitism can be used to justify slaughtering millions of lives,"
We have to recognize that this is no slight thing. Not only was the Holocaust the logical progression of "Darwinistic elitism," but over 200 Million deaths in the 20th Century alone can be linked to evolutionist thinking. It is based on survival of the fittest. If this is your philosophy of the world, you have no reason to sustain or protect life.
The issue is that if human life is not made in the image of God, then there is no good reason not to eliminate the human life that will not produce what we want. That means, as with the Jews in Germany, the capitalists in Laos, or the unproductive generals and uncooperative Ukrainian farms in the USSR, they can be killed.
Have you not heard of George Bernard Shaw. He wanted all unproductive people killed. As a famous eugenics proponent, he would have fit right in with Hitler. But don't be fooled, eugenics is joyfully practiced every day in America. Shaw would have been happy to see the infanticide of American abortion clinics.
But I will let George speak for himself:Don't forget to Like Freedom Outpost on Facebook, Google Plus, & Twitter. You can also get Freedom Outpost delivered to your Amazon Kindle device here.