Energy efficiency in windows and doors
Energy efficiency in windows and doors has been making a larger impact in recent years. Reducing energy consumption not only helps cut costs and improve comfort around the home, but it reduces harmful emissions to the environment.
Total Home Windows and Doors helps maximize energy efficiency in its windows through fusion welding, weather-stripping, the types of glass used, as well as the low-emissive glass coatings. We also implement the Super Spacer insulating glass unit, which provides optimal thermal performance and has the lowest U-Value in the industry.
What is Energy Star?
Energy Star is a joint program between the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the Canadian Department of Energy that protects the environment by mandating energy efficient products and practices. Certification from Energy Star can only be approved after vigorous testing from an independent laboratory. All Total Home Windows and Doors products not only meet but exceed Energy Star standards.
Understanding the Energy Star performance markers
U-Factor. The U-Factor is a measurement of the amount of energy a material can conduct. In terms of windows, the lower the U-Factor, the stronger that window will resist to heat loss. The lower the U-Factor, the more money you will save over the winter months.
Solar Heat Gain. A Solar Heat Gain co-efficient is a measurement of the amount of solar radiation transmitted through a material. The lower your Solar Heat Gain co-efficient, the more ultraviolet (UV) rays will be absorbed through your windows. This is fantastic for saving money during the summer months.
Air Leakage. An Air Leakage rating is a measurement of the amount of air passing through cracks in the window. This affects both heat losses as well as heat gain. The lower the Air Leakage rating, the less air will pass through cracks in the window.
Energy Rating. Energy Ratings are determined through a combined analysis of the Solar Heat Gain co-efficient, air leakage and heat loss.