Books 7th Grade
Library Books for Seventh Graders
Books 7th Grade
The Books 7th Grade list includes most of the best books for young adults in 7th grade. This site provides links to free book resources and links to purchase many of the books. Most books, newspapers, and magazines are written between a 4th-7th grade level, so you’ll find that this list, while fairly extensive, could be far, far longer. Every attempt was made to inclusively list only the best teacher-selected titles. These are the books teachers use most. Over two hundred teachers were polled in order to make the list of the best books for young adults.
If you don’t find what you’re looking for on this list, you might try the book list for 6th or 8th grade. The difference, in terms of ability level, among books of these levels is minimal, and I would highly encourage you to look at all of these lists. Also, book levels are based on reading difficulty, not content or plot. Many books are highly readable but challenging in different ways, typically incorporating symbolism and other important literary devices. Again, it is entirely appropriate to read books above or below the reading level you are targeting if the book challenges the reader in other ways, perhaps in provocative way.
Book levels are based on reading difficulty, not content or plot. Many books are highly readable but challenging in different ways, typically incorporating symbolism and other important literary devices. It is entirely appropriate to read books above or below the reading level you are targeting if the book challenges the reader in other ways, perhaps in a provocative way. For example, The Catcher in the Rye is certainly a push for fourth grade in terms of content. Perhaps pushing it to seventh or eighth grade may be an option. As you can see, limiting a child to a book, because of a book list or the child's age, is a mistake. Grade-level lists are only guides and careful attention must be taken in order to select proper reading material based on ability and interest rather than a grade recommendation.
Harry Potter - Box Set of Books 1-7
Books 7th Grade
Books, Cliff Notes, and Lesson Plans
7th Grade Level Books
Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland
Anne of Green Gables
Cider House Rules, The
Cyrano de Bergerac
Five Little Peppers and How They Grew
Great Fire, The
Great Gatsby, The
Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix
Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince
Hero and the Crown, The
Hitty, Her First Hundred Years
Incident at Hawk's Hill
Incredible Journey, The
Invisible Man, The
Lincoln, A Photobiography
Penultimate Peril, The
Slippery Slope, The
Time Machine, The
Trumpeter of Krakow, The
Virtual Reality: Beyond the Looking Glass
Wizard of Oz, The
Book Links to Additional Lists
Books for Gifted Children
Books 7th Grade
Seventh Grade Novels and Interest Levels
There has long been a debate between phonics and whole language. Google “whole language”, and you’ll find almost 20,000,000 articles about the subject. Google “phonics’, and you’ll find almost 9,000,000 articles. Google “novels”, and you’ll find over 81,000,000 articles!
There are numerous opposing beliefs when it comes to teaching reading. Ultimately, regardless of how a child is taught to read, the reading material largely dictates his/her interest level. Can anybody truly be interested in the reading material contained in most reading texts? At what point is a child’s interest level as important as the method in which they are being taught to read? In my twenty years of teaching, I’ve found that the single best way to improve in reading is to read. I know that sounds simple, but it’s true. The problem with reading texts is that they really don’t provide a lot of reading opportunities that are interesting, so students never read from them on their own. Novels, on the other hand, are far more engaging and tend to motivate students to read both in groups and independently. As a result, I highly recommend novel reading over text reading when it comes to increasing student interest.
Books 7th Grade: Links to Free Lessons and Resources
- The Great Gatsby - Lesson Plan Library
The Lesson Plan Library offers high school lesson plans covering all major school subjects and special interests.
- Lesson Plans: Animal Farm: The Complete Project (Senior, Literature)
Teachers.Net Lesson Plans: Lesson Plans: Animal Farm: The Complete Project (Senior, Literature)
Please Make a Comment!
My intent is to continue adding titles, links, and free resources to this list. Please help me improve this free resource by recommending titles, reviewing books already on this list, providing lessons that can be shared with others, and helping me find additional links to existing sites that are beneficial. Your comments are greatly appreciated by all.
Other Links by This Author
- Teaching and Preparing for Your First Classroom
The first day of school is so important, and you'll need to spend time preparing for it. Unfortunately, many new elementary teachers tend to spend an inordinate amount of time, in the days before the first day of school, working on bulletin boards an
- Overlooked Classroom Discipline Strategies
Every teacher needs great classroom discipline strategies. This article, however, isn't about discipline programs. Instead, its about making sure the discipline problems don't occur in the first place. I have almost twenty years of experience in edu
- School Rules and Consequences
School rules and consequences are a necessity. While classroom behavior plans are common, school behavior and consequence plans are almost impossible to find, anywhere. This behavior intervention plan is...
- New Teacher Handbook
This new teacher handbook is free and available to all educators. Starting a new year, regardless of whether you're new to teaching or a veteran, can often be overwhelming. I think it tends to be this way, because so many of us try to reinvent the wh
- Gifted Education and Higher Student Achievement
Its easy to overlook gifted children, because many of them often seem to effortlessly do well in class. In an effort to make sure that all children learn, we spend more money and time helping children with...