There are many environmental factors that have contributed to the rapid growth of [type 1 diabetes]. Healthy lifestyle factors play an enormous role in preventing and treating this form of diabetes. Most experts are now looking to environmental factors that are causing toxic and deficient states in these individuals.
One of the leading environmental toxins linked to type I diabetes is pasteurized cow’s milk. Pasteurized cow’s milk has a very strong link with many auto-immune disorders. In the case of diabetes, many of these individuals inherited a trait where they make certain proteins on the beta cells of the pancreas that are very similar to a protein found in cow’s milk.
The pasteurization process scrambles the amino acid sequences which can trigger a violent reaction from the immune system, which damages the beta cells of the pancreas rendering them incapable of producing insulin. Conventional dairy products also contain very high levels of pesticides, herbicides, dioxins (up to 200x the safe levels), and up to 52 different types of antibiotics that toxify the body and compromise the immune system.
Low vitamin D levels have been linked to autoimmune diseases such as juvenile diabetes. This is due to the powerful immune modulating effects of vitamin D. Researchers have found vitamin D receptors in every cell of the body from the bones to the pancreas and the brain.
Recent studies have shown that 67% of mothers and 87% of newborns had severely deficient vitamin D levels lower than 20 ng/ml. Other studies have shown that children receiving vitamin D supplementation from age 1 had an 80% decreased risk of getting diabetes. Many vitamin D experts are now recommending that couples normalize their vitamin D levels before conception occurs for disease prevention and optimal health of the newborn.
Anyone looking to prevent and reverse juvenile diabetes needs to begin by optimizing their vitamin D3 levels to 60-100 ng/ml. This is done through regular sun exposure and/or supplementing with an emulsified form of vitamin D3. 50,000 IU daily is a great dose for the body to absorb and utilize to quickly raise D3 levels, and 5-10,000 is a great maintenance dose.
An anti-inflammatory diet is critical to reduce auto-immune activity, reduce cellular inflammation, and rebuild healthy cells. This diet requires one to completely avoid man-made foods, sugars, and common food allergens. The long chain omega 3 fatty acids EPA and DHA powerfully de-inflame the body by restoring natural balance to the lipid cell membrane.
Great anti-inflammatory foods include phytonutrient anti-oxidant rich fruits & vegetables, coconut, avocados, and non-denatured, whey protein from grass-fed cows and goats. This protein source contains essential amino acids that enhance cellular glutathione stores, which are necessary for rebuilding pancreatic tissue and detoxifying poisons. Anti-inflammatory herbs such as turmeric, ginger, cinnamon, rosemary, & oregano should be used as much as possible.
Health-e-Solutions comment: The cow’s milk, vitamin D and inflammation links to type 1 diabetes risk are strong. It would serve all people with T1D well to avoid these triggers as much as possible. We believe the diabetic-alkaline lifestyle is beneficial for this purpose and more. It would also avoid most fruits since they are higher in sugar content; something diabetics should avoid to maintain better blood glucose control.
Our Recipe e-Books provide alternatives to the typical high-carb, low nutrition foods that are standard fare for the average American diet. Our Home Study Course teaches you how to implement the diabetic-alkaline lifestyle in a practical and livable way.