News about the health and beauty of the natural world that sustains us.
By 2025 half the newborn will be Autistic! That is the conclusion of Stephanie Seneff, Phd. a professor and researcher at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. She warned at a recent conference that, “At today’s rate, by 2025, one in two children will be autistic.” She noted that the side effects of autism closely mimic those of glyphosate toxicity, and presented data showing a remarkably consistent correlation between the use of Roundup on crops (and the creation of Roundup-ready GMO crop seeds) with rising rates of autism. Children with autism have biomarkers indicative of excessive glyphosate, including zinc and iron deficiency, low serum sulfate, seizures, and mitochondrial disorder."
Glyphosate - Pronunciation: gli-fə-ˌsāt - Chemical formula, C3H8NO5P
Common sense should tell you that anything that does what roundup does to a plant, a living being, cannot be good or harmless to any other living beings.
How to Detect Autism
Moms and Dads, if your child is at least 6 months old and does not smile, it’s time for some serious concern. For more information and guidance consult the Global Autism Collaboration.
With the age old adage that one picture is worth a thousand words, I present two pictures that nail the lid on the coffin or Roundup. Use of this chemical should be banned.
Follow this link, Glyphosate-based herbicides are toxic and endocrine disruptors in human cell lines, and you will also find that Roundup induces breast cancer cell growth.
It not just herbicides that are destroying the brains and immune systems of the newborn, children and adults. The psychologists are starting to figure out what orgain gardeners, farmers and consumers have been screaming about for years An article in Psychology Today notes that “low-dose exposure to a variety of common pesticides and conditions ranging from attention deficit hyperactivity disorder in children to neurodegenerative conditions such as Parkinson's disease in later life.”
Does the USA Really Feed the World?
The article explains that “By 2007, over 5 billion pounds of synthetic pesticides were sprayed, dusted, or coated on crops worldwide, according to the EPA.”
But the most striking statement made is that “The U.S. uses 22 percent of the total [pesticides] to produce 4.3 percent of the world's agricultural output.” That flies in the face of the ongoing lecture that US farmers feed the world.
Silent Spring Rachel Carson, one of my heroes, warned us about the dangers of chemical contamination from agriculture and industry in 1962 with her book Silent Spring. Since then the number of chemicals and the contamination of food and soil has increased by to the present level of 5 billion pounds or about four and a half pounds per person.
• The work of Stephanie Seneff
All MOTHER EARTH NEWS community bloggers have agreed to follow our Blogging Best Practices, and they are responsible for the accuracy of their posts. To learn more about the author of this post, click on the byline link at the top of the page.