Colonel Irfan Lancert held his head in his hands, defeated. He was the ultimate authority as Operations Coordinator in the classified branch of the NSA otherwise known as The Ninth Intervention. He'd sent military personnel on solo field runs before. Hundreds of times, he'd believed. But this one might have been too far.

The urgent, pleading voice of the new 28-year-old recruit blasted through his intercom again.

"Repeat. Can confirm multiple hostiles honing in on my location from all directions. They'll be on me in minutes." A sigh of frustration and despair came through clearly on the radio frequencies. "Will try to hold position but I'm low on ammo. Call for emergency helo exfil. I'm begging you, Colonel Lancert!"

Lancert needed to make a decision. He had seconds. Compromise operational security to save one? That went against every creed that The Ninth Intervention held. If a field agent was identified by the enemy, the policy was to claim no government involvement. Agent Sam, pleading for help, would not be claimed, helped, or recognized by the US Government in any capacity. He did not technically exist in the United States census or social security records. This would be explained away as a bureaucratic error. Lancert needed a third option. This reminded Lancert of when he served in the Army. Pinned down by overwhelming forces, it was either flight or fight. But a quick-minded Army soldier came up with just the right solution.

"A distraction!" Lancert barked. "Do you have anything that could be loud? A grenade, anything?" A hesitant voice came back. "Uh, yes sir, but--"

"We have detected multiple building infrastructure vulnerabilities to the building southeast of you. It will completely flatten the ruined building if you place it well. We have confirmed no signs of life in the building via heat signatures. Aim for the second story. Go. Now!"

Agent Sam trusted his boss with every instinct. He wasn't going to question him now. He pulled the pin on an M67 fragmentation grenade and tossed it hard at a somewhat broken pillar of the building about 100 feet from him. What happened next would determine Sam's fate--live or die.
