Here are eight things to consider when identifying your target audience. 

1. Analyze current customers.
If you are in a position where you have existing customers, then a good first step is to identify traits and characteristics among them. Think about the demographic they belong to and why they may be purchasing products or services from you already. You may already have data regarding your current customer's ages, locations, and vocations. These are all valuable metrics to track and interpret when defining your target audience. 

2. Market research.
Conducting market research is a valuable process. By conducting market research, you can identify areas in which you may be able to grow an audience or a blind spot where your services could be of real value. Looking into your competitors can provide great insights into what works and doesn't and where services like yours perform well. Knowing what others offer gives you an advantage when creating a unique selling point that sets you apart. 

3. Industry trends. 
Keeping your finger on the pulse and identifying what changes are occurring within your industry allows you to tailor content and services in a way that provides real value. This leads on from market research slightly and is another way of ensuring you stay informed concerning your customers' expectations and desires. This will allow you to provide them with a constant value.  

4. Distinguish benefits from features. 
Benefits and features are fundamentally different things. It is important to clarify this to your target audience. It is excellent that you have a feature or product that can help them in some way, but it's even better if you can explain the practical benefit of the feature. Take, for example, a product that improves productivity. Emphasizing productivity improvement and what that means is more important than highlighting the actual feature that does the work. People are more interested in what you will enable them to do rather than how you will do it. 

5. Spy on your competition. 
Just as important as your customers are your competitors. Keep an eye on what they are doing and the content they are producing. What could be working for them, and what could you do to improve what they have? This is an easy way to gain inspiration and see what's not being offered. This will allow you to fill in the gaps and potentially convert customers to you and your services. If your competition produces content about something you are not, this may mean they have researched and identified a weak spot. Now you can do your own research and improve on what they have done. 

6. Who isn't your target audience?
Knowing who your target audience is made much easier if you can identify exactly who it isn't. Who won't benefit from what you are offering or take an interest in what you are saying? By analyzing these questions, you can reduce your audience to specifics and tailor your services to those likely to benefit from and purchase them. Doing this will give you more time to concentrate on those that matter. 

7. Be objective. 
Making assumptions can lead to alienating some of your customer base. This can be avoided by posting content that leads by facts more than anything else. By being objective, you show your customers you can be trusted and only care about black and white. This should help to foster a sense of trust in you and your products. 

8. Go niche. 
It may seem like going to a niche would limit your customers, and while that may be true to an extent, you shouldn't underestimate how many people are in the world. And also how being a leading figure in a super niche topic can grow your audience quickly and lead you to be the go-to person in said niche. Also, it is worth remembering that while your niche may mean fewer customers or audiences, it also means less competition.
