That sounds exciting! Setting up a party can be daunting, but don't worry, I've got your back.

1. Determine the range of your budget: Staying within it is important because it makes planning everything else much easier.
2. Set a suitable date, time and venue: Keep the availability of people in your workplace in mind as you plan this. Hosting the party on a day when there would otherwise be a work day could be a good idea, but weekends may prove to be more suitable around the holiday season. The venue could either be at the workplace, a rented event space or even a hall.
3. Pick an engaging theme or decoration: Get your coworkers' opinions on themes they'd like to see at a party. Perhaps it's one based on Snow White, a fairytale or a popular T.V. show.
4. Catering: Whether you plan to have a buffet or even order pizza, make sure to have appropriate food and drink available for all persons; consider the restrictions or preferences for someone vegan, vegetarian, religious, non-alcoholic and so forth.
5. Entertainment: Whether it's putting the classic Christmas hits of the 1980s on the radio, or karaoke to a top chart hit, consider an activity that as many people will want to join in as possible. Other activities include board games, contests and trivia or hosted Q&As.
6. Photography: Consider this a great chance to capture pictures to serve as timeless memories. Pick somebody to be the designated photographer or set up a photo booth to capture all the silly, fun and endearing moments!
7. Organization: Make sure to anoint a few other people to help with planning and scheduling; doing everything on your own may be too daunting and remember that it's okay to enlist the help of others, that's what teams are for!
8. Invitations: Ensure all invitations are sent to the appropriate people ahead of time. Make sure to double-check emails when forwarding to multiple people or departments. When RSVPs are sent out earlier, recipients can more efficiently plan and prepare for the party's date.

And most important of all, have fun! Use the party as a chance to capture important memories you'll remember for years to come and take the chance to express appreciation for the effort your coworkers have put into the environment over the year. Best of luck, I know you can do it!
