“According to the American Cancer Society, a person has a 1 in 50 chance of developing non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma…. This type of cancer is slightly more common in men than in women.”
Although scientists are unable to pinpoint an exact cause of non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, they’ve noted that people with weak immune systems are especially vulnerable.
We know that juicing boosts your immune system. Does this mean that juicing vegetables could help prevent cancer? The authors of the study, “Diet and non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma risk,” believe that a poor diet causes cancer:
The role of dietary factors in the epidemiology of Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma (NHL) remains largely undefined. Dietary habits may play a role in the etiology of NHL by influencing the immune system.
Consumption of highest versus lowest quartile of proteins (OR, 8.088 P(trend)=0.000), fats (OR, 6.17 P(trend)=0.000) and sweets (OR, 8.806 P(trend)=0.000) were associated with a significantly increased NHL risk. The inverse association was found for fresh fruits (OR, 0.117 P(trend)=0.000) and vegetables (OR, 0.461 P(trend)=0.010).
An association between dietary intake and the risk of NHL is biologically plausible due to immunosuppressive effects of fat and animal proteins, and antioxidant properties of vegetables and fruits.
In other words, the more fruits and vegetables a person eats, the less likely he will develop cancer.
That study is an unsurprising finding. We are what we eat. We are what we juice. Consider buying the best juicer you can afford as an investment in your health.
Another study echoes that result. In, “Antioxidant intake from fruits, vegetables and other sources and risk of non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma: the Iowa Women’s Health Study,” the scientists studied the eating habits of women with non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma.
They tried to determine what foods best help prevent cancer. Their conclusion?
From a food perspective, greater intake of total fruits and vegetables, yellow/orange, and cruciferous vegetables, broccoli and apple juice/cider were associated with lower NHL risk; there were no strong associations for other antioxidant-rich foods, including whole grains, chocolate, tea or nuts.