Fancy The Forest Cat 

Once upon a time, there was a black cat named Fancy. Fancy lived in a nice house in the countryside, where she and her companion Buddy the Schnauzer were both loved by their owners. Fancy loved to spend time with her owners, but when they went to work each day, she would go outside to spend time in the woods with Buddy. Even though dogs usually chase cats, Fancy and Buddy were both really good friends. However, they both enjoyed chasing a squirrel named Chip, who always evaded them by going up into the trees when they would show up.

One day, Buddy went out into the woods on his own, but he didn't come back for hours. This worried Fancy because Buddy never spent much time alone out in the woods. She decided that she needed to go find him before their owners came back home. So she set out into the woods to go find Buddy. She asked Chip if he knew where he was, but Chip was too scared to say anything because Fancy had always chased him and he was afraid she would do it again. 

Fancy assured Chip that she would never chase him again and apologized for doing so before. This reassured Chip when he realized that Fancy was sincere, and he said that he had heard from one of the deer in the woods that Buddy had gone east. Fancy and Chip set off in the easterly direction. They asked other animals along the way if they had seen Buddy, but none of them had. Fancy was getting more worried. Finally, just when all hope seemed lost, they met a raccoon named Rex who said he had seen a Schnauzer go into a farmer's cornfield at the edge of the forest not too long ago. 

Fancy and Chip went into the cornfield where they found Buddy! Buddy had gotten lost but he was so glad to see his friend Fancy again as they were reunited at last. He was surprised to see Chip, but Fancy told him that Chip was now their new friend too. Fancy led the way back to the house and the trio returned home before the owners of Fancy and Buddy arrived. Fancy, Buddy, and Chip all lived happily ever after in the house and the forest. The End.
