There are many different theories about the origin and history of April Fools Day. However, most of them are just theories. There is no real evidence to point to any single individual or event.
The 16th Century French Calendar
One theory is that it originated in France. In 1564, the government decided to move the New Year from March 31 to January 1. Whether it was by decree or just something the people thought of, jokes and pranks were concocted on those who refused to adjust or forgot the new date.
The most popular prank was to place paper fish on the rear of these folks. They were known as Poisson d’Avril (April Fish). The history of April Fools Day thus began in France, according to this theory.
Some researchers feel that its origins can be traced to the spring festivals celebrated by various ancient cultures. In ancient civilizations it was marked by playfulness, merry-making and jokes. Roles of masters and servants were reversed and the roles of parents and children interchanged. These practices may have originated in Roman times. Eventually it spread to Europe and became the event we know today.
There are some researchers who trace the history of April Fools Day in mythology. One theory is that it originated in Roman myths. Some have suggested that when Persephone (Proserpina) was abducted by Hades, she screamed for her mother Ceres. Ceres didn’t realize that her daughter was in the Underworld and searched for her fruitlessly on Earth. Thus the foolish search became the basis for the event.
Some believe that the practice began in Britain. In the 1630s, the law stated that wherever King John walked, the land would automatically be turned into a public property.
One day the King was headed for the town of Gotham. The citizens were terrified to lose their lands. When the King sent soldiers ahead of him, they reported strange activities. According to this version of the history of April Fools Day, the locals pretended to be insane. The King fell for their antics and decided not to go there anymore. According to legend, their jokes became widely known and copied.
There are some who suggest it began in Germany. In 1530 financial leaders were supposed to meet and discuss monetary issues in Augsburg. It never happened. But some people had wagered it would happen and lost a lot of money. They were laughed at.
Another theory places its origin in the Netherlands. On the first day of April in 1572, the Dutch were able to take back the town of Den Briel away from the Spaniards. According to lore, pranks were played by the Dutch to recall the embarrassment of the Spaniards in losing.
The origin and history of April Fools Day is complex. Studying it can lead one into blind alleys. Regardless of how it started, it seems destined to become even more popular around the world.
Did you know?
- In France, April Fools day is called “Poisson d’Avril” meaning April Fish. The tradition is that French children will tape paper fish to the backs of their friends. When they would discover the fish on their back, the prankster would yell “Poisson d’Avril!” The origin of this is unknown.
- In Scotland the April fool is called April “gowk” which is Scottish for cuckoo. The Cuckoo is an emblem of simpletons.
- In Canada, CHEZ FM fooled the listeners one April Fools Day making listeners believe that it was the last day that the treasury would honor all the two-dollar bills still in circulation. The same year they had people going through their change looking for the mysterious two-dollar coins that had mistakenly been minted from real gold.
- One newscaster on the news show CBO Morning announced that the clock in Ottawa’s Peace Tower was being switched to digital.
- On 1 April 1957 on BBC’s show Panorama opened with a line about Spring coming early this year, prompting the spaghetti harvest in Switzerland to be early as well. In the normal news manner, spaghetti’s oddly uniform length was explained as the result of years of dedicated cultivation. The report stated that the ravenous spaghetti weevil had been conquered.
April Fools’ Day is also called All Fools’ Day, the traditional folk festival in both American and other countries in the west. April Fools’ Day is similar to Hilaria from ancient Rome and Holi from India. Seen from the view of time, the weather changes suddenly so it seems that it is the nature play a trick on human beings. As to the origin of April Fools’ Day, there are many statements. A statement says that it comes from a festival in India on which people can make fun of each other and play tricks on each other, regardless of male or female, elder or youngster.