Toys play a significant role in baby's understanding of the world. Toys use its bright colors, beautiful, exotic styling, smart activities, sweet sound to attract children's curiosity and attention. The actual toy is a specific object and can meet the children hands-on, brain, manipulating and playing with desire. Various types of toys can cause children's interest, good toys that stimulate children's desire to make the game, and also a loved good companion of their lives.
First, toys can mobilize the activity enthusiasm of kids. Physical and mental development of children is developed in activities. Any toys for young children can be free to play with, manipulate and use, in line with children's psychological preferences and ability level. Toys can meet their needs of activities and improve the activities enthusiasm. Such as "Rocking Horse" toys, children will naturally ride, back and forth, not only to meet the requirements of their activities, but also enable them to have a positive pleasant emotions. Another example is the "doll" toys, can cause children to do a variety of activities for all ages of children according to their life experience and to do the doll games.
Second, toys can promote a variety of sensory activities and enhance the perceptual knowledge. Toy has the characteristics of visual image and conducive to a variety of sensory training of children. Such as colored sets of towers, blow toys, dolls and toys of various animals, which are conducive to visual training; octave Bear, a small piano, tambourine, small puncture pit, etc. can be used to train hearing; building blocks, plastic film plot, structure model can develop space perception; various puzzles, inlaid toys, soft plastic toys, etc., may exercise the touch feel; pull duck cars, trolleys, tricycles, two wheelers etc. help the development of motion perception.
In the development of sensory and motor ability, toys not only enrich the children's emotional knowledge, and help to consolidate children get the impression in life. When children fail to extensive contact with real life, they understand the world through toys.