S'mores are a delicious treat most often enjoyed over a summer campfire. Who doesn't remember a cool, summer evening out with friends and family enjoying a little bit of crispy, chocolatey goodness? In this article, we will explore three simple ways to bring that s'mores experience inside your home.

1. Microwaving S'mores: The microwave is the simplest and most often used method for making a homemade s'more. It is a simple process. All you need to do is put a graham cracker down on a microwave-safe plate or napkin, then top it with a piece of chocolate, and then the marshmallow. You are going to want to watch it closely depending on the power of your machine so try to do it in 15-second intervals. As soon as you see the chocolate starting to glisten and the marshmallow itself change shape it is time to take it out and use the other graham cracker to smush it down. Then it is ready to eat.

2. Air Frying S'mores: Air fryers are the new wonder machine of the modern kitchen. They can impart a toasty flavor to the graham cracker giving it a hint of campfire goodness. When you close your eyes, you can hardly tell the difference. To make a s'more in an air fryer you first put both graham crackers in the bottom of the basket. Top one of the graham crackers with a marshmallow and set your device to around 400 degrees Fahrenheit. It should take about 5 minutes for the marshmallow to brown and heat up. When it does, pull out the basket, put a chocolate bar piece on top of the marshmallow, and then complete the sandwich using the other toasted graham cracker half. Enjoy immediately.

3. Oven S'mores: Making s'mores in an oven is nearly the same as in an air fryer. Place graham cracker halves on a baking sheet, place a piece of chocolate on one and marshmallow on the other, set the oven to 400 degrees, place the sheet on top rack for a few minutes then pull it out. From here, you can put the two halves together, and now you have a delicious s'more to enjoy at any day or time.

S'mores aren't just for summer; bite into one all year round!
