Sinusitis It is a swelling of the inner lining of the sinuses. The sinuses are the spaces between the bones in the face where air passes and where a fluid called mucus drains into the nose
Symptoms The most common symptom of sinusitis, and often the most unpleasant, is pain. You have several different sinuses above and below your eyes, and behind your nose. Any of these can hurt when you have a sinus infection. Inflammation and swelling in the sinuses causes them to ache with a dull pressure. You may feel pain in your forehead, on either side of your nose, in your upper jaws and teeth, or between your eyes.
Tretment Analgesics - used to reduce fever and relieve headache, toothacheand facial pain caused by infection or congestion in the sinuses.Over-the-counter pain relievers such as acetaminophen and ibuprofen can be used. Decongestants – a decongestant to help your sinuses drain. Decongestants are for short-term use. Should not be used beyond their recommended use, usually four to five days, or they may actually increase congestion Antibiotics – used for bacterial sinus infections. Your doctor may prescribe antibiotics when symptoms of sinusitis are severe and do not respond to home treatment, or complications (such as pus formation in sinus cavities) develop. Synthetic penicillin like amoxicillin is used most commonly.
Statistics An estimated 134 million Indians suffer from chronic sinusitis, the symptoms of which include but are not limited to debilitating headaches, fever and nasal congestion and obstruction. That's more than population of Japan. The National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases' (NIAID) estimate does not even take into account those of us who suffer from acute sinusitis. Among Indians this disease is more widespread than diabetes, asthma or coronary heart disease. One in eight Indians suffer from chronic sinusitis caused by the inflammation of the nasal and throat lining, which results in the accumulation of mucus in the sinus cavity, and pressure build-up in the face, eyes and brain. What's worrying, say Mumbai doctors, is that the disease is likely to be higher in Mumbai given the pollution levels and unhealthy lifestyle of its citizens.