Worship Flags and Banners
Raising the Standard
One of the names of God is Jehovah Nissi, which means “The Lord is my banner”. When we raise our flags in worship, we are symbolically exalting the name of Jesus.
Banners, standards and ensigns are used interchangeably throughout the bible. The word “flag” is a more recent word used to refer to banners, standards and ensigns. Flags are used to break the atmosphere, stir emotion and patriotism and are important symbols that can be used in a variety of ways. Throughout scripture, we find that there are three main purposes for raising a standard or banners which are still applicable today.
“The sons of Israel shall camp, each by his own standard, with the banners of their fathers’ households: they shall camp around the tent of meeting at a distance.” Numbers 2:2 NASB
Flags used for identification
Flags are used for identification. Each of the twelve tribes of Israel had a banner that symbolized their tribe. Whenever the tribes moved or went into battle the standard was raised so that the leaders could identify the tribe and their location. Banners are a symbol of the tribes of the Lord going forth.
Banners and flags used during worship are a visual demonstration of the ever raging supernatural battle that is being waged. As imitators of our savior, we are to be a physical display of the Kingdom of God here on the earth. As followers of Jesus, we identify under his banner of love and go forth into spiritual battle!
Flags used to claim or show ownership of land or territory
Banners or flags are used to claim or display possession of land or territory. Most of the scriptures referring to standards or flags are in military descriptions. Numbers 2:10 says “they set the standards according to the armies.” When we raise our banners in worship, we are… ”as an awesome army with banners.” Song of Songs 6:4.
Just as in the physical realm, flags and banners represent victory in the spiritual realm. Flags can be used to break down spiritual strongholds and put the enemy on the run. As we raise our banners in worship, we become a beacon of hope and encouragement to occupy and take possession of the land, both physically and spiritually, that God has given us. We are reminded of our freedom in Christ and the dominion inheritance that he has given to us.
Flags and Banners are used in Celebration and Victory
Banners and flags are used in celebration and victory. Whenever there is a military victory, flags are flying! It is also true that when we have a personal victory we want to celebrate. Waving flags and banners is a way to celebrate our ultimate victory over sin and death in Jesus as our savior.
Jesus is considered God’s banner. “And in that day there shall be a root of Jesse, who shall stand as a banner to the people; for the Gentiles shall seek him, and his resting place shall be glorious.” Isaiah 11:10
Jesus is our ultimate banner, he is the “standard” that we look to, the rally point of all nations, and the emblem of our ambassadorship on the earth.
Whether you are identifying with Jesus, claiming new territory for Him or Celebrating His and our victory, grab a flag or banner and start worshiping today!
Flags and Banners from our Shop showing below…