Managing Invasive Plants in Your Woodlot
At the Thursday, June 11th Cumberland Woodland Owners Association Meeting, PA DCNR specialists, Kelly Sitch, Bureau of Forestry Botanist, and John Schwartzer, Bureau of Forestry Service Forester will speak about the impact of invasive plants and control methods. Invasive plants are impacting the regeneration and management of private and public forests. They are slowly changing the character of our natural ecosystems by displacing native plants, impacting native wildlife habitat, increasing soil erosion, and limiting forestry management options. Private landowners need more information about how to identify invasive plant species problems and how to apply effective management practices. The meeting will be at 7:00 PM, at the Cumberland County Extension Office which is located at 310 Allen Road in Carlisle. You do not have to be a member and there is no cost to attend.
Invasive insects, plants, and microbes have had and continue to have a significant harmful impact on U.S. forests. Invasive plants easily colonize the disturbed areas and enter adjacent woodlands. Invasive plants also can interfere with the growth of new trees. Competition from invasive plants reduces native plant diversity, and can harm animals that depend on native plants for food and shelter. Invasive plants threaten the habitat of two-thirds of all threatened and endangered wildlife species. It is estimated by the U.S. Forest Service that economic damages caused by nonindigenous species and costs for control and management of these species exceed $137 billion per year. One of the best ways to control these plants is for woodland owners to familiarize themselves with the plants and work with local officials and agencies to start eradication programs.
The Cumberland Woodland Owners Association is an organization of forestland owners and others interested in forestry issues in south central Pennsylvania. For more information about the meeting or the Cumberland Woodland Owners Association, contact Fred Peabody at 717/776-3565 (email: firstname.lastname@example.org).