1. Do crafts. Doing an artistic hobby on board your flight is a great way to pass time. Consider bringing tools for drawing, knitting, or crocheting. 
2. Write in your journal. Your flight makes a great time to reflect on your past, upcoming events, and your internal thoughts and emotions. If you aren't into keeping diary-style entries, you can also use journals for brainstorming, freewriting, or creative writing such as poetry. You could also write a letter to a friend while you are flying. 
3. Organize your trip. While on the plane, make a vague outline of events and attractions that you will visit once you arrive at your new location. 
4. Watch a film or a TV show. Even if your plane does not have in-flight entertainment, you can still pass time on your flight by watching a movie or TV series on your smartphone or a tablet if you have one.
5. Listen to music. Listening to music will keep you somewhat occupied and makes a great activity to combine with something else, such as making crafts or journaling. Choosing to listen to new and unfamiliar music can make a great choice for keeping yourself more entertained.
6. Use an app. If you have your phone available, use an app to keep you entertained on the flight. You can play games, scroll social media, manage your finances, or organize your email. Some apps require internet to use, which is not available on all flights. It typically costs money to connect to in-flight wifi.
7. Read a book. Whether you prefer classic print on paper, e-readers, or using the Kindle app on your iPad, reading a book on your flight is a great way to help time pass by more quickly. Bonus points if the book is particularly suspenseful or otherwise works well to hold your attention.
8. Do skincare. Planes have extremely dry air and this can dry out your skin. Your flight makes a great time to use a face mask, apply moisturizers, or do other small and simple skincare treatments. Avoid bringing any products that must be rinsed off.
9. Take pictures out the window of the plane. If you have a window seat, taking pictures of the ground from your bird's-eye viewpoint can allow you to capture some very interesting moments in time. This suggestion is not as good for overnight flights, those not sat in window seats, or those who are flying over mostly water.
10. Get productive. If you can do so, complete some work for your job or potentially for school assignments while on your flight. This will help pass time and has the bonus of giving you a sense of accomplishment once you are done.
11. Chat with your neighbor. Whether it be friends or strangers, your seatmates on a flight can be a great source of entertainment if you are the social type. Talking to others on your flight can pass time and gives you insights into the lives of others, which can help you foster more empathy.
12. Listen to a podcast. Podcasts are a great option for killing time on a flight. The topics of podcasts can be informational, scientific, spiritual, comedic, or pure entertainment. 
13. Learn the local language. Using podcasts, apps, or pocket-sized guidebooks, you can attempt to learn the local language of the place you are visiting. Some helpful words include thank you, please, sorry, hello, yes, no, you're welcome, and goodbye.
14. Play a game. If you have friends sitting near you on your flight, one great way to pass time is by playing games. Some examples of games that are great for flights include word games and card games.
15. Move around. If you are comfortable, walk around on your flight a little bit to stretch your legs. This can improve blood flow and will prevent you from feeling as stiff upon landing.
