Peoples’ beliefs, values, and fears have an immeasurable impact on what they write. Explaining those beliefs, values, and fears helps unlock complex texts for students, which is just what these historical context lessons are made to do! Heavily based on the historical previews from Holt, Rinehart, & Winston’s Elements of Literature textbooks, these presentations introduce parts of history that influenced American Literature in a visual and interactive manner. Introduce (or recap) each literary movement in American Literature with a historical context presentation.
These 11 lessons take about 40 minutes each. Fill-in-the-blank notes pages are ready to copy and go. Students listen, take notes, and make connections between literature and history. Also great for an American Literature course review! (You may purchase these lessons individually as well, but you save money by buying them all at once!)
Movements covered include: Native American, Puritan, Rationalist, Romantic, Transcendental, Emerson, Dark Romantic, Realist, Naturalist, Modern, and Post-Modern. Each of these eleven movements has a PowerPoint presentation, fill-in-the-blank notes page, and key in this bundle.
I’ve found that students appreciate some contemporary connections to bring these movements to life. The format of these presentations includes funky pictures and catchy phrases to breathe some fresh air into the classics.
Fill-in-the-Blank Notes can be collected for a grade or participation points. I have my students hand their notebooks four times a year, and I check the notes at that time.
3 of the presentations have recommended links to video clips, including connections with Star Wars, Snow White, and Mountain Men. 7 extension activities included in case your lesson runs short or to pull the main ideas over to the next lesson.
Please note that the Post-Modern presentation links heavily with The Crucible by Arthur Miller. If your students won’t be reading this, this part of the presentation can be cut out, shortening length of the lesson.