Front panel Ac Switch failing to start computer.
Try these steps.
If Power supply light does not turn on (or no power supply LED)
Perform the following steps, in order, until power is restored or it is determined that there is a hardware failure:
NOTE: If the Power Supply fan spins when the PC is turned on but the light does not come on, it is possible the LED is defective. If this is the case, use the section Power supply light comes on or flashes .
1. Disconnect everything from the PC, including the power cord.
2. With the power cord disconnected, press the power button on the front of the computer. Plug in the power cord and test to see if the computer can turn on. If not, continue using these steps.
3. Replace the power cord with another power cord, like the one used by the monitor.
Test to see if the computer can turn on. If not, continue using these steps.
4. Ensure that the voltage selector switch is on the correct setting, 115V for North America.
5. With the power cord removed, flip the red voltage selector switch to the opposite position, wait about five seconds, and then switch the red voltage selector switch back to its original location.
This ensures that the voltage switch is engaged and set correctly for your country/region.
6. Plug in the power cord and test to see if the computer can turn on. If not, continue using these steps.
7. Plug a lamp into the same outlet to see if the wall outlet has power. Try the computer in a different outlet in order to eliminate the outlet as a possible source of the issue. Test both to see if the wall outlets have power.
8. Remove all extension cords, power strips, surge protectors and any converters that remove ground. Plug the power cable directly to the wall outlet. Test for power. If this fixes the issue, find the device that is causing the issue and do not use it.
9. Use a vacuum cleaner to remove the build-up of dust from the power supply fan vent holes. Make sure that the PC is turned off and that the power cord is plugged into a grounded outlet. Only use the end of the vacuum hose near the outside of the fan entrance.
Plug in the power cord and test to see if the computer can turn on. If not, continue using these steps.
10. If all of the above steps have been tried and the power supply light remains off, use the steps in the next section, use the next section Power supply light comes on or flashes , to reseat the cables and check the power switch connector.
Jan 11, 2009 |
Compaq Presario SR1000T (568657) PC...