PAPAYA TREES ARE BEST KNOWN FOR THEIR VIBRANT ORANGE FRUIT, BUT THE WORLD OF ALTERNATIVE MEDICINE IS EMBRACING THEM FOR A DIFFERENT, MORE GAME-CHANGING REASON.
PAPAYA, THE CANCER FIGHTER
It’s no cure, but papaya leaf has scientifically verified cancer slowing properties. A study by the University of Florida documented the impact of papaya leaf extract on lab-grown tumors and discovered the extract’s ability to slow cancerous tumor growth without the negative side effects of chemotherapy.
10 different types of cancer including cervix, breast, liver, lung and pancreatic cancers were exposed to papaya leaf extract. In every single case, the extract slowed the growth of the tumors, and the larger the dose of papaya leaf extract, the stronger the anticancer effects.
This is great news for everyone, because millions of people suffer from cancer directly or indirectly everyday, and the numbers keep growing. Mountains of money are thrown towards research for cancer cures, but to this day, cancer remains an incurable disease.
Could mother nature hold the cure to this chronic illness in the glowing green juice of the papaya plant? Alternative medicine might be on to something.
PAPAYA LEAF EXTRACT AND TH1-TYPE CYTOKINES
Th1-type cytokines are hormonal messengers responsible for the biological effects of the immune system. Papaya leaf extract boosts the production of these molecules, giving you a stronger, healthier immune system.
ADDITIONAL HEALING PROPERTIES OF PAPAYA LEAF EXTRACT
- Revitalizes the human body by maintaining energy and vitality
- Supports cardiovascular and gastrointestinal health
- Prevents cataract formation
- Alleviates inflammation
- helps with nausea and constipation
- Can help to reduce blood sugar levels
PAPAYA LEAF EXTRACT AND DENGUE
Dengue fever, also known as breakbone fever, is a mosquito-borne tropical disease caused by the dengue virus. Symptoms include fever, headache, muscle and joint pains, and a measle-like skin rash.
Some cases of this ailment can develop into life-threatening dengue hemorrhagic fever or dengue shock syndrome with very low blood platelets.
Papaya leaf extract contains two important compounds called papain and chymopapain that help to increase and normalize blood platelets. As a result, this extract has been used for years to effectively treat dengue fever.
INCLUDE PAPAYA LEAF EXTRACT IN YOUR NEXT JUICING SESSION
Papaya leaf extract is sometimes sold as a supplement, but you could easily add the leaf extract to any of your juices. Keep in mind, papaya leaf extract is bitter, but adding it to fruit juices can help to mask the taste.
Disclaimer: Consult your doctor before using papaya leaf extract to ensure that it doesn’t conflict with any other medication you may be taking. Do not use this extract if you are breastfeeding or pregnant.
Although papaya leaf extract has displayed some promising results, further study is needed into the benefits of this liquid.