Depending on the jurisdiction and country, a uniformed police officer usually wears a utility belt that carries the following equipment:

1. Duty firearm - Police officers are armed with a handgun or pistol; the type depends on the jurisdiction or area of work. A typical standard-issue police firearm in the United States is a semi-automatic pistol, usually a 9-millimeter caliber, Glock handgun. The Glock handgun has a polymer frame and metal slide and has at least a 10-round capacity, but usually is capable of 15 to 17 rounds.
2. Handcuffs - Metal handcuffs are needed to physically restrain individuals during an investigation. Handcuffs are circular metal bracelets attached by a metal-linked chain; they can be double-locked to ensure they do not tighten on an arrestee's wrists or injure them during their transport to a lockup facility.
3. OC spray - Oleoresin capsicum (the active ingredient in pepper spray) is made from the oily residue of hot peppers, which is placed into a canister and made to propel in either a spray (using an alcohol- or water-based suspension fluid) or a foam, which prevents inadvertent spraying of surrounding people.
4. ECW - Also colloquially known as a "Taser," the Electronic Controlled Weapon (ECW) is a plastic-framed pistol-type weapon that is capable of launching twin darts attached to the weapon by wires that become energized by 50,000 volts of electricity powered by a battery pack located in the grip of the gun. An ECW is used to control a violently resisting individual by achieving neuromuscular incapacitation (NMI).
5. Baton - A police baton can be either of the wooden straight-stick variety or a metal collapsible baton. Both batons can be carried at once and each one has its benefits.
6. Gloves - Latex gloves are a must in the field, especially when officers are handling contaminated items or touching people who may have communicable diseases. Several pairs of latex gloves can be rolled up tightly and kept in a glove pouch on the officer's utility belt.
7. Magazines - An officer may carry one or more extra magazines for their duty firearm in pouches on their utility belt in case they need it.
