Not all sugars are bad for your teeth. Xylitol is the form of sugar that is known to replace fluoride as a healthier option for brushing. In fact, Xylitol is a secret weapon to wipe out oral desease-causing bacteria and plaque. It doesn’t contain side effects that are associated with fluoride. Pure Xylitol looks and tastes like sugar and is used in a variety of sugar- free sweeteners as well as toothpaste and mouthwash.
It is a well known fact that regular sugar is made of sucrose which produces bacteria that destroys tooth structure. Xylitol, on the other hand, is derived from natural fruits and vegetables and is also found in the human body. Xylitol prevents bacteria from attaching to the tooth surface which in turn causes decay. With consistent use of Xylitol nasty bacteria are rendered virtually harmless.
Today, gum desease and tooth decay levels have reached epidemic proportions causing more severe problems such as Diabetes and Heart Desease. Luckily, Xylitol has properties that disarm decay-causing bacteria in your mouth. Xylitol is a completely natural substance. Studies have shown that only 10 grams of Xylitol a day reduce acid – causing bacteria in your mouth by 95% over a six- month period.
Dental caries affects the population of every country. By the time an American child turns 17, almost 80 percent have experienced tooth decay. In Finland it is practically the opposite where 80 percent of high school graduates have no caries. The difference is that in Finland schools regularly distribute xylitol to the students.
Hard to imagine most people having teeth without decay, isn’t it? It is, however, possible. Dentists in the American Academy of Oral Systemic Health know and understand the importance of oral health and its contribution to overall wellbeing. They recommend daily xylitol regimen to most of their patients. As changes like this begin to take place in the dental industry, we are on the way to a healthier nation.
If you’d like to receive updates from My Family Dentistry, information and tips about dental care, promotions, and more, subscribe to our email newsletter.