Good evening, and welcome to Sports Talk. On tonight's show: Can Flurgen Constantine win a fourth Speegle Cup? Plus, the Tongsten Pacemakers were off to a fabulous series start, but their season is quickly coming to a close. Can they stave off elimination in this best-of-23 series? And finally tonight, Jag Magenta is a sports legend on the pitch and a cultural icon off it. We'll tell you more about what he has been working on since he played his last game in 2003.

But first: Flurgen Constantine is synonymous with winning. In the entire history of the sport of blazeball, only three players have been successful enough to win the Speegle Cup twice, and Constantine is already in line to win his consecutive fourth Speegle next week when the Gatestown Capers meet the West Coast Applejacks in Stormcenter Stadium on Friday. Constantine has been considered by peers and critics as one of the greatest—if not the greatest—center catchers the sport has ever seen, and one of the greatest players the sport has ever produced. Constantine hopes to make history by becoming the winningest blazeball player to play the game. He'll have a lot of help when teammate and left ball pitcher Sugar McFarlane returns from a month-long eyelash injury he sustained playing against the Freetown Radiators back in December. The first game of the series between the Capers and the Applejacks will be this Friday at 10 Eastern on Blister TV.

After the break, we'll be speaking with Sports Talk Senior Reporter Mankin Manneskin about the Tongsten Pacemakers' chances of getting past the second round of the Bony Invitational.

Hello and welcome back. Here with us for tonight's next segment is Sports Talk's Senior Reporter Mankin Manneskin to give us some insight into the best-of-23 series of the Bony Invitational, and how the Pacemakers of Tongsten City are hoping to come back home with the win. Mankin?

Hi, yes, thanks, Sneek. I'm here in front of the Bony Invitational Stadium in Gattisberg and things have come to a quiet hush in this area as the Tongsten Pacemakers were denied another win tonight when they played the Mishy Blankets. The Pacemakers lost the game 4 to 2, to the Blankets thanks to Blankets' forward Tyle Are playing a solid game on the defensive end.
