What Do They Say about Islam
In one of her lectures, Carly Fiorina, the Former CEO of Hewlett-Packard, said:
" I'll end by telling a story.
There was once a civilization that was the greatest in the world.
It was able to create a continental super-state that stretched from ocean to ocean, and from northern climes to tropics and deserts. Within its dominion lived hundreds of millions of people, of different creeds and ethnic origins.
One of its languages became the universal language of much of the world, the
bridge between the peoples of a hundred lands. Its armies were made up of people
of many nationalities, and its military protection allowed a degree of peace and
prosperity that had never been known. The reach of this civilization's
commerce extended from Latin America to China, and everywhere in between.
And this civilization was driven more than anything, by invention. Its
architects designed buildings that defied gravity. Its mathematicians created
the algebra and algorithms that would enable the building of computers, and the
creation of encryption. Its doctors examined the human body, and found new cures
for disease. Its astronomers looked into the heavens, named the stars, and paved
the way for space travel and exploration.
Its writers created thousands of stories. Stories of courage, romance and
magic. Its poets wrote of love, when others before them were too steeped in fear
to think of such things.
When other nations were afraid of ideas, this civilization thrived on them,
and kept them alive. When censors threatened to wipe out knowledge from past
civilizations, this civilization kept the knowledge alive, and passed it on to
While modern Western civilization shares many of these traits, the
civilization I'm talking about was the Islamic world from the year 800
to 1600, which included the Ottoman Empire and the courts of Baghdad, Damascus
and Cairo, and enlightened rulers like Suleiman the Magnificent.
Although we are often unaware of our indebtedness to this other civilization,
its gifts are very much a part of our heritage. The technology industry would
not exist without the contributions of Arab mathematicians."
Source: A What does our future demand of leaders today?
Download the full lecture in PDF format
"My choice of Muhammad to lead the list of the world's most influential persons may surprise some readers and may be questioned by others, but he was the only man in history who was supremely successful on both the religious and secular levels."
"Of humble origins, Muhammad founded and promulgated one of the world's great religions, and became an immensely effective political leader. Today, thirteen centuries after his death, his influence is still powerful and pervasive."
Michael H. Hart's
The 100: A Ranking of the Most Influential Persons in History
"Four years after the death of Justinian, A.D. 569, was born at Makkah, in Arabia the man who, of all men exerciesed the greatest influence upon the human race .. MUHAMMAD .. "
John William Draper
A History of the Intellectual Development of Europe