I look little....but I PRINT
Click the printer icon with the crayon cursor for a high quality
large coloring page. You may print in black and white or after you've colored
the artwork. Scroll down the page to see detailed instructions.
State of Missouri - Missouri State Flag Color
Flag Meaning: A blue band with 24 stars surrounds the state seal that sits on three stripes - one red, one white and one blue. The same 24 stars are repeated inside the seal. The stars represent Missouri as the 24th state to join the Union. Numerous symbols are used within the state seal that represent both the state and the nation: shields of both lie side by side in the center of the seal. The two grizzlies represent support for both state and nation. The words around the shield state necessity for the Union. A helmet symbolizes enterprise and hardihood. White represents purity, blue for vigilance, and red for hardiness and valor. The date Missouri's constitution was adopted is shown in Roman numerals. The state motto is above that date. The flag was adopted in 1913.
Click on one of the colors in the color palette to
choose a color.
With your selected color, click on a part of a picture
to fill it with that color.
You may change your colors as often as you like.
When you are happy with your coloring, you may print
out your picture by clicking on the printer icon on the
coloring page (Says "Full Page Print"). Only your artwork
with sentence will print - advertisements, directions,
and color palette will not print. Graphics print crisply
If you wish to color your page offline, hit the printer
icon on the coloring page BEFORE filling in any colors.
If you already started to color online, you can color
the parts white or hit refresh to get just the outline.
These Missouri coloring pages make great mouse practice
activities for younger children but can also be used with
older children beginning to learn how to read. If the child
is unable to read the sentence that goes with the state of Missouri
coloring page, have them click on each word to hear the
sentence. This activity reinforces reading skills. Check
out our additional ideas
on how to use our state of Missouri coloring pages for reading