Long ago, many years before humans walked the Earth, a plant decided to put down roots in the desert. At first, its roots were shallow, unable to find purchase in the cracked and sun-hardened ground. This plant was stubborn though and determined to find a way to survive where no plant had ever survived before. It soaked up the sun’s harsh rays during the day and weathered the nighttime frost and waited patiently for the day when the rain would finally bless the brittle valley. 

When it did, the droplets were such a relief to the parched little plant, but it knew that it needed to make this water last. And so, for the rest of the storm, it focused all of its energy on pulling the water that fell upon its stem inward. 

Weeks passed and the land dried back up, but the plant remained cool and content with its core full of water. The ground below could feel the moisture emanating from the plant’s roots and tugged at them, pulling them deeper and deeper, and the plant grew strong.

For many years this system worked without fail, but life was evolving rapidly and new creatures were moving to the valley every day. These creatures were not able to store their water in the same way this plant was, but they were able to use their beaks and claws to chip away at it, revealing the water inside and taking it for themselves. The plant knew that it needed a way to protect itself - its own version of beaks and claws. So it concentrated once again, and eventually produced a long pointy leaf that would pierce anything it came in contact with. 

One of these spines gave way to another and another until one day, the plant was completely covered in them. Nothing bothered the plant again and it lived peacefully in that valley for more than a hundred years, 

Eventually, though,  it became lonely and longed for a companion to teach its secrets to and a crown of beautiful white flowers sprouted from its head. Tiny creatures were intoxicated by the smell of these flowers and got close enough to spread their pollen, allowing the plant to reproduce. 

Over time the land became covered with this one plant’s children. Humans came around and gave a name to them - the cactus. They were prized and cultivated and praised for their ability to adapt and survive in harsh conditions.
