One day, a little girl was walking through the woods to get back home. However, she realizes she has taken a wrong turn and gotten lost. It is starting to get dark outside, so the girl becomes overwhelmed with fear. Tears start forming in her eyes, and she begins to sniffle. As she frantically looks around the woods, she hears twigs snapping. She hears someone approaching. The girl runs to what looks like a blackberry bush and hides behind it. The little girl covers her mouth to conceal her whimpers. Now, she hears them walking even closer. The little girl's vision is blurred from her rush of tears, so she can't see who it is. As the figure approaches, she lets out a scream. It is a big, black grizzly bear. She can't believe her eyes. The bear is walking on its hind legs as if it were human. She doubts that she can outrun the bear. "Well, hello there." The girl is too stunned to speak. How can this bear talk? "You're not real!" She yells at the bear. The bear comes next to the girl and sits on the ground. He grabs a blackberry from the bush and eats it. "Well, of course, I'm real. This blackberry is real, isn't it?" The bear laughs. 

The girl doesn't know if she should laugh or cry. He grabs another blackberry and offers it to her. "Here, maybe this will make you feel better. How long have you been out here?" The girl wipes her tears and responds. "Well, I was walking my usual way home and then I got lost. Do you- do you think you could help me find my way?" The girl is hesitant, but at this point, she just wants to find any way home. The bear smiles and stands up. He reaches his paw out to her. "Of course, I know these woods like they're the back of my paw. Come on, I'll get you back home safely." The little girl feels encouraged and gets up. This time, she doesn't hesitate and grabs the bear's hand. The bear finds her home and the girl is relieved. She hugs the bear. "Thank you! I'm home!" The bear smiles and says, "If you get lost again, you can find me by the blackberry bushes."
