I defeated several of the boss's fighters, but I was using more and more of my power. The more I used it, the harder it would be to hide it. As I opened the channel more, I felt Asuka's presence clearer. It was her power I was drawing on through our bond. I couldn't let her continue to suffer. 

The next fighter was the bullman I'd fought once before. Now, he was in a suit and stood ready to crush me. He was just a distraction before, but I could feel his bloodlust. He wouldn't let me pass. He must have been the final fighter. My strength was already just over half power, and I knew I would need more. The bullman rushed me, throwing fists left and right with the precision of a world champion. I ducked and weaved but couldn't dodge them fast enough. Each time a fist connected with my guard, I felt like my bones rattled. 

I slipped into his guard and delivered a bone-shattering blow to his gut, but he just sneered and grabbed me, his hand engulfing my whole head, and slammed me into the ground. I gripped his wrist and violently twisted myself, snapping out of his hold. But he brought his other hand across and connected with the side of my face. I hit the ropes and vaulted to my feet, spitting blood. The bullman didn't give me a break. His gums pulled back as he tried snuffing out my life with his powerful legs.

I had no choice. I threw open my internal channel and felt my heart sync with Asuka's. I heard her voice. "Please be safe."

Even now, she was thinking about me. I caught the bullman's foot, a shock wave ringing from my feet as the concrete cracked beneath me. I looked up with glowing orange eyes, a horn protruding from my skull. I twisted his whole body, which was three or four times my size, like a ragdoll. He spun, and my foot was between his eyes from below. Then I was above him, a haymaker sending the bullman crashing into the ground. I held his skull with one hand and shouted, "Asuka! I'm coming for you!"

I felt her heart leap, and I looked at the boss in the booths. She was with him, but he wasn't going to let her go. I was suddenly surrounded by foes.
