STUNNING VICTORY AT THE BLACK GATE
Halfling sabotage team may have been key to the defeat of Mordor's armies

March 25, 3019

MINAS TIRITH (GNS) After a week of chaos the Capital of Gondor reacted with shock and relief that Gondorian forces and their allies from Rohan had defeated the forces of Mordor at the black gate.  The initial word of the battle came from an Eagle messenger.  The invasion's success surprised residents of Minas Tirith, as the 6,000 to 7,000-man expeditionary force attacking the Black Gates was expected to be outnumbered by a factor of at least ten-to-one by orcs and Mordor's human allies.  Many military experts considered the attack to be futile.

Accounts of the battle remain incomplete, but casualties are heavy, with over a thousand injured and several hundred dead.  Orcs were close to overrunning Western positions before the tide of battle turned.  How the forces of Mordor were defeated remains unclear. Still, initial reports indicate that the assault on the Black Gate was made in conjunction with the actions of a small team of Halfling saboteurs who were able to infiltrate Mordor and destroy its headquarters at the tower of Barad Dur, possibly with the assistance of some ancient magical artifact.

However it was accomplished, numerous eyewitnesses report seeing the tower fall and Mt. Doom erupting.  Sauron appears to have perished as the tower collapsed, and his forces broke down in disarray almost immediately.  Some observers report that the Ringwraiths turned from the battle and headed back toward Barad Dur just as it broke down,  Trolls and other monsters scattered almost immediately, and Mordor's human allies agreed to a truce shortly afterward.

The Gondorian military refused to comment on the "Hobbit Commandos," however, one source close to royal claimant Aragorn remarked that "those little people may not look all that tough, but they do have a knack for covert ops."

The victory at the Black Gate ends two weeks of turmoil for Minas Tirith and the Kingdom of Gondor which culminated in a massive battle near the city gates and the suicide of Denethor, Steward of Gondor.  Aragorn, the former northern Ranger who has claimed kingship over Gondor appears to have survived the battle and is expected to be coronated in the next month.
