If you have eliminated your pest hatchery by getting rid of brush, weeds and debris you have come a long way. The next step is to carry out the types of cultural practices on your lawn that will make it a pleasant place for people and pets, and an unpleasant place for pests.
Traditional lawns have hundreds of variables. They are one of the largest consumers of home management dollars.
There is mowing to be done, and the expenses that go along with that. There is irrigation, and the cost of the system, and then the continuing cost of the water it uses. There is fertilization, and the cost of the fertilizer as well as the expense or the time and labor of applying it. There are activities like aerifying, dethatching, that add to the cost and, or the labor. Of course, there is also the cost of pest control.
Considering all of these factors, and adding environmental impact, we can say that lawns are resource hungry, and when done incorrectly, they have a big carbon footprint and a big financial footprint.
New trends in lawns
Awareness of this is growing, and new trends are springing up which counter many of these effects.
There is a movement toward native or natural habitats. This extends beyond “natural forest” type settings to the use of native grasses and landscapes which can survive and even thrive with the normal levels of rainfall for a given area, and are less likely to need additional fertility or pesticides.
Native habitats, using native landscape plants and grasses offers a huge advantage in pest prevention, and we will talk more about this a little latter.
There is a movement toward home farming, micro farming, and gardening that is beginning to use much of what was formerly formal lawn space for growing vegetables and herbs.
Home farming and gardening can be part of a practical answer to lawn pest issues. By using lawn space as productive land, the need for the large amounts of intensive lawn maintenance are diminished, but many pest control issues still exist, so it is basically neutral from a pest prevention perspective.
Traditional lawns and lawn maintenance practices
For now, we will look at traditional lawns, and traditional lawn maintenance practices and their relationship to the control and prevention of pests in both the lawn, landscapes, and the home itself.
Pest like cover for protection, they like food and water for survival and multiplication. They will take this wherever they can find it, and move on looking for more. As the population grows, they will seek more. When they find more, the population grows more!
A well balanced lawncare program will work against pests, a poorly balanced lawn regimen will attract pests. All aspects of lawn care are important. Mowing is the primary lawn care activity, and will yield the best results if carried out properly, and the worst results if neglected or done improperly.
Do not underestimate this part of your overall pest prevention program.