WATCH THIS VIDEO ABOUT TEACHING CHILDREN WITH READING DIFFICULTIES.
OR .... YOU CAN READ THE FOLLOWING!!!.
Just because a child has a reading difficulty or reading disorder does not mean they should ever be prevented from learning - or receiving a good education.
Yet by insisting that a text book or printed materials be used as the only way to provide information to that child, is doing just that.
These children represent a huge proportion of our society that is being robbed of their opportunity to learn, and enjoy their education, because they are expected to use text-based materials that do not meet their needs.
But most children with a Reading Difficulty or disorder are EXTREMELY intelligent and highly creative with a strong desire to learn and excel.
This is why it is not surprising that so many famous and highly successful people in the world today - and in history, have also suffered from a reading disorder or reading disability like Dyslexia.*Yet the solution to educating children with reading difficulties is so simple.
These children are often Visual Learners, so you provide the information you want them to study in a visual format.
Video provides that ideal visual format - it enables students to learn by watching .....and listening too.
Zane Education currently provides the only online video library that is also fully subtitled. It offers immediate access to the online teaching of 260+ curriculum topics across 12 subjects, for students and kids of all ages, using an inexpensive online monthly or annual subscription system costing from as little as between $8.99 to $17.99 per month.
But there is far more to using our online Visual Learning solution than using online educational video to teach children with reading difficulties and reading disabilities. It also includes and supported by:
The use of video also enables each child to learn entirely at their own speed which is essential in allowing them to achieve their greatest individual potential.
Zane Education's online Visual Learning solution is an ideal and much more affordable alternative to remedial reading classes and tutors that often charge up to $100 an hour for their time.
YOU COULD CHANGE AND IMPROVE YOUR CHILD'S LIFE IMMEDIATELY by enabling them to enjoy learning - and their education. End their frustration and restimulate that natural desire to learn which will secure their future.
To purchase your subscription and for further information about your choice of subsciptions, go to the very top of this page and visit our Buy a Subscription page.
And when you have completed your purchase, please don't forget to visit our Downloads page where you will find a wide selection of freely downloadable User Guides including a Guide for the Disabled Student, provided to help you and your child achieve the best results from our online resources.
Our unique and advanced online learning solution provides these significant benefits for families of those children experiencing difficulties with reading:
Customers can complete a free Registration for a Basic Membership by going to our Registration Page.
Access to the use of our full subtitled videos is a Premium Service and requires the purchase of a Gold, Silver or Bronze Membership subscription
Gold Membership - all videos for all subjects for all Grades
Silver Membership - all videos for all subjects for the chosen Grade
Bronze Membership - all videos for all Grades for the chosen Subject