Designed for introductory social foundations or multicultural education courses, this text offers a powerful model for cultural ecological analysis and pedagogy of responsibility, providing teachers and teacher educators with the information and classroom practices they need to help develop citizens who are prepared to support and achieve diverse, democratic, and sustainable societies in an increasingly globalized world.
"Authentic hope is the gift Rebecca Martusewicz, Jeff Edmundson, and John Lupinacci offer readers of EcoJustice Education [...]. We learn what it means to recover the ancient arts and skills of cultivating commons, common sense, and community collaborations in our hard times."
- Madhu Suri Prakash, Pennsylvania State University
"EcoJustice Education should become a core part of teacher education programs across the country as it provides both the theory and examples of classroom practices essential for making the transition to a sustainable future."
- C. A. Bowers, author, international speaker, and retired professor
1: Introduction: The Purposes of Education in an Age of Ecological Crises and Worldwide Insecurities
2: Rethinking Diversity and Democracy for Sustainable Communities
3: Cultural Foundations of the Crisis: A Cultural/ Ecological Analysis
4: Learning Androcentrism: Gender and Education
5: Learning our Place in the Social Hierarchy: An EcoJustice Approach to Class Inequality
6: Learning Racism: An EcoJustice Approach to Racial Inequality Co-authored by Gary Schnakenberg
7: Learning about Globalization: Education, Enclosures, and Resistance
8: Learning from Indigenous Communities
9: Teaching for the Commons: Educating for Diverse, Democratic, and Sustainable Communities
There are currently no reviews for this product. Be the first to review this product!
Rebecca A. Martusewicz is a teacher educator at Eastern Michigan University, where she has developed a concentration in EcoJustice Education for the Masters in Social Foundations program.
Jeff Edmundson directs the teacher licensure program at the University of Oregon and teaches courses in EcoJustice at the undergraduate and graduate level.
John Lupinacci is Adjunct Faculty at Eastern Michigan University, where he teaches pre-service teachers using an EcoJustice framework. He is a high school mathematics teacher and community activist in Detroit.
All three authors are active in EcoJustice Education, an international organization that includes the Center for EcoJustice Education offering faculty development workshops and the journal The EcoJustice Review: Educating for the Commons.