A cat on her lap, sitting on top of a blanket on the rooftop of her apartment building watching the night sky. Steam from a hot cup of tea by her side floats up into the night before dissipating into thin air. She checks her watch with great anticipation before checking her phone for notifications but nothing had come in.

"Where are they, Smudges?" she asks the cat as it purrs away on her lap.

 She swipes up and clicks on the messages app and starts texting, "Mom".

"Anything yet?"

The message sends and she waits eagerly while biting her lip. Then soon after, DING.

"Nothing yet :-/ have patience, Sara"

She puts her phone back down on the blanket with a huff. Smudges continue to purr loudly as she scratches his ears. Tilting her head back even further to study the stars, her eyes bounce all over the sky as she scans for any kind of movement. Her heart skips a beat every time she finds a shooting star or a satellite but it quickly turns into nothing more than disappointment.

"Hey," the voice of a young woman says entering the rooftop behind her, "Anything yet?"

"No," Sara says as Smudges slowly crawls out of her lap to secure a place on the ledge of the rooftop, "Nothing yet."

"Ugh," she groans as she takes a seat next to her, "The anticipation is literally going to kill me."

"Have patience, Yuma." Sara says with a smile. 

"Hi, Smudges," Yuma says, patting the cat as he walks by. 

DING

Sara picks up her phone and reads a message from "Mom".

"NOW!"

"There!'" Yuma yells, pointing into the night sky.

Sara immediately breaks her attention from the phone and looks up. Across the sky is a long yellow streak being left by a large bright light traveling across the sky. A large smile breaks on Sara's face and is soon accompanied by tears welling up in her eyes."

"They made it!" Yuma cried out.

Sara was speechless as so many emotions ran through her heart. Happiness, fear, ecstasy, terror, longing, hope, and love.

"Please land safely, please land safely, please land safely," Sara whispered to herself.

"It's going to be okay," Yuma said with a smile as the bright light fell below the horizon. 

DING

Sara glanced down at her phone once again. From "Mom":

"Daddy's home! :-)"
