The world is full of amazing travel destinations, so it's understandably challenging to choose the perfect place to go. Here is a list of the best places to visit if you don't want a beach vacation and don't like big cities:

1. Glacier National Park
Glacier National Park is one of the most striking parks in North America. Snow-capped peaks and crystal-blue lakes, over 700 miles of hiking trails, and plenty of camping areas make this a great option for an adventurous holiday. There is a lot to do all year. In the winter, you can go snowshoeing and skiing, and in the summer, you can swim in Lake McDonald or go whitewater rafting on the Flathead River. There are also beautiful scenic drives if you prefer to go the comfortable route.

2. The Swiss Alps
The Swiss Alps are world-famous for their snow-covered mountains and cute little towns. If you visit in the winter, you will get some world-class skiing in St. Moritz or Zermatt. If you go in the summer, you can hike through the Swiss National Park or attend some festivals in Montreux. Don't forget to visit the Jungfrau Region to see the most idyllic mountain villages like Grindelwald and Mürren.

3. Costa Rica
Costa Rica offers travelers everything from volcanic mountains and rainforests to waterfalls and a stunning shoreline. You can hike along Arenal Volcano, try to spot exotic wildlife like river turtles, otters, and howler monkeys in Tortuguero National Park, swim next to some of the country's waterfalls, or zip line through rainforests. Just make sure you visit between mid-December and April, when Costa Rica has its dry season.

4. South Island, New Zealand
New Zealand's South Island offers amazing landscapes, beautiful mountains, and impressive fjords. From hiking trails to boat trips, you have limitless possibilities. Visit the Mount John Observatory for some peaceful stargazing at night, or go for the adrenaline experience in Queenstown for some bungee jumping. Make sure to visit a few wineries and indulge in winetasting if you visit the Marlborough region and stop by the two most accessible glaciers, Franz Josef and Fox Glacier, on the west coast.

5. Tasmania
Tasmania is Australia's island in the south, about 150 miles from the mainland. It has an abundance of wildlife like Tasmanian devils, penguins, and kangaroos, impressive scenery, and 19 national parks to explore. Visit Hobart and Launceston for some acclaimed art and gastronomy experiences, or give their wine trails a try to taste some pinot noir and sparkling options.
