Oh my goodness! There was once a girl who was late. She was always late for everything. She was late for school, meeting friends, appointments, and just about everything else. She is late today for a very important event. Today was her graduation and she was not ready. She had her gown and her shoes and her hat, but no car keys. How was she going to graduate without a way to get to her school? A problem indeed. What shall she do? Well, first she paces back and forth like she always does, asking herself a million questions. Where could she have left those keys? Were they under her bed? No. Were they in the bathroom? No. Were they on the kitchen counter? No. 

She puts her hands on her head and closed her eyes. "Now, where would I be if I were keys?" She sat there in silence for a moment and just stared at the wall. "If I don't hurry, I'll miss the whole thing and I do not like to be late. I'm always though." Today, she thought, could be different. She still had time to get there, or so she thought. The girl stood up and straightened her dress, then started going down a list of places it could be. "I'm sure it's not here or here or here." This went on for about 20 minutes. She was getting more and more nervous than one would get if they were running behind. "Tardiness isn't acceptable today," She said aloud. "I cannot be late." Growing ever more frustrated, the girl started running in circles around her house. She was getting more and more frustrated and nervous. She could hear the hands of the clock ticking louder and louder. 

The girl closed her eyes and screamed. It was the longest, loudest scream she had ever screamed, but it felt very good. She opened her eyes and stood up. Suddenly, she had an idea. She looked to her right at the wall. There on a hook were the car keys. They were there the whole time. "No time to waste," She replied as she grabbed them and ran out the door. A moment later, the door opened and she ran in to grab her graduation hat. "Today is going to be a great day," With that, she hopped out the door.
