Tiger: Hey Zebra!
Zebra: Hey Tiger!
Tiger: Hey, I've been meaning to ask you...who are your parents?
Zebra: My parents?
Tiger: Yeah, who are your mom and dad?
Zebra: Well, Marsha and Dave...the zebras down the road.
Tiger: Okay, I just thought I'd ask.
Zebra: Wait, what's this about then? Why are you asking about my parents?
Tiger: Well, I was just wondering...
Zebra: Wondering about what?
Tiger: Well, I mean...I never knew my dad, and my mom was a single tiger, so...
Zebra: So you thought my dad...was your dad too?!
Tiger: I mean, well yeah! You could see how a tiger would get that confused.
Zebra: I don't get how anyone would get that confused! You're a tiger, dude...
Tiger: Yes...and we both have black stripes...see what I'm getting at? Huh?
Zebra: (Pauses)
Zebra: Okay, you got a point there. But you're not a zebra!
Tiger: Maybe you're a part tiger.
Zebra: That's ridiculous. 
Tiger: Same stripes?
Zebra: We're LITERALLY different species of animals.
Tiger: Yes, but couldn't different species mate with each other? Isn't that how we get oranges?
Zebra: I don't know how we get oranges, but I doubt it's from two different species mating with each other!
Tiger: I think it is, though...just like how tangelos are a cross between tangerines and marshmallows...
Zebra: (Smacks his forehead) Okay, I think you're an idiot.
Tiger: Nah, I think I heard that somewhere...
Zebra: ...What, that you're an idiot? Because I said that.
Tiger: No, that tangelos are tangerines and marshmallows mixed together. I think Dave told me that.
Zebra: Who's Dave?
Tiger: You know, Dave from down the road.
Zebra: Dave is a scarecrow; he doesn't speak...he's not even alive.
Tiger: I think he is alive...one time I saw him hanging out with some of the local birds. It looked like they were having a grand time.
Zebra: No no no no...scarecrows are dummies that literally "scarecrows" so they don't eat the farmer's crops.
Tiger: Hey! Don't call him a dummy!
Zebra: Okay, I'm leaving now.
Tiger: Tell your dad I said hi!
Zebra: Just...no.
