1. Helvellyn, England - this is a mountain peak that beginners can easily climb in one day. Helvellyn may be accessed from the Ullswater villages of Patterdale and Glenridding. It is the third-highest peak in England and offers a unique climbing experience where expert or novice climbers can proudly reach the summit and make it back to the pub in time for a pint to celebrate. The ideal trekking season for this mountain is from spring to autumn, and climbers should be aware of the changing weather conditions throughout the year. 

2. Hochschwab, Austria - The mountains of Northern Styria are filled with alpine huts that facilitate multi-day hikes, giving you a welcoming overnight stay as you climb to the top. The lodge that stands near the cliff face of this mountain was originally constructed in 1884 and offers an impressive panoramic view from its outdoor decks. The ideal trekking season for this mountain is from spring to autumn, with ski touring in the winter. 

3. Emel Shan, China - This mountain climbing experience is often described as a spiritual one. A pilgrimage to the summit of this mountain is said to forgive all sins. The Emel Shan is the highest of China's Four Sacred Buddhist Mountains, and there are roughly 300,000 transgressors who make the journey to the summit every year. Staying true to the Zen mindset helps climbers deal with the never-ending stone steps and the suffocating crowds. The ideal trekking season for this climb is all year, but it is recommended to avoid any public holidays if you want to avoid crowds. 

4. Mount Temple, Canada - Be sure to pack a high-quality camera when you go on this climb because this trek up one of the Canadian Rockies will take you to one of the most photogenic peaks in the world. The staggering views from the top turn the spectacular glaciers, mountains, and rugged terrain below into an amazing view of raw geography. The ideal time to climb this mountain is between July and August after the snow has melted. Keep in mind the rockfall from above and consider taking a helmet with you. 

5. Mount Anne, Australia - With wild rivers, beautiful terrain, and perhaps even a wild animal or two, Mount Anne, located in Tasmania's Southwest National Park, looms above as the area's most prominent peak. Brave beginners can often take on the entire climb in a day, while others may prefer to take their time and camp out overnight. The best time to climb Mount Anne is between November and May. This is when the area has the best weather for climbing. 

6. Snowdon, Wales 
If you are looking for a mountain climbing experience that the entire family can enjoy, Snowdon Mountain in Wales is excellent for climbing with kids. The mountain is associated with the legends of King Arthur, the fabled king is said to have killed a fearsome giant who once lived on the mountain and is reputedly still buried at the summit. While it is possible to trek Snowden Mountain throughout the year, the railway closes down during the winter. 

7. Alvand Kuh, Iran - Ideal for cultural exchange, the mountain of Alvand Kuh is a good choice for beginners. It is one of the most popular peaks in western Iran for climbing or hiking and for good reason. The trek to the top may be completed in one day, but it can be fun to stay overnight with the locals at one of the mountain shelters along the way. The best time to trek this mountain is between spring and fall. If you have concerns about losing your way, it is a good idea to climb during the weekend so that you will be around other local hikers who will help you find your way to the top.
