Once there was a circus ringleader who treated his performers badly, but he treated the animals even worse. When a show didn't go exactly as expected, he yelled at the clowns, emotionally berated the acrobats, and spewed horrible names at the circus sideshow entertainers. Everyone was afraid of him, but they were even more afraid of leaving because he threatened them with horrible torture if anyone took off. He was truly a vile person, but the animals got the worst treatment. He starved them, chained them in tiny cages, and beat them daily to keep them submissive and afraid. Even the lions and tigers cowered when he approached. 

While he was putting on a show, spectators thought he was a great ringleader, and they really enjoyed the circus acts, but they didn't see what happened when the lights went out and the crowds dispersed. One day, an older, mysterious woman stayed behind. She saw beyond the forced smiling faces and saw how all the animals cowered in fear when he was around or when they heard his booming voice. She knew there was something wrong with this circus, and she aimed to find out what it was. 

As she quietly snuck around the tents, she heard the ringleader screaming at his employees. Her suspicions were founded, and she continued to watch and listen. When she saw him kick a skinny, starved dog chained outside his tent, she knew she had to take action. She wasn't going to report him to authorities, though; she had another plan. She knew dark magic. The way to teach this horrible man a lesson is to turn him into what he despises the most. The old woman waited until he went to bed, then she started her chant. She watched as a dark mist entered his tent. It glowed briefly to let her know the magic was successful. 

When the ringleader woke up the next morning, he found he was chained to a post outside. He was cold, tired, and hungry, and when he tried to speak, there were no words. Only barks, whines, and whimpers exited his throat. The ringleader had been turned into a dog and now would live the rest of his life as a poor, mistreated animal.
