Phil: “Hey, Bob, Larry, and Greta -- let’s be fair about this. We should take turns.”

Bob: “No way, Phil. You’re just saying that because you’re old and slow.”

Phil: “Bob, that is totally unfair. I'm in good shape for a seagull my age.”

Bob: “Survival of the fittest, baby. You snooze, you lose!”

Greta: “That’s cold, Bob. We don’t want him to starve to death. Who knows how many more breadcrumbs they have to throw?”

Bob: “Greta, look at how much of that sandwich her kid didn’t eat. The kid is already in the water. He’s done with that. His mom will toss it to us in pieces; just watch. I’ve seen it a million times!”

Larry: “Can you really say so for sure, though, Bob? I mean, she may decide to wrap it up and take it back to the hotel with them. I’m with Greta; it’s really hard to tell at this point.”

Phil: “Hey, what was that, Bob? You just stole my bread! That breadcrumb was clearly intended for me. You can’t just intercept a crumb toss when it’s made directly to another seagull! We’re civilized seagulls. It’s against our rules of engagement!”

Bob: “What’s that you said, Phil? Can’t hear you; I’m making too much noise while I eat this bread.”

Phil: “Okay, that’s it, pal--”

Larry: “Calm down, you two. Look, we’re going to be out here working this seashore together long after this woman and her kid go back to Topeka or whatever waterless nightmare they live in. Let’s try to do this in a more orderly way. Okay?”

Greta: “Oh, I love a seagull with a logical mind. Hey, Larry, do you want to maybe get together later tonight?”

Phil: “Yes! I finally got one; I’m flying over there to eat it because I don’t trust you seagulls!”

Bob: “Great. And now she’s wrapping up the leftovers to take with them, just like Larry predicted. We will never hear the end of this now.”

Larry: “I’m just an astute observer of human nature, Bob. Maybe you should do more chasing crumbs and less taunting Phil.”

Bob: “Forget all of you, I’m going to fly over there to look for more dumb tourists.”
