I went to school in the UK where, at the end of our final year, our school organizes a Formal. This is similar to a prom, but with less pressure over bringing a date so promposals are not as common.
Nearly 10 years ago, my Formal was coming up and I had a massive crush on this girl. I had liked her for years and sometimes did the things teenage guys do, like negging, to get her attention. Admittedly, I had also done some awkward things like figuring out where she lived by spotting her dad's car, getting her phone number off a mutual friend, and once I took a few strands of her hair. With the the Formal coming up, I decided to be brave and plan a promposal to ask her to go with me. 
I made a sign asking her to be my date and presented it to her outside of the entire school. To my horror, she quickly said no and walked away. She didn't give any explanation or apologize for her rejection. I couldn't believe it. I tried to ask her multiple times throughout the day and told her it was cruel and mean to reject me the way she had. Some of my friends also tried to get her to at least talk to me about it. She didn't answer any of us. I was really hurt by it. 
It's been nearly a decade, but I haven't recovered from the brutal rejection. It shattered my self-confidence and made it difficult for me to date at all. Honestly, it was so embarassing. 
Recently, a friend of mine ran into this girl while she was visiting town. He told her how I had been affected by her rejection and instead of apologizing, she told him about everything I did as a teenager that she found uncomfortable and creepy. I think she exaggerated a bit, but my friend confronted me about it and I tried to explain how it was just emotional teenage stuff. My friend then went around town telling all of our friends about this new drama. Our friends are divided as some of them knew everything at the time and agree it was just teenage stupidity. My parents found out, though, and are now pissed at me for my behaviour and said that they might not let me take over the family farm over this. Thety might give it to my younger brother instead. This would destory everything I've worked for and completely ruin my life. I don't understand why this girl is doing this to me all over again so many years later.
