Sure! If you've ever gotten so consumed in a task that you forget about the outside world and completely lose track of time, you were likely in a state of flow. It may be commonly referred to as being "in the zone." “Flow” and “flow state” are both terms frequently used in psychology and happiness research. Achieving flow is different than daydreaming, but activates the same part of the brain called the default mode network (DMN). The brain is relaxed when daydreaming, or doing nothing essentially. Interestingly, even though the brain is putting in thoughtful effort in flow, it is enjoyable and relaxing to the brain rather than feeling like work. It actually suppresses anxiety and frees up other parts of the brain to make meaningful connections. 

As the understanding of flow increases, more and more people are looking to see how they can achieve flow. Here are some things you can do to set yourself up to flow: 

1. Set clear goals: First, it’s important to have a defined goal involving the task at hand. A finite goal is more beneficial than a time-oriented goal, as it is more likely to emit a feeling of accomplishment once the goal is met, or the task is finished. 
2. Find things that are the right amount of challenging: If a task or activity is too difficult, it’s hard for the brain to be relaxed enough to be in a flow state. However, the brain needs enough challenge for the brain to see it as interesting and engaging.  
3. Create an environment for focus: This means doing what you need to do to eliminate distractions. This also includes carving out time to achieve flow where you know you won’t be interrupted. 
4. Don’t forget about self-care: Oftentimes in a flow state, people don’t feel thirsty or need to use the bathroom or end up sitting in the same position for a long period that’s not necessarily ergonomic friendly. In order to achieve longer-lasting flow states and take of yourself at the same time, invest the time or energy into getting set up right by doing things like having water readily available or sitting in a proper ergonomic chair. 
5. Put away your phone: This deserves a category in itself because our phones can be the biggest distraction. Turn it off, switch it on do not disturb, or keep it out of sight. Do whatever you need to do to not be tempted to pick up your phone. 
6. Develop a pre-flow ritual: This can involve a number of things like checking your email and messages before tuning in to your work or activity, putting on a designated playlist, doing jumping jacks, etc. It’s more about whatever works for you to clear your mind and set you up for focus. 
7. Get to know yourself: It may take a bit of trial and error to find what works best for you to achieve flow. You can’t enjoy everything, but you can make most things enjoyable by knowing what motivates you and helps you get into a state of flow. 

Psychology experts have determined that flow is associated with increased dopamine, which plays a huge role in regulating mood and motivation. It's also been determined that you can go in and out of flow and have multiple flow states per day, but 90-120 minutes is an optimal flow state for many people. It’s good to want to achieve flow as often as possible in whatever you are doing for overall health and well-being.
