Driving through New York City in the early morning traffic, Rachel realizes she should have left earlier. She speeds into the parking garage trying to get to the meeting that started ten minutes ago. Grabbing her laptop and purse, she sprints to the elevator, pressing the button repeatedly with great urgency. It seems like an eternity before the door opens. She paces back and forth anxiously waiting. Finally, the door opens and she runs in, pressing the button to the 25th floor. Reaching her floor and going to her office, she throws her purse and grabs the coffee waiting for her on the desk. Thank God for her assistance.

Drake looks around the room and then says, “Okay everyone, let’s begin with this week’s assignments.” Rachel works for Brand Magazine. The magazine covers areas of interest like politics, celebrity news, heartwarming stories, beauty secrets, and basically, any story that causes a sensation. All writers fight to get the best stories of the week. She keeps asking Drake to give her a big assignment. He promises ‘next time’ each week, but never delivers. He tells her he considers all material newsworthy and the best story. It’s up to the writer to be creative and turn it into the greatest story. 

Circling the table, he gives each a package of information regarding a specific topic. Looking at Rachel and holding the package in front of her, he tells her this is a special assignment. Turning his attention to the group, he says, “I’m sure all of you know that Mrs. Vanders of the well-known Vanders Estate is in poor health. The magazine has given an all-access interview about the history of the family. Mrs. Vanders is the last of the matriarchs of the Vanders family members. Rachel has been assigned to go to the estate. At the end of two weeks, she will submit the story of their extravagant history. Mrs. Vanders has agreed to share any information you need but insists she will need to sign off on the final print. I want this piece to be emotional and riveting, leaving our readers mourning her passing when it comes. He hands her the information package and says, “See me if you have questions.”

As Rachel reads through the information package, she realizes that this is the big break she has been waiting for.
