Okay, so you know how we have television, and we send each other letters, and we call each other on the phone? Well, the internet is this thing that allows us to do all of that and more, with everyone around the world. So, you know about computers, right? Well, the internet is essentially a whole network of connected computers, much smaller than the ones you have, all around the world. At first, we connected to each other through phone lines, but technology gave us faster and easier ways to do that. And at first, we could just do basic stuff like send each other electronic mail, or "email." You would type your message on the keyboard, which was like a set of typewriter keys, and the words you typed showed up on the monitor, which is like a TV screen. Then you'd send the message to the email address (which is like kinda a real address) of the person. And any emails that came to you would show up on screen, in a list. Each email has a title or subject, and then the main part of the email has the message you sent.

At first, we primarily sent emails and we would go to what are called websites, which were kind of like a set of newspaper pages. And as technology got better, we could do more - we could watch television-like videos on websites, and we could also make videos using cameras like you have now, but more advanced. You could also record music, and other people could listen to it. The internet became fast enough and easy to use that a website called YouTube was created, where people around the world could make videos, and others around the world could watch them. Now, technology is so advanced that there are websites where individual people broadcast live, on millions of channels, and people can talk to each other and the person on the channel, by typing to each other. We're also able to play games with each other around the world. You can play chess with someone in China, or have a conversation with someone in Britain. It's as if they're in the room with you. You can see AND talk to them. Technology is amazing!
