Question 1: What was the name of the column by former First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt? 
Answer 1: My Day

Question 2: Did Japanese Americans hold citizenship during the time period around WW2? 
Answer 2: Some did and some did not. First-generation Japanese, Issei, were barred from obtaining citizenship under the 1790 Naturalization Act. Second-generation Japanese, Nisei, were allowed citizenship due to being born in the United States. 

Question 3:  Was it before or after the attack on Pearl Harbor when the first lady publicly stated that if the country entered the war, the government would not discriminate against any law-abiding non-citizens living in the United States?
Answer 3: The First Lady publicly stated this on December 4, 1941—three days before the Pearl Harbor attack

Question 4: After the U.S. declared war on Japan on December 8, the Treasury Department froze all assets of Issei (first-generation Japanese American) residents. True or false?
Answer 4: True

Question 5: Was Attorney General Francis Biddle for or against the mass evacuation of Japanese Americans during the war?
Answer 5: Biddle was of Mrs. Roosevelt's allies within FDR’s administration. He tried to advise the president against mass evacuation. But when it became clear that FDR was going to issue an executive order authorizing the forced removal and internment of Japanese Americans, Biddle declined to have the Justice Department intervene.

Question 6: What led to the United States forcing more than 100,000 Japanese Americans out of their homes and into remote military internment camps?
Answer 6: Two months after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor—President Franklin Delano Roosevelt signed an executive order establishing the forced imprisonment, or internment, of Japanese Americans. 

Question 7: Did First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt publicly oppose her husband's actions against Japanese Americans? 
Answer 7: As first lady, Eleanor Roosevelt could not and did not want to publicly disagree with her husband’s executive order. (Despite their disagreements, she was a fierce protector of FDR’s image and legacy.) Instead, she attempted to assist Japanese Americans who were in the camps, while publicly praising their loyalty and work ethic in order to convince other Americans that they were not a threat.

Question 8: Why did the First Lady help develop the National Japanese American Student Relocation Council in May 1942?
Answer 8: This was the product of her advocating for a program to transfer Nisei students out of the camps so they could go to college.

Question 9: Did the government allow the First Lady to visit the internment camps?
Answer 9: She asked the Department of War in 1942 if she could visit one of the camps. They denied her request. When she asked again if she could visit a camp in early 1943, government officials were more amenable.

Question 10: When did Mrs. Roosevelt praise the internees as hard-working, law-abiding and loyal to the United States in an interview with the Los Angeles Times? She said that “The sooner we get the young Japanese out of the camps, the better.”
Answer 10: After she made an approved public visit to the Gila River Relocation Center in Pinal County, Arizona.
