Business Summary

Our business is called "Captain Cookies". We are a small business in Hawaii that makes a variety of cookies for any occasion. We have been in business since 2019 and continued to do business despite the pandemic, selling our cookies from home to local stores, businesses, and even online.

Since 2019, Captain Cookies has sold a total of $300,000 worth of cookies to stores and businesses around the world. However, the number of cookies we make in our tiny kitchen cannot meet the overwhelming demand we have received recently due to a hugely successful TikTok campaign that came out several months ago and created a craze for our product.

Therefore, we are now applying for a loan of $100,000 to help our business meet the growing demand for our cookies.

Business Plan

Our business plan involves the following:

1. Leasing a new 1,000-square-foot warehouse building;
2. Purchasing the necessary equipment (ovens, mixers) and packaging (plastic bags, twist ties, labels) to make and package 1,000 cookies a day, which would be an increase from the 200 cookies we currently produce from our current kitchen;
3. Paying for utilities (electricity, Internet access for POS systems, and online sales).

5-Year Plan

The 5-year plan for Captain Cookies will see our company expanding from a single kitchen to a larger warehouse kitchen that will accommodate the increase in demand for our cookies. Within the first year, we plan to start a business relationship with a large international coffee chain that operates from Washington State; this coffee chain has agreed to purchase 10,000 cookies for a first purchase order for one of their local stores as a test market, with the agreement to buy an additional 100,000 cookies if that particular campaign is successful.

We plan to do approximately $500,000 in sales by year three. By year five, we anticipate that with current sales, as well as the added relationship with the coffee chain and catering to a larger online market, we will do approximately $1 million in sales. We anticipate making our final payment on the loan before year four.
