The multichain-bridge Multichain is often used to swap popular tokens such as WETH or USDC between blockchains. Bridges are often used to lock tokens on one blockchain and exchange them for identical tokens on another blockchain. Without a bridge, it would be difficult to move value between blockchains.
Some smaller blockchains like Fantom have heavily used Multichain. Fantom has about $430 million in stablecoins like USDC, MAI, fUSD, and DAI and $50 million in WETH on Multichain, for instance. Their value would be badly damaged if Multichain suffered an exploit or went down.
Bridges are often vulnerable to multi-million-dollar exploits. Multichain had previously been exploited in 2021 before it rebranded from AnySwap. Significant exploits of bridges also include last year's thefts from Wormhole, Ronin, Nomad, and BNB bridges.
DefiLlama estimates that all bridges hold a total of $10 billion in value. This makes them the fourth largest category of DeFi by value held. Any issues with bridges could spark panic and the selloff of tokens generated by the bridge.
Multichain currently holds $1.5 billion in assets. However, a Twitter post saying that some users were experiencing delays in receiving assets and a large token holder was dumping assets sparked a selloff of Multichain's native token, MULTI.
Blockchain data indicated a transfer of 500,000 MULTI, worth about $3.2 million at the time of transfer, to a centralized exchange named Gate.IO. The MULTI was presumably sold.
A Chinese-language Twitter account picked up traction. Twitter's automated translation service may have provided a poor translation, but it seemed to say that Multichain's team may have been arrested and funds were frozen. Twitter users picked up on the rumor, surmising that Chinese authorities may have arrested the team.
Multichain did not provide many details about its status besides allowing that an upgrade may have delayed some routes and responding to the rumors in a way that only added more ambiguity. It cited "force majeure" as a reason that some cross-chain routes were unavailable. It promised that service would be restored and assets credited as soon as possible. The lack of clarity added to the panic and the selloff of MULTI.
The value of MULTI has dropped from $6.50 to below $4.90 and continues to drop. Some exchanges such as Binance have suspended deposits of some Multichain-based assets.
