After parking the car, Mike climbed out of the driver's seat and took a long, deep breath as he took in the familiar view. The trees and wildflowers seemed to sway and bob their heads in greeting, saying, "Hello again, old friend." In the distance, sunlight sparkled on the surface of the lake. The scent of pine and damp moss was underscored by the smell of burning firewood, and Mike saw smoke rising from the cabin's chimney. His sister Phoebe and her husband Jamal must have arrived hours ago. 

"What's the wifi password?" his son, Charlie, asked, stepping out of the car without so much as a glance up at the cabin. 

"No wifi here, buddy." 

"What?" Charlie squawked, incredulous. "How could you not warn me before we left?" 

In retrospect, Mike thought, perhaps he should have allowed his son to bring a friend along. Most of Charlie’s friends were unsavory James Dean types, but even a bad influence would be better than total isolation and cold turkey wifi withdrawal for a week. 

His daughter Nina was next to climb out of the car, popping the trunk to make sure her luggage hadn't been damaged on the drive. It was obvious that Nina had packed for a vacation entirely different from the one she was actually on; her strappy sandals and cream linen jumpsuit wouldn’t last an hour before the mud surrounding the cabin irreparably soiled the clothes and the jagged rocks punched holes in her leather soles. She stood by the trunk, tapping her feet for a minute before Mike caught her eye.

“Sorry,” Mike teased, “Bellhop’s on break right now, so you’ll have to carry those bags in yourself.”

Nina sighed, rolled her eyes, and wrenched her duffel from the pile. 

On the back porch, Mike found his sister serving a tray of freshly baked biscuits--a family tradition. 

"Hey, brother," she grinned as he planted a kiss on her cheek. "You're just in time." 

Mike greeted Phoebe and Jamal briefly but didn't make any small talk. Not yet. Phoebe twisted the dusty lid off an old glass jar and offered Mike a butter knife. "For old time's sake?"

Mike slathered a biscuit with butter and his grandmother’s incomparable raspberry jam, then sank his teeth in with a sigh as he gazed over the treetops.
