“Get out of my country!” shouted the driver as I drove past him in the narrow parking lot. 

I clenched my jaw and gripped the gear shift, ready to chase him down. Taking a deep breath, I relaxed my muscles, collected my thoughts, and parked the car. I replayed those words in my head, my blood boiling up to my ears, and I kept coming back to the same question: I’ve been on the receiving end of much worse before, why am I so furious? I then realized who those words were from. That driver was a fellow American, someone who I could have stood shoulder-to-shoulder with at a World Cup game cheering for the same country. This thought infuriated me and made me question the depth of the American spirit in the United States. 

Back in my apartment, I tried to come to terms with the fact that people from all walks of life, even Americans, can discriminate. It took much self-restraint for me not to start that car chase and I was proud of myself for showing restraint. As someone who wasn’t always good at remaining calm, I have grown tremendously in controlling my temper over the past few years. Before that day, the concept of the American spirit was still largely a hazy idea for me. I vaguely believed Americans should focus on helping themselves before helping others when they are in need, even if that need is intangible like cultural acceptance. However, my encounter with that driver helped develop my belief about the American spirit: the American spirit is the continuous never-ending cycle of self-improvement and helping others. These two ideas of simultaneous self-improvement and helping others are both necessary in building a grounded foundation and it is up to each true American to find his or her style. Sometimes it is not so straightforward, and almost always, it is not easy. On that day, I focused on composure and having a mature response. This in turn stopped me from compounding the driver’s hate with my hate and that was about as much help as I could give him. In reality, anybody can simply be an American by legal definition, but fully embodying the American spirit is much more meaningful. This realization continues to grow my appreciation and admiration for those with true American spirit.
