- Mendacity 
The tendency or compulsion to lie. 

Synonyms: dishonesty, untruthfulness, deception
Antonyms: sincerity, truthfulness, frankness

“He was well-known for his mendacity, so it was difficult to believe a word of his story now.”  


- Unguent 
The healing salve or cream that you put on an injury. 

Synonyms: ointment, balm, remedy
Antonyms: irritant

“Unguent was applied liberally to protect the wound from infections while it healed.” 


- Aspirant 
Someone that strives for success and is known as an ambitious person. 

Synonyms: aspirational, hopeful, wishful 
Antonyms: uninspired, non-contender, uncompetitive 

“She rose through the ranks of her career field with high hopes and an aspirant attitude.” 


- Mawkish 
Overly sappy or sentimental to an excessive degree. 

Synonyms: mushy, bathetic, emotional 
Antonyms: calm, rational, serious 

“The love letter was mawkish and insincere, written in the sappy style of famous romantic movies.” 


- Deplore 
To express strong disapproval or distaste of someone or a situation.  

Synonyms: criticize, curse, bemoan
Antonyms: admire, adore, applaud 

“She felt it was in her nature to deplore the taste of brussels sprouts.”  


- Sapience 
The trait of being wise or highly intelligent in a situation that requires knowledge or experience. 

Synonyms: wisdom, soundness, smarts 
Antonyms: folly, stupidity, ignorance 

“The professor impressed with the utmost sapience in his field of education.” 


- Impudence 
A shameless nature or impertinent act.

Synonyms: insolence, cheekiness, rudeness
Antonyms: friendliness, kindness, courtesy

“Her impudence and entitlement ruined the first impression of her natural beauty.” 


- Sinuous 
To curve, wind, or bend. 

Synonyms: serpentine, windy, twisty
Antonyms: straight, direct, linear

“The oak tree stood intimidating and sinuous, stretching towards the sky in every direction.”


- Pander 
To appease, indulge, or gratify. 

Synonyms: cater, ply, provide 
Antonyms: refuse, deny

“To win votes, the politician would pander to the outcries of the public.” 


- Putrescent 
To rot or decay.

Synonyms: decompose, rancid, deteriorate
Antonyms: fresh, pure, clean 

“The dog yipped and pulled on his leash, leading the jogger to a putrescent pile of bones in the forest.”
