The gig economy is booming. There are many side hustles you can do both in person and virtually if you'd like to earn extra money or develop a passive income. Here are some ideas for things you could do on the side to make money while still working a traditional day job:

1. Edit Videos. Oftentimes brands need to produce promotional materials but don't necessarily have the time or expertise to do it in-house, so they hire freelancers to edit video content. 
2. Sell NFTs. Non-fungible tokens are used to buy and sell products online. If you have something creative to sell, NFTs can be a great way to turn a steady profit. 
3. Be a social media manager. Many companies or small businesses need a social media presence but don't necessarily want to deal with posting and coming up with good content all of the time. This is why many businesses will hire someone else to do this for them. 
4. Be a virtual assistant. This is a straightforward side hustle that can be done from anywhere. 
5. House sit. Housesitting is an industry in itself where people that have second homes or go on vacation but want someone to look after their space, including pets and plants, hire other people to do so. 
6. Teach a language. You don't necessarily have to be bilingual to teach your native language to others, and this can be done virtually or in person. 
7. Rent out your space. Airbnb has made it super simple and profitable to rent out your spare room or your entire home if you aren't using it. 
8. Sell products on Etsy. These can be physical products or digital designs like branding or spreadsheets, for example. 
9. Drive for a rideshare company. If you have a car, driving for Uber or Lyft in your downtime or on the weekends is a great way to earn money on the side. 
10. Deliver food. Depending on where you live, delivering food through Postmates or Deliveroo can be a substantial side hustle and you don't even need a car. 
11. Write an e-book. Since it's possible to self-publish, there's no downside to creating an e-book on a topic you're familiar with and selling it on Amazon. 
12. Create an online course. This is another thing that may require a good amount of work upfront, but can eventually turn into a passive income.
