Here is a list of three ways people can reduce their medical anxiety:
1) Work with a Primary Care Physician. By developing a relationship with a single doctor who can access all of your health records, you are gaining access to someone who can help ease any sense of paranoia you may be experiencing. Not only can they give you answers to possible problems you're having, but they are trained to help you through all sorts of concerns you have regarding your health and they will be able to refer you to a therapist if necessary. It's helpful to disclose that you are experiencing health anxiety so they can work with you on record keeping, tracking the actual state of your health, and avoiding costly and unnecessary screening tests.
2) Live a healthier lifestyle. If you are worried about your physical health, it may help to improve your lifestyle. When your body feels good, your mind does too. Try exercising, eating healthier, and drinking more water. There's also more that goes into a healthier lifestyle, like interaction. Stay active in your community, make new friends, try new hobbies, and go out of your comfort zone.
3) Regularly attend check-ups. Don't miss any check-ups, whether it be for a doctor, dentist, or another specialist. While you're at these check-ups, ask any questions you have about your health and share your concerns with them. They can help you feel better about any medical anxiety you have.
4) Meditate. Meditation is a way to feel your body and appreciate it, even when it doesn't feel perfectly comfortable. By meditating, you are practicing looking deeper within and experiencing what your body is feeling. You'll have a better understanding of your body and what's going on with it through meditation. Meditation is also relaxing and can help ease your feelings of anxiety. Along with that, meditation can help you to understand the signals your body is sending so that you can practice regular and effective self-care rather than rushing to a doctor's office to address every passing ache and pain.
