209003 was its name. But the colonists called it Mesiea’s Bite. Her heart was bitter, and her icy tundra was unforgiving of carelessness, or even simple bad luck. Mesiea would kill you if she could. Most of the planet remained uncharted. The cold wreaked havoc on machines and travel was difficult, preventing widespread exploration.

The dawn light reflected faintly on the snow-covered peaks. Soon, as the planet warmed, the Woolies would come down to the frosty plains to graze. Alistair prepared for the hunt, his economical movements a display of controlled elegance. The thick, white thermal gear he wore would keep him warm and hide him from view. The native Woolies had sharp eyesight and an even sharper sense of smell and provided a critical source of food for the colonists. 

He slung his energy bow, an elegant weapon both powerful and quiet, an ancient art reborn for use on a hostile planet. The slender bolts of energy it fired resembled arrows only in the barest sense. They maintained their form just long enough to puncture the target. Alistair could configure the shape of the energy bolts to cause maximum damage to large prey or a more delicate but still deadly missile for smaller game. Today, he was opting for a heavy bolt. 

He finished strapping his gear on and pushed open the heavy door. A lighter version of an airlock door, it was superb for keeping Mesiea’s bitter chill out of the habitat. His storm-gray eyes scanned the white expanse of untamed wilderness. He lowered his face shield and instantly the blinding glare subsided and he could detect variations in the landscape. Subtle slopes and crags revealed themselves. It would be a long hike before he was far enough from the habitat to reach the Woolies' grazing area. He checked his equipment once more. Equipment failures were fatal for the careless. His understanding of the terrain, a sign of his survival skills, allowed him to move through it effectively. His heart soared. He allowed himself to feel his fierce love for the icy planet, then set his feelings aside. Respect, not love, would keep him alive today.
