While all martial arts are designed to give you a good workout and promote self-defense, here is a list of 5 martial arts that you could learn that will give you the most "bang for your buck":

1. Brazilian Jiujitsu - One of the best martial arts for both self-defense and a killer workout, Brazilian Jiujitsu (BJJ) provides practitioners with real-world self-defense. Many fights end up on the ground, and those who are not used to maneuvering on their backs will find themselves defenseless, trying to protect against attacks from above. In addition to the self-defense skills you'll learn in BJJ, you'll also get a tremendous workout that is sure to tax your aerobic and anaerobic systems. 
2. Muay Thai - This martial art from Thailand is such a huge sport that modern mixed martial artists have incorporated it into their training regimens. Muay Thai is a form of kickboxing that also makes use of elbow and knee strikes, as well as throws and leg sweeps. A good defensive martial art teaches you to strike with multiple different parts of your body, and Muay Thai does just that. You'll also get a great cardio workout doing several rounds of Muay Thai kickboxing against a sparring partner or potential opponent.
3. Kung Fu/Wushu - Kung Fu and Wushu are Chinese martial arts that have been around for centuries. While Kung Fu can mean anything that requires skill (i.e., you can have good "Kung Fu" washing dishes or driving a car), the martial art of Kung Fu is specifically a fighting art that teaches multiple stances, punches, and kicks, the most popular of which mimic the movements of animals like the snake, the crane, and the tiger. A great workout can be had practicing stances and forms that require you to stand in unusual positions, such as a horse stance, for several minutes at a time. Wushu (the competitive version of Kung Fu) stresses the importance of performative martial art through high jumps and kicks, twirls, flips, and other choreographed moves.
4. Judo - Much like the other grappling arts, Judo is a Japanese art that involves throwing one's opponent and also using their momentum and body weight against themselves. In addition to throws, Judo also practices grappling (both on the ground and while standing) and submissions (joint locks, strangles). Judo can be likened to lifting weights due to having to throw and carry your opponent, which can be tiring.
5. Karate - Karate, like its Chinese counterpart in Kung Fu, is a martial art that involves the use of strikes and stances. However, Karate's development in Japan created a martial art that promotes striking opponents hard and fast; straight punches and kicks that snap from the waist are favored over the flowery techniques of Kung Fu and Wushu. As with all the other martial arts listed above, Karate offers a great workout practicing striking and forms.
