Perhaps the most dreaded yet inevitable question that a freelancer is asked is, "What is your rate?" It's something that you need to consider and feel confident discussing very early on in your freelance career.

For some reason, for many freelance writers, it's uncomfortable to put a price on their worth, and sadly many freelancers sell themselves short. Obviously, it's important to consider your knowledge, skills, and experience, but price yourself with what you are comfortable earning so that you will continue to be motivated to keep up your freelance writing business for the long term. 

Here are some simplified steps to help you set your freelance writing rates. 

1. Start with some online research. It's good to get a grasp on what people are paying in your industry or niche. If you don't have one, that's fine too! Seeing the differences in pay may be a factor to consider if you're thinking of choosing a niche. You can go to any of the freelance job platforms you're now a part of to see what clients are listing their budget as (even though it's not always listed), what other writers' rates are, and their level of experience/background. 

2. Consider your professional and educational background. Even if you are new to freelance writing, any relevant experience can set you apart from others and provide a reason to charge a higher rate. This has its limits obviously, you must have the skill to back it up. If you have a degree in English or journalism, that sets you apart. Obviously, if you don't have a writing background or other credentials, this doesn't mean that you can't be a freelance writer, it just means that you may have to start at a lower rate until you have successfully completed a few projects and have some good reviews under your belt. 

3. Consider the budget of potential clients. It's important to know what clients you are targeting. If you want to take on a client with a startup business, they will likely offer lower pay because that may be all that's in the budget. If you target more established businesses or individuals to write for, there may be more room for negotiation on your rate or the project cost.
