It all rested on this moment. For centuries, the tyranny of the mammoth's reign rendered the tribe to live in fear and famine, but no longer. It towered over the small tribe of 20, like ants to an anteater, it was over 50 grown men tall, and each footstep it took ravaged the ground, forcing them to regain their footing. Each breath it took from its coiling trunk had enough force to knock them clean off their feet, and its menacingly sharp ivory tusks could pierce them like a knife through butter. Despite all this, none around it showed signs of backing down. They had families and friends to protect, and knew in unison, that they could defeat it. It was slowing down. The mammoth had already claimed the lives of many; men, women, children, and animals. It bore no difference to the behemoth, for it killed anything its crimson, sinister eyes gazed upon.

The tribe slowly circled it. Spears of stone and shields of wood in hand, they would rhythmically bang the two together, an ensemble of cymbals followed by chants of valor. In their language, it meant "to do or die". Though they flowed around the beast like water, not one of them possessed liquid courage of any sort. In a burst of energy, they would lunge forward, swiping, stabbing, and piercing the Mammoth's feet. Each attempt may have looked futile, but it was death by a thousand cuts. The woolly demon would buck and sway, its deafening yowl didn't seem to phase any member of the tribe. The tribe's roars and chants were the opposing force in this cacophonous symphony.

One by one, each would lunge and deftly dodge the towering beast's legs. They knew it would only take one hit for their lives to be over, so they could afford no mistakes. The mammoth would aggressively spin its body around, hoping to slice anything in its range with its blade-like tusks, but the tribe responded in kind. They would skilfully dodge the beast's rage and strike back in kind. Bit by bit, they struck in tandem. Suddenly, the mammoth let out a disorienting wail and slumped to the ground. The tribe members in a moment of disbelief, stopped their chants and waited in suspense. The mammoth did not move. They had done it!
