Here are some exercises you can do to train your legs without needing weights. 

1. Squats
Squats have long been regarded as the best way to build strong legs and butt. The squat mainly works your quads, glutes, and core but will also work your hamstrings to a lesser extent.

To do a squat stand with your feet hip or shoulder width apart in a stable stance. From there, push your hips back as if you were going to sit down. While the hips are moving back, let your knees bend and move down until you feel the strain. Be sure to try and maintain vertical shins throughout the exercise. Once you are at your lowest point, you can begin to push yourself back up to a standing position. You can make this harder by adding a heavy backpack or holding something in each hand so long as the objects are equal in weight.

2. Jump Squat
Similar to the standard squat, you can use a jump squat to improve your power and increase the intensity of the exercise. A jump squat will be more beneficial when building your fast-twitch muscle fibers. 

Performing a jump squat is as easy as it sounds. Start off in a squat position and perform a standard squat. Once you are at your low point, use the power in your legs to jump up and make sure to land softly in the same position you started. Try to maintain form with this exercise. Keeping your legs controlled when jumping will also help to increase core strength. 

3. Lunge
A lunge requires immense stability as you split your hips in half. A great exercise for your glutes, quads, and hamstrings, a lunge can be done pretty much anywhere. A lunge will also help you work your hip stabilizers as you try to maintain balance. 

A lunge is done by standing in a normal position with your feet. From here, extend one leg backward until both of your knees are at a 90-degree angle. Your front knee should not go past your toes. From here, push off with your back leg to regain your original stance. Repeat this for both legs as many times as you wish.

4. Jump Lunge
Just as a jump squat increases your fast-twitch muscle fibers, so will a jump lunge. A great exercise for building power in your legs. This exercise is not easy, so be careful when trying it, and ensure you are comfortable with a standard lunge first. 

To do a Jump lunge, get into a lunge position as you would normally. From the point where your knees are bent, you can now jump up and alternate your legs in the air. This should be performed in a controlled way so that you land softly. 

5. Side Lunge
A side lunge is similar to a normal lunge but has key differences. Firstly this exercise will work your abductors, glutes, and quads. Working different leg muscles on a lateral plane rather than a linear one is a good exercise. This is important as the range of motion we experience with our legs daily is large. 

Start off in a standing position. Next, move one leg out to the side. Imagine it's just one leg in a normal squat position. Your knee should be bent but not past your toes. Your other leg should be straight. From here, simply return to standing and alternate the legs as you go. 

6. Sumo Squat
We've done normal squats, so now here is the sumo squat. The sumo squat pays particular attention to your adductors, glutes, and quads. 

Start off by standing as a sumo with your legs wider than your shoulders to where it is comfortable. Keep your toes slightly pointed away from your body. From this position, perform a squat as you would usually, and again, be sure that your knee doesn't extend past your foot and that your shin stays as vertical as it can.
