If you had a love of jigsaw puzzles as a child, grab another and get to work! Jigsaw puzzles benefit adults in many ways.

Working on a Puzzle Improves  Memory
While working a puzzle, your brain utilizes existing connections in your brain cells, but you'll also increase the generation of new relationships. Because new relationships are forming your mental speed and thought processes increase. Further, puzzles improve your short-term memory.

Puzzles Improve Problem-Solving Skills
Completing a puzzle requires different approaches and techniques because there's a lot of trial and error involved. You may not realize you are testing different ways to efficiently complete the puzzle, changing up your methods, and learning to deal with failure while working a puzzle. 

All these skills can easily be transferred and valuable to our work life.

Puzzles Improve Visual-Spatial Reasoning

Visual-Spatial reasoning is a valuable skill to have when driving a car, packing for a move, using a map, and more.
When solving a puzzle, looking at different pieces and figuring out where they fit within the larger picture. improves our visual-spatial reasoning.

Working Puzzles Increases IQ
Because puzzles improve our memory and overall reasoning. it shouldn’t come as a surprise that one of the other benefits of puzzles is that they help raise our IQ (intelligence quotient).
One researcher from the University of Michigan even found that adults spending 25 minutes per day on a puzzle could boost their IQ by four points.

Improved Mood
Working on a puzzle increases our brain’s production of dopamine.

Dopamine is a neurotransmitter that regulates mood and feelings of optimism. It also affects memory, concentration, and motivation.

Once a puzzle is completed successfully, dopamine is released. In fact, each time even a single piece is fitted into the puzzle dopamine is released. This encourages us to continue working on solving them and challenging ourselves.

Puzzles Lower Stress Levels
Puzzles challenge us but they also help us to relax. Your brain goes into a relaxed state while concentrating and this produces a sense of calm
