Here are five exercises you can do to grow your arms. 

1. Dead hang pull-up. 
The dead hang pull-up is a variation of the standard pull-up and is excellent for working your biceps. Start by grabbing a pull-up bar underhanded so your palms are facing you. Your arms should be about shoulder-width apart. Hold your weight, cross your legs behind your body, and raise your feet slightly so your knees are bent. This is your starting position. To perform the exercise, pull yourself up so that your collarbone is in line with the bar. The trick to performing this exercise is to lower yourself at a slower pace. About 4 seconds will be best. Now repeat until you are unable to do any more. 

2. Rolling skull crusher with press. 
Start by lying on a bench with a dumbbell in each hand, raised straight above your chest. Now allow your elbows to bend so that the dumbbells fall beside your head in a controlled manner. Now reverse this motion so that the dumbbells are in the original position and perform a press like a bench press. Once you have completed all these motions, that's considered one rep. This exercise works your triceps and chest, so it's versatile when trying to build muscle. You can use a Swiss ball instead of a bench for more difficulty. This will work your abs as well. 

3. Drag curl.
Everyone knows that curls help to build your biceps and arms in general. This exercise is no different in that sense but is performed with some differences. Start by holding the barbell with a shoulder-width, underhand grip. Now you should pull your shoulders down and back. When doing this, you should drag the bar up the front of your body, keep your elbows around, and slowly lower the barbell. To work slightly harder, try using dumbbells instead of a barbell. 

4. Grasshopper pushup.
Like curls, pushups are renowned as an excellent exercise for building muscle and strength. This variation pays particular attention to your arms. To perform this exercise, get in a standard pushup position, but instead of having your palms open, use your fists to stabilize yourself.  The inside of your hands should be facing each other. Once in this position, you perform a pushup as usual by lowering your chest to the ground and pushing back up to start. If this hurts your fists, you can face your fingers out to work the same muscles. 

5. Supinated cable row. 
To perform this exercise, you will need a cable station. Use the low pulley on the cable station and attach a straight bar. Using an underhand grip, shoulder width apart, row the bar towards your belly button and return with control. Keep your hips back and your stance soft so that your torso is around 45 degrees angle to vertical. You can also do this with a barbell once you have mastered the exercise with the cable station.
