Tweet 1:
Your personal finances are important. 

Strong finances can give you confidence in your present and future life. A personal financial review is one way to make sure everything is in check. 

See this thread for a breakdown of how to keep your finances in check. (Pardon the pun)

Tweet 2:
Start with your debt and assets. 

Write down all your assets, their value, and the expected appreciation/depreciation rate. Your assets include your house, car, accounts, and valuable collectibles. Now calculate your debts and be sure to include the value and rate of interest. 

Once done, you can calculate your net worth by taking your debts from your assets. 

Tweet 3:
Assess your debts. 

In step one, we wrote down our debts and interest rates. Look at this data and determine if it is needed to accelerate paying it off. Paying off debt can save you heaps of money in interest over the long term. Something as simple as paying your mortgage off Bi-Weekly instead of monthly can save you thousands in interest. 

The snowball or avalanche methods may be an excellent place to start. 

Tweet 4:
Calculate your income. 

What money is available to you every month? Factor in every single source of income you have, whether that's your 9-5, your side hustle, or any benefits you may receive. This is the money you have to work with, and it is crucial you try to keep expenses below this number to grow wealth. 

Income can come from a variety of sources. Some people make good money from their side hustle selling eggs. 

Tweet 5:
Spend analysis. 

It's a long, tedious process, but categorizing and analyzing your spending is invaluable when improving your finances. By taking your bank statements and categorizing your transactions, you can get a real insight into where your money goes each month. 

You will likely be shocked by what you find. 

Tweet 6: 
Build that budget.

So you have your income and know what you spend your money on. Great. This exercise should be easy if you spend less than you make each month. If not, then prepare to make some sacrifices. Every unique category from your spending analysis now forms your budget categories. Populate these categories with figures making sure to account for your savings goals and debt payments. 

DO NOT EXCEED YOUR BUDGET.
