Here is a rewrite of the list of top books in fiction and poetry from 2017. I have redacted the names of the publishers and the cost of the books. Each listing is rewritten as questions and answers using facts about the books, with some language variations throughout.

1.  Question: That book by author Omar El Akkad, called American War, what's it about?
Answer: The debut novel American Civil War imagines the events that lead up to and follow the Second American Civil War at the turn of the 22nd century.

2. Question: Which audacious novel is about small-town characters struggling to make sense of past family traumas?
Answer: The audacious novel that is about small-town characters struggling to make sense of past family traumas is called Anything is Possible by Elizabeth Strout.

3. Question: The author Ali Smith sets her novel Autumn during which period in history?
Answer: Ali Smith sets her novel Autumn in Britain after the Brexit vote.

4. Question: How many short stories does author Tessa Hadley serve up in the book Bad Dreams and Other Stories?
Answer: Author Tessa Hadley serves up 10 short stories in her book Bad Dreams and Other Stories.

5. Question: Who are the three main characters in Lawrence Osborne's book Beautiful Animals?
Answer: The three main characters in Lawrence Osborne's book Beautiful Animals are two wealthy young women and a handsome Syrian refugee.

6. Question: In Lidia Yuknavitch's novel The Book of Joan, what has happened to the Earth, circa 2049?
Answer: In Lidia Yuknavitch's novel The Book of Joan, Earth, circa 2049, has been devastated by global warming and war.

7. Question: What is the historical period in Rachel Seiffert's novel A Boy in Winter?
Answer: Rachel Seiffert's novel A Boy in Winter takes place in the same historical period when Hitler ruled.

8. Question: The author Victor LaValle combines which two literary genres in his book The Changeling?
Answer: The author Victor LaValle combines the two literary genres of social criticism and horror in his book The Changeling.

9. Question: The British novelist Jeanette Winterson wrote a collection of stories that are otherworldly and wickedly funny. What is the book called?
The British novelist Jeanette Winterson wrote a collection of stories that are otherworldly and wickedly funny. The book is called Christmas Days: 12 Stories and 12 Feasts for 12 Days.

10. Question: Which literary genre is explored by the author Peter Kimani in his book Dance of the Jakaranda?
Answer: The author Peter Kimani explores the literary genre of historical fiction in his book Dance of the Jakaranda.

11. Question: In Margaret Drabble's book The Dark Flood Rises, tell me something about the main character.
Answer: In Margaret Drabble's book The Dark Flood Rises, the main character is a 70-something woman who is on a road trip through England.

12. Question: What do the characters grapple with in Joshua Ferris' book The Dinner Party and Other Stories?
Answer: The characters grapple with anxiety, self-consciousness and humiliation in Joshua Ferris' book The Dinner Party and Other Stories.

13. Question: Sarah Perry in her novel The Essex Serpent links which two main characters?
Answer: Sarah Perry's novel The Essex Serpent links two main characters: an independent-minded widow and the possible haunting presence of a giant serpent.

14. Question: Name three books written by the author Moshin Hamid, including his newest novel.
Answer: Three books written by Moshin Hamid are The Reluctant Fundamentalist, How to Get Filthy Rich in Rising Asia and his newest novel, Exit West.

15. Question: What is the backdrop for Fast, a collection of poems by the author Jorie Graham?
Answer: Fast, a collection of poems by the author Jorie Graham, is set against a backdrop that includes her parents dying, her undergoing cancer treatment, and the nation mired in war and ecological crisis.

16. Question: What are the themes explored by James McBride in his book Five-Carat Soul?
Answer: The author James McBride in his book Five-Carat Soul explores the themes of race, masculinity, music and history.

17. Question: Disconnection and the divided self are themes explored in which book by which author? (Hint: the novel traces the lives of two Americans in Israel.)
Answer: Nicole Krause explores the themes of disconnection and the divided self in the novel Forest Dark, whose two main characters are two Americans in Israel.

18. Question: What do the numbers in the title of Paul Auster's book 4 3 2 1 refer to?
Answer: The numbers in the title of Paul Auster's book 4 3 2 1 refer to the four versions of the formative years of the main character, a Jewish boy born in Newark in 1947.

19. Question: Which novel did the author Jeffrey Eugenides write before his newest book Fresh Complaint: Stories?
Answer: Before the release of his newest book Fresh Complaint: Stories, the author Jeffrey Eugenides wrote the book The Marriage Plot in 2011.

20. Question: Louise Erdrich, the author of the book Future Home of the Living God, poses and answers what question in her new novel?
Answer: Louise Erdrich poses and answers the question "What if human beings are neither inevitable nor ultimate?" in her new novel Future Home of the Living God.

21. Question: The author Dylan Krieger, in his book Giving Godhead, mixes which two themes throughout the book?
Answer: The author Dylan Krieger, in his book Giving Godhead, mixes religious and obscene themes through his book of poetry.

22. Question: What is the setting for Emily Fridlund's book History of Wolves?
Answer: The story for Emily Fridlund's book History of Wolves unfolds in Minnesota's north woods.

23. Question: The author Kamila Shamsie structures the book Home Fire using which story of the past?
Answer: The author Kamila Shamsie structures the book Home Fire as a bold retelling of Sophocles' Antigone. The book follows the lives of three British siblings of Pakistani descent.

24. Question: The themes of loneliness, desire, hope and self-awareness themes explored by the author Ottessa Moshfegh in which book?
Answer: The themes of loneliness, desire, hope and self-awareness are themes explored by the author Ottessa Moshfegh in the book Homesick for Another World.

25. Question: Who is the main character in David Grossman's book A Horse Walks Into a Bar? 
Answer: The main character in David Grossman's book A Horse Walks Into a Bar is a tormented stand-up comedian. The book is translated by Jessica Cohen and combines comic dexterity with Portnoyish details.
