“We can hop out here,” Skye told the cab driver, who screeched to a halt at the curb. Embry saw her whisper something in the driver’s ear before opening the door. The driver stared straight ahead, then reached over to reset the meter. Embry never saw money change hands. 

Skye led him down a busy sidewalk crowded with drunk college students. They shouted and swayed, then gracelessly drifted aside as Skye drew near, clearing a path without ever noticing her presence. To an untrained eye, the whole scene might have looked choreographed. But now, Embry could see it for what it truly was: the sheer force of a sentient wind.

He grinned, following close in her wake. “Bet that never gets old, does it?” 

Skye shrugged. “I don’t know what you’re talking about.”

She steered them down a dark, narrow alley. Once the light and noise of Broome Street faded behind them, Embry heard the deep pulsing bass beat of dance music and the laughter of inebriated sophisticates ahead. Soon, his eyes found the club’s sign, though it was camouflaged to blend in with the surrounding fire escapes. 'Compass,' it read in black iron letters beside a compass rose.

Skye lowered her voice as they approached the door. “Follow my lead, okay? And uh… try not to look so lost. Those wide eyes and baby cheeks are just begging for attention.”

Embry puffed up his chest. “Maybe I could use some attention.”

Skye shook her head with a condescending smirk. “Not this kind.” She paused, meeting his questioning gaze. “Look, when you put this many Elementals in an enclosed space with booze, they inevitably start challenging each other to duels. You’re not ready for that. Just keep your head down.”

There was no line outside--only a few patrons smoking cigarettes. Embry tried not to gape at their outlandish outfits, but it wasn’t easy. The fabrics they wore were like nothing he’d ever seen, woven in shapes that defied gravity and colors that shifted from one second to the next. His gaze lingered on the tallest man among them, who wore a full body suit the texture of tree bark. The longer Embry stared, the less certain he became--was it a garment, or simply his skin?

“What did I just tell you?” Skye hissed, “Quit gawking!”

Embry flinched, tearing his gaze away.
