Congratulations on the interview for your dream job! 

As requested, the following four tips to ensure that you make a good impression to strengthen your odds of getting hired. 

Good luck! 

1. Be prepared with answers to commonplace interview questions. 

While no interview is the same as the one before it, there are commonplace questions that may be asked in each interview throughout your work history. For example: 

•	Where do you see yourself in 5 years? 10 years? 
•	Why do you want to work with our company? 
•	How would past employers describe your work ethic? 

Even though you’ve seen and been asked the same questions dozens of times, they can still throw you for a mental loop in a moment of nervousness. Prepare your answers beforehand. 

While not every question is one you can prepare for, there are topics that you know an interviewer will touch upon, such as your interest in the job and your skills for the position. Strive to have an outline of personal responses for anticipated commonplace interview questions and remember that you don’t have to be perfect – just genuine.  

2. Be aware of your body language and facial expressions during an interview. 

Don’t be robotic, but don’t be totally relaxed in your mannerisms either. Job interviews are professional settings where you strive to make a good first impression. Ergo, your body language and facial expressions should reflect your intent for and interest in the job. 

Work on a cordial handshake, make eye contact naturally with your interviewer and be attentive to control nervous tics, like constantly touching your nose or looking away. Interviewers understand that you are nervous, and nobody is perfect in how they cope with nervousness, but you should make an effort to leave behind a good first impression of professionalism and respect.  

3. Do your research on the company and ask questions at the end of the interview. 

Most potential employers will ask if you have any questions at the end of the interview. This is where you can show attentiveness with proof of research. You should know the ins and outs of the role you apply for, but inquire about the workplace environment with questions like: 

•	What is your vision for the company? 
•	What are your expectations of behavior and productivity in the workplace?
•	How can I contribute to this role positively? 

When you ask questions following an interview, it shows potential employers that you are self-aware and have a genuine interest in the job. 

4. Memorize the details of your resume and have answers ready for questions about your job and education history. 

It’s amazing what you can forget the moment when someone asks you a question about your history. Sometimes the nervousness of potentially landing a dream job can overwhelm your senses, so memorize and practice beforehand. You’ve lived your work and education histories, so you know them the best. Be prepared to answer questions about how well you did in education facets or what prompted you to leave one of your earliest work positions.
