Your wish is my command! Here’s the numbered list of Julia Roberts movies you wanted with a brief introduction:

Julia Roberts is one of the world’s best-known actresses. Though she has starred in dozens of incredible films, here are eight of the best (in no particular order!):

1. Pretty Woman: Roberts plays the role of a sex worker named Vivian Ward whose life changes forever when she meets a wealthy businessman, played by Richard Gere. 
2. My Best Friend’s Wedding: When Roberts' character Julianne Potter receives a call from her best friend from college and hears that he’s getting married, she realizes she’s been in love with him all this time and just couldn’t admit it. But when she tries to break up his wedding, nothing goes to plan. 
3. Wonder: Julia shines in the role of a loving, supportive, and exhausted mother of a young boy with facial disfiguration. Though he is the true star of the film, Robert’s performance was also unforgettable. 
4. Notthing Hill: Famous movie star Anna Scott, played by Roberts, meets William Thacker, a small book shop owner in England. Their romance is certainly surprising for both of them, but it’s one of the most heartwarming stories ever told on film. 
5. Erin Brockovich: Based on a true story, Julia Roberts plays the role of a very real woman, Erin Brockovich, who changed the lives of hundreds of people fighting to ensure they received a settlement from a major corporation after their water was contaminated and did it all as a single mother without a law degree. 
6. The Pelican Brief: Roberts plays Darby Shaw, a law student who uncovers an incredible conspiracy within the government after several murders are committed. 
7. Sleeping With the Enemy: As Laura Burney, Julia plays a woman who desperately tries to escape her abusive husband by faking her own death and moving across the country. But when he finds out she’s still alive, she has to fight for her life one more time. 
8. Stepmom: In this heartwarming and tear-jerking film, Julia Robert’s character is the stepmom to two kids, and while they are navigating the waters of their new relationship, their biological mother becomes extremely ill due to cancer.
