Absolutely, I can do that. Here are four places you should consider traveling to in Paris based on your desire to visit historic venues, museums, and places where you can take beautiful photographs. Each destination includes a brief description and explanation of why you might enjoy it. Here is your numbered list:    

1. Notre Dame Cathedral. Although the cathedral itself remains closed to the public due to significant damage from a 2019 fire, a new exhibit has opened in an underground facility in front of the cathedral. The exhibit highlights the ongoing construction work at the site and various works of art from the cathedral. Located along the picturesque River Seine, the Notre Dame Cathedral is a Gothic masterpiece dating back to the late 12th century. This destination should suit you based on your desire to visit historic venues as well as places where you can take beautiful photographs. 
2. Musée du Louvre. One of the top art museums in the entire world, the Louvre opened in 1793 and displays more than 35,000 works of art. The museum features art from diverse places and time periods such as ancient Egypt and the Renaissance. You should consider visiting the Louvre based on your interest in historic venues and museums. 
3. Musée d'Orsay. Located in a former railway station, the Musée d'Orsay features a wide variety of impressionist works. On your visit, you will see paintings from famous French artists, sculptures, photographs, and even furniture displays. The museum's top balcony also features a breathtaking view of the Sacré-Coeur Basilica through the museum's massive transparent clock. This destination is well-suited for you based on your desire to visit a museum and a place where you can take beautiful photographs. 
4. Arc de Triomphe. Located at the western end of the Champs-Élysées, the Arc de Triomphe was commissioned by Napoléon to honor the Grande Armee during the Napoleonic Wars. The historic monument contains intricately carved sculptures, names of battles fought during the first French Republic and Napolean's Empire, as well as the famous tomb of The Unknown Soldier. In addition, the view from the top of the monument features a beautiful look at the city and the Eiffel Tower. You should consider this location based on your desire to visit historic venues as well as places where you can take beautiful photographs.

I hope that you've found these suggestions helpful as you plan your trip. Enjoy your visit!
