The pizza restaurant employee gave the customer's order to the delivery driver: one medium flat-crust pepperoni and sausage pizza; one medium flat-crust mushroom and olive pizza; one medium flat-crust ham and pineapple pizza, one large order of 8 breadsticks, and one liter of diet soda. The instructions on the ticket were to deliver the pizza to a customer named Kevin at 123 Forest Drive.

The delivery driver pulled up the address on his phone's GPS. The location came up to a treehouse in the middle of a forest. It appeared to the driver that there were no roads that led to the treehouse and that the house was literally in the middle of a large forest, with the closest road being about a mile away.

The driver supposed he would figure out how to get to Kevin's treehouse once he was in the area. As he drove to the location, the delivery driver tried his best to adhere to the pizza restaurant's promise of delivering all orders within 45 minutes or the customer would receive their order for free. The driver got to the area within 20 minutes, which would have been a relief for him had he been able to walk right up to the treehouse's front door. However, "in the area" for the driver meant parking on the road about a mile away from the customer's house and having to walk a mile to complete the delivery.

The driver lugged his heavy delivery bag containing the customer's large order down a rocky road slightly covered with grass. The day was hot and sunny, but the dense canopy provided by the forest trees overhead provided a measure of protection from the heat. Soon, the driver found himself lost in the woods. He decided to call Kevin for directions but found his phone had no reception in the dense forest. He looked at the timer on his phone: 4 minutes left until he would be too late and Kevin would receive his order for free. The driver wanted to avoid this at all costs considering a free order to a customer would result in his pay being docked for the free food he had to give to Kevin.

The driver sat down, defeated, and as soon as the 45 minutes elapsed, decided to dig into some pizza and breadsticks.
