One day, a fly opened his many eyes and looked around to see he had been born in a compost pile. He was really very excited because there were a lot of delicious things to eat and smell, plus there were other flies everywhere for him to meet and play with. 

The fly started buzzing around, trying to decide what to do first! There was a big pile of old tomatoes that looked absolutely delicious, but then there was also half a chicken he could see that smelled divine. 

Then, out of the corner of one of his eyes, he saw a bunch of flies buzzing around something and decided he would go check it out and hopefully make a few new friends. 

The other flies were chatting away. “Oh boy,” one of them said, “Check this out! It’s an entire meal all in one. Rotting fruit, veggies, meat, and even some pasta!” Then the fly overheard one of the other flies say, “I saw it first, so I get first dibs!” 

“That’s not fair!” said one of the other flies. “I know I saw it first.” 

The fly who had just woken up was really confused. He thought to himself, “Why are they fighting? There is plenty for everyone.” So he decided he would tell them, “Hey guys, there’s so much food here! Why can’t we all share?” 

They all responded in a fury: 
“Get out of here, new guy!”
“We don’t need another mouth to feed.”
“You don’t belong here!”

The fly flew away extremely sad. Not only did he not get to enjoy the perfect meal, he certainly didn’t make any new friends either. 

He went and ate some tomatoes by himself, not quite knowing what to do next. 

Then, a little while later, a fly buzzed up to him and said, “Hey, can I share some of those tomatoes?” To which the fly said, “Of course! Dive right in!” 

They shared the meal, and the second fly said, “You know, some of the other flies really don’t like sharing.” 

“Well,” said the first fly, “I like to share.” And so the two became best friends right then and there. 

The fly realized he didn’t need the perfect meal or dozens of friends; some tomatoes and one good friend were enough.
