[A mid-fifties African-American woman sits on a porch swing. She has a friendly smile, blue glasses, and a white dress] 
"Hello, I'm Donna. I started smoking at 15 and just... [brief pause] never stopped. I got used to it. I graduated college. I had an amazing job which I enjoyed a lot. And back then, everybody smoked. It wasn't out of the ordinary. I remember [she laughs] I used to go out for my cigarette break and the smoking shelter was always full. But then times changed. Lots of people gave that habit up, but I didn't. And I noticed a couple of things. In my professional environment, people started looking down on me for smoking, like I was inferior to them because of my habit. Then I noticed that a lot of the time when I'd go out to smoke, I'd miss important things that were happening at work. I felt excluded and it was harming my career. So I reached out to Senior Smokers and they were amazing. They gave me all the tools and support I needed to help break my habit, and now my career is thriving again!"

[A man in his early 60s sits on a couch inside his home. He is balding with grey hair and expressive brown eyes]
"I'm Alan. I just grew up smoking, you know? I smoked, my parents smoked, and my wife smoked. But then... [his eyes fill with tears and he chokes up] she passed away. Lung cancer they said, from smoking. And you know, that should've been enough to help me stop, but it wasn't. If anything, I smoked more. But then my kids sat me down. They said they didn't want to lose me like they lost their mom. That was the real kick in the backside that I needed. They gave me the number for Senior Smokers, I gave them a call and [he smiles] they were so understanding. So helpful. It's been 2 years since I had a cigarette and [he laughs] I don't miss it at all! Now my kids and grandkids know I'll be here for them for a long time to come." 

[The screen goes black, with yellow text and voiceover reading the text]
Narrator: "It's never too late to get your life back with Senior Smokers."
