Here are some fast and drug-free ways to relax your senses and unwind after a stressful day:

1. Aromatherapy: Aromatherapy is an excellent way to de-stress through our sense of smell. What’s more individualistic than our sense of smell? Diffuse lavender essential oils, which provide calmness and relaxation, geranium oil can reduce stress and anxiety while elevating our mood, or peppermint oil to boost energy levels while providing a refreshing scent. 
2. Creativity: If you want a hands-on approach, try your hands at a creative outlet that satisfies your sense of touch. Adult coloring books, painting, knitting, or drawing are a few ways to relax our minds by giving our bodies something productive to do with our hands.
3. Deep Breathing: All it takes is breathing several relaxing breaths to calm down your heart rate and calm your nervous system. Take long, concentrated breaths in through your nose, hold for a couple of seconds, and then quickly breathe out through your mouth. Do this for 1-2 min, and you will feel composed in no time.
4. Going for a walk: A light, easy walk would stimulate our sense of sight farthest from the walls. Walking outside, in nature, or on a quiet path will add a peaceful sense of ease to your day. If you don't have a large amount of time, consider taking walking breaks all day long, whether it be up the stairs or taking a walk around the workplace. It'll have you relaxed before you realize it.
5. Guide Your Imagination: Guided imagery can take you on a mental vacation to help you escape your stressors. Simply sit or lie down in a quiet space and listen to a guided visualization that appeals to your senses.
6. Try Meditating: Meditation is a promising method for creating peace and calm within yourself. Focus on your breath and your physical sensations to help quiet your mind and release tension.
7. Relax Your Body: Progressive muscle relaxation involves tensing and relaxing specific muscle groups in your body, one by one. It releases physical and mental tension, allowing you to fully unwind.
