You know, it doesn't get much better than this. Fertile soil on a luscious campground. Gentle bursts of flame on a toasty fire. So much sap, moisture, and dew you could almost feel it on your face. Completely disconnected from the world. And the best part of all, I'm with my two best friends, Jenny and Sal. We've said for years that there wouldn't be anything between us, but I think a bit of romance is building between them. It's hard not to feel intimately close to someone in this setting.

My only regret was that I couldn't convince them not to take Fizzo. It's the new highly illegal recreation 'vitamin' that is all the craze in social media. Apparently, doing it just once is a life changer. They insisted, and I didn't want to be a downer. Seems like they're doing just fine. We wrapped up for the night, and I slept in my tent. I could have sworn that Sal made his way into Jenny's tent. Who knows, maybe they'd be great for each other.

Loud footsteps. I tried to ignore it. Oh, this was something serious. Did we have a bear? I could hear growling. I checked my phone. 2:16. Another big, wet, vicious growl. This one seemed to have a deeper tone. And it seemed hungrier. Do I make noise to try to get help? Or should I stay silent? My tent was shaking. The zipper started trembling. What were they thinking trying to get into my tent with a bear--or whatever it was--right there!?

The zipper started unzipping. I saw claws. A scream escaped my throat, "HELP!" The claws kept unzipping. This did not look like a bear. I was trembling as I saw glowing red eyes and a wolf-looking snout.

"JENNY! SAL!?" I shouted. I had nowhere to turn.

With an aggressive shake, the zipper was torn off by a burly, furry beast four feet from me, another right behind it. It braced its yellow fangs with saliva dripping. All its movements and mannerisms were strangely human-like. I felt myself jump up and try to tear through the opposite side of the tent. There was no escape. I felt claws slash through my side and neck while turned away and knew the end was coming very soon.
