Sea turtles throughout our world's oceans are rapidly disappearing. The sea turtle population has been in a state of rapid decline due to human interference. Marine pollution has been a major factor in the drop in the sea turtle population. Things like sewage disposal, oil spills, and toxic waste are harming the reptile group greatly. In addition to this, there are 100 million tons of plastic in our oceans, 80% of which comes from people. Many turtles are killed or injured due to plastic trash alone but the harm that is being done to this aquatic reptile doesn't stop there. About 250, 000 turtles have been captured, injured, or killed by fishermen, often even by accident. Fishing nets used to catch other ocean creatures have captured many sea turtles by mistake. The nets keep the turtles held underwater and cause them to drown. According to the data, the issue is very severe. One species in particular, the leatherback, has had its population decline by 40% in the past three generations according to the NOAA. 

Needless to say, something must be done about our precious sea turtle population. Nearly all species of sea turtles have made their way onto the endangered species list. Some steps we could take to try and reverse this catastrophe include participating in coastal cleanups, reducing the rate at which we use single-use plastics, and even conserving the water we use at home. Those are things we can all do as individuals to help. However, we must also hold corporations that dump toxic waste into the ocean accountable. Although it is illegal in most places to dump waste into the ocean, that does not stop it from happening. The ocean is a very difficult place to regulate and perhaps society as a whole should at the very least try to make these regulations even more strict to better enforce these rules but it is easier said than done. 

In conclusion, the world's sea turtle population is in rapid descent due to ecological factors caused by humans that affect their immediate environment. There is currently little we can do to reverse the situation, but I wanted to help bring attention to it so that we may all do our part in reducing plastic use and helping stop other waste from affecting our oceans. Turtles are not the only sea creatures harmed by these atrocities, they are simply the most affected. I hope my essay inspires whoever reads it to make changes in their everyday lives to help our endangered turtle friends as well as all of the other ocean creatures impacted by marine pollution and the other factors I mentioned to continue to survive. Most of all, I hope it calls into question our current policies on ocean regulation and if they are enough. This type of harm to the natural beauty of our Earth simply should not stand.
