Transitioning from your childhood bedroom to a college dorm can make you feel overwhelmed and scared. Hopefully, the following four tips will help you make a smoother shift from home to a college living situation. 

Congratulations on making the big move toward an independent future! 

1. Ask your family, friends, and loved ones for help. 

You’ll probably need physical help making the move to college, but you’ll also need support and emotional help. For many college newbies, it’s not easy to leave the familiarity of a childhood home but knowing that you have the emotional support and love of those that you care about can give you a much-needed confidence boost and lessen your doubt or anxieties. 

2. Sharing a dorm? Be open-minded as to who your roommate may be. 

While you can request a specific type of dorm room, it’s not often that you can request a specific type of roommate. So, be open-minded and respectful of whoever you’ve been paired with. You’ll be spending a lot of time together in the same space, so you must establish a cordial rapport from the start. If you and your roommate have too many differences, you can always request a transfer later in the school year. 

3. Pack the essentials, but save décor and organizational extras for after you’ve moved in. 

Toiletries, clothes, and comfort items, like a favorite blanket, are all essential for any college student on move-in day. Otherwise, everything else is extra that can wait until you’ve settled into your dorm room. 

Don’t overload the car with things that you don’t need right away. There are stores and shops galore in college towns, so it should be easy to find any décor or organizational tools that you may need after you’ve officially transitioned from home to college. 

4. Anxious? Arrive on campus earlier than everyone else to ensure you don’t get caught in the move-in rushes. 

Anxiety is the biggest problem for most new college students, especially because they don’t want to feel dumb or make a fool of themselves on the first day around everyone else. It’s a common fear, and one that’s typically unfounded, particularly when everyone is worried about the same things. 

However, you can lessen your anxiety by planning on earlier arrivals. If you’ve packed only the essentials, it should be easy for you to find your room and get settled in before the other students make a mad dash to do the same. The general rule of thumb for anxious students is to arrive two to three hours before the move-in rushes.
