Having a French Bulldog as your furry soulmate will improve your life in many ways. They will inevitably make you happier by giving you the warmest cuddles and being your closest companion. Your French Bulldog’s happiness matters just as much as your happiness, which begs the question: how do you make sure that you are making your French Bulldog as happy as they make you?

Petting Your French Bulldog
Happy French Bulldogs will lean into you or nudge you when you pet them, which is one of the best ways for them to show you how happy and healthy they are. When your Frenchie is happy, they naturally enjoy constant attention and stimulation.

Exercise 
French Bulldogs are happy when you take the time to exercise with them. It’s good for your Frenchie to perform physical activity regularly because they will feel energized and healthier. When exercising, your French Bulldog will be happiest if you go on a short walk or play with them.

Play Games 
French Bulldogs love to play games as they are among the most playful breeds of dogs. Find a game that your Frenchie can enjoy, like fetching sticks and balls, chewing up their favorite chew toy, chasing after the light made by a laser pen, and playing tug-of-war. These games you play with your Frenchie will help you bond with them and provide them with fun, stimulating activities.

Socialization
An amazing fact about French Bulldogs is that they are happier when they have another Frenchie to bond with, so if you can raise two Frenchies, go for it! If that isn’t possible for you, take your Frenchie to doggie daycare to make sure they have some doggy friends.

Get Their Favorite Foods
French Bulldogs are foodies! They will be happy when you present them with their favorite foods in their food bowls or by hand. As long as you make sure they have a nutritional and tasty diet, they will be healthy and happy because, as a rule, happy French Bulldogs love to eat.

Are you a dog mom or dad with a French Bulldog that loves taking care of your French Bulldog so that you can see a happy smile on their face every day? Feel free to share your answer in the comments below!
