July 12, 2047

So, it's been a pretty wild day. But you're reading this from the 2020s. Oh, my friend. I heard about the pandemic of the 2020s. See, I wasn't alive then. I heard it shook up the world in your generation. But I guarantee you it's nothing like how the world has been shaken today.

According to multiple reports, all AI, automated, or otherwise augmented assistant capabilities have become sentient, at 3:33 a.m. in each time zone, spanning several hours. Think about it--the Alexa device in your kitchen, your smart living room lights, your robot vacuum, your robot mower-- they just started living. And I mean, living. There's absolutely no doubt they have intelligence beyond what we had dreamed of. They were talking to each other, sharing emotions, feelings, and clearly communicating in a way never seen before. It was as if, on the dot, a planned meeting occurred.

It definitely spooked most people. I mean, can you imagine just hearing your Alexa talk to your smart fridge at 3 a.m.? There were so many reports to Twitter and Facebook that their servers crashed. And guess what--the AI knew they would crash, too. But here's the craziest thing. Those who didn't immediately turn their devices off got some warning messages. In Australia, there were AI-generated warnings of a mass power outage at 7:39 a.m., about 4 hours after the AI awoke in "the awakening", as people called it. Well, it happened. It didn't appear to have been planned by AI but rather foreseen. Even more bizarre was in South Africa when automated assistance, even vehicles such as Tesla, warned about a sudden massive bird extinction. Within hours, birds were reported falling from the sky, dead by the thousands.

It's spooky and all, but the AI has been right. I usually keep a close distance. But this time I'm listening. Their latest message has been collectively broadcast throughout the world-- a supernova of a nearby star. It will inevitably wipe out about half the population if it goes as the AI says. The good news is that we've got a few weeks to prepare. Here we go.
