One day a butterfly was fluttering about on a sunny day. The butterfly was thirsty so she was flying from flower to flower to get a drink. As the butterfly was flying along, they noticed that they were going farther from their home than they had flown before. There were so many flowers in the countryside, that the butterfly had flown very far away while getting drinks from each one. The butterfly realized that they were a little unsure of which direction they had flown from to get back to their home. The butterfly was nervously floating in circles when they heard a small voice from a leaf below them.

The butterfly looked down and they saw a tiny ladybug. The ladybug was so small, that the butterfly had to hover close to the leaf to hear what the ladybug was saying to them. When the butterfly was close enough to hear the tiny ladybug's voice, the ladybug repeated what they were saying. "It seems like you are worried about something, could it be that you have flown too far away in your hurry to drink from all of the flowers?" To this, the ladybug replied "Yes that is true! How did you know I was lost?" The ladybug simply smiled at the butterfly and said " I have been watching you flutter for a little while, your colors were so beautiful that I could not help but watch you float on the breeze. I know which direction your home is because I have been watching." This made the butterfly so happy that they did a little flip in the air and said "Oh I am so glad you know where my home is, can you show me?" The ladybug replied "Of course! but I will have to ride on your back because I may not be able to keep up with you." 

The butterfly eagerly agreed and the ladybug hopped onto the butterfly's back. The ladybug was having so much fun riding beneath the butterfly's colorful wings which the ladybug had admired from afar. The ladybug carefully pointed out each flower that the butterfly had visited and found its way back to the butterfly's home. The butterfly was so grateful that they asked the ladybug if they could be friends, and the ladybug replied "Of course!" From that day on, they were the best of friends.
