Sally's cheeks were rosy and RED, just like the hair on her head. 1 - 2 -3 -4 -5, she counted the fruits that helped them survive. 1-2-3-4-5, not only did they help them survive but they helped her family to thrive. "Where does this watermelon come from?" Sally asked Mom. Mom knew everything then. She knew how and when. "Do you see this skin, shiny and GREEN? Do you see what I mean? I knew this melon was good. It came from a store in our neighborhood,"  Sally had to think about this for a while. She stared out of the window at the sky so BLUE. Mom said it, so it must be true. "How did it get to the store? Where was it before?" " It came on a truck that could have been BLACK,  WHITE, or BROWN. It came from far away and was brought to our town."  "What about before it was on the truck? Do you know? Is there any such luck?" Sally whispered, hoping to know. "It came from the place where they grow. A place called a farm, where workers have a strong arm. They grow lots of things, ORANGE, PURPLE, and YELLOW. We owe a lot to the farming fellow," Mom could tell that Sally wanted to know more. This curious daughter, she did adore. "The farmers put a seed in the ground; it can't have any weeds around. It is covered with dirt, so it won't get hurt. Water helps it to sprout and grow. So does the sunshine, you know?" This all sounded true, but Sally wanted to know what she could do, to be a farmer on her own, to have a watermelon that she had grown. Mom cut the melon open wide to show Sally what was inside. She saw a seed, exactly what Sally would need. They went to the yard, where the earth was scarred.  They shoveled a mound with the dirt they had found. The seed was tucked into a dirt bed, where it could be a sleepy head.  They watered the mound, one with no weeds around. The hardest part was to wait, to wait for the date when they could celebrate. As time went by slowly, the watermelon did grow so lowly. One day came time, when Sally picked her watermelon and declared, "This is all mine!"
