Timothy Thompson has always shown little interest in making new friends or being talkative around others. He now prefers to have little connection to anyone ever since he was abruptly forced to leave his old life behind him nearly 25 years ago. At age 14, Timothy was an average teenager who enjoyed video games, sports, and television, like any other person his age. Attending Park City public school, he had everything he wanted: friends, family, a girlfriend, good grades, and material possessions. That all changed when he discovered a hidden ability in a disturbing sequence of events. 

Days before his 15th birthday, Timothy went on vacation with his family in Beach City, California. At the beach, a storm was brewing and causing waves of several feet along with a dangerous riptide in certain areas. Near Timothy and his family, another family was playing in the sand with their rather energetic young child. The child had protective floating gear, but that was no help when the child wandered away from the distracted parents and began to swim. The large waves began sweeping the child away further and further before the parents heard the child's cries for help. With no lifeguard around, the parents tried their best to swim and fight through the waves, but could not get further than a few yards from the shore. Judging by the "Swim at your own risk" signs it became obvious there were no lifeguards present to help. Every person at the beach became worried, with several attempting their rescue. Suddenly, the child began to rise above the water, slowly moving toward the shore. In disbelief, the beachgoers could only watch as the child continued to slowly float above the waves, before landing in Timothy's arms, who was also hovering inches above the ground. They both landed in the sand, with Timothy in a trance-like stare. 

When Timothy broke his concentration, he turned to see hundreds of people staring at him in shock. Timothy and his family immediately left and returned to the hotel. Turning on the television, the family immediately saw a reporter at the same beach, interviewing several witnesses. Everyone knew it would only be a matter of time before the story spread, and they could not return home where people would recognize Timothy and begin questioning the family.
