August is a great month to visit a few different destinations in the US, especially the places that are normally colder than other parts of the year, making it the perfect time for outdoor adventure, festivals, and more. 

1. San Francisco, CA: This is a bustling city in Northern California with loads of culture and excellent dining options. Plus, its geographical location puts it close to several national parks and outdoor activities. 
2. Outer Banks, NC: This area is home to some great east coast beaches with endless water sports opportunities. August is also a good time to catch some festivals. 
3. Aspen, CO: Aspen sees much fewer crowds and lower prices this time of year, making August a pleasant time of year to see the beautiful landscapes and hike stunning rocky mountain trails.
4. Jekyll Island, GA: This beach destination boasts some interesting history and nice beaches for an August escape.
5. Santa Fe, NM: This is a hotter destination for August, but still known for history and adventure, and in August, the city hosts Santa Fe Music Week. 
6. Fire Island, NY: Here lie some of the best beaches in the northeast, along with camping, hiking, fishing, and kayaking opportunities. It’s also pretty accessible from New York City.
7. Memphis, TN: Elvis Week occurs in August in Memphis, along with other festivals celebrating music and taking in the end of summer. There’s plenty of nature outside of Memphis like kayaking on the Mississippi River.
8. Cannon Beach, OR: This is a great coastal destination for cooler temperatures and stunning landscapes. Plus, there is plenty of surrounding national park areas to explore. 
9. Cape Cod, MA: This is a fantastic east coast beach destination known for biking trails and delicious fresh seafood. 
10. Lake Tahoe, CA: Though this is a popular winter ski destination, there are loads of water activities to partake in on and around the lake in the summer. 
11. Bend, OR: This town is an outdoor lover’s paradise. From hiking, kayaking, rock climbing, paddle boarding, white water rafting, and more, there is plenty to keep you occupied in Bend in August. 
12. Park City, UT: One of the top things to do in Park City in the summer is a hot air balloon ride. There are also other nearby activities for thrill seekers like an alpine roller coaster and ziplining. 

These are just a few of the best places to visit in the US in August for nature, activities, good food, and more!
