Silence pools between us. We've both run out of words. I wrack my brain for something else to say--some maxim about a battle well fought, perhaps, or a comment on the weather, which is notably pleasant just now. But every thought that pops into my head seems far too stupid to voice aloud, and anyway, Max is already looking at me funny. Not like he's about to laugh or make a joke; no, he's looking at me like my face is somehow more fascinating than the vivid sunset hues spread over the mountains ahead of us, and also like he might be somewhat nauseous. I'm about to bring my fingers to my cheeks and ask if there's something on my face when I suddenly realize what's happening and start to feel a touch nauseous, too. 

Max takes a step toward me and I lean back on my heels, nearly falling over backward. My breath is caught in my throat and for an excruciatingly long moment, we both stand frozen like people on a cliff's edge, debating whether or not to jump. 

He lurches first and catches my lips with his own, but for all my anxious squirming, it might as well be a set of barbed wire lips tangling themselves in dried tumbleweeds. Almost immediately, he stiffens and pulls away. 

“Oh,” he starts, “I’m sorry, Nora, I didn’t think you would—object, honestly—“

“No!” I squeak, “That’s not...” Then I draw a breath to summon courage and lunge back at him with a vengeance. Somehow our teeth manage to collide before our lips do, and he pulls back again, wincing a little this time. 

I want to bury my head in the sand. 

“I'm so sorry!” I tell him, covering most of my face with my hands. “Oh, how atrocious! I just… I’m not very good at these kinds of things, Max.” 

“Nor am I, apparently,” he commiserates before a sly smile tugs playfully at the corner of his lips. “But I suppose that just means we’ll have to help each other practice, hmm?”

My cheeks swell as a smile spreads over my face. This time, we both lean in at once like dancers following choreography and even though we're both falling, we manage to hold each other up.
