1. The Dover Demon. 
In 1977, in the space of two days, three teenagers, all of whom were separate at the time of the sightings, swear they saw a creature with “large eyes that glowed and tendril fingers.” When authorities plotted the sightings on a map, the path was a straight line for two miles, but the creature was never found.  
That’s the only time the creature was ever spotted in Dover, Massachusetts, but those three sightings sparked legends for decades. 

2. Yowie – also known as Sasquatch, Skunk Ape, Bigfoot, and Yeti (depending on where you go to hear about sightings). 
This large, hairy, humanoid creature has many names, and many cryptozoologists believe that there are hundreds of these creatures across the world because of the numerous locations of supposed sightings. Grainy photographs have captured massive footprints and what could be eyes in the wilderness, while other pictures show human-like figures, covered in hair, from very far away. 
The first-ever reported sighting of Bigfoot was in 1811 in Alberta, Canada, but Native Americans have talked of similar creatures in their stories and folklore for centuries. 

3. The Jersey Devil. 
The folklore of The Jersey Devil spawns from a story about Mother Leeds, a New Jersey woman with twelve children. She discovered that she was pregnant with her thirteenth child and, in a fit of rage, cursed her pregnancy, offering the child to whoever listened. When the baby was born, it sprouted the features of a goat, horse, and bat all at once, then flew off into the trees. 
Some of The Jersey Devil's legend has been proven as fact. There was a Mother Leeds, and she left a written will to 12 children, but there’s never been documented evidence of the thirteenth child. There have been over 1,000 sightings of The Jersey Devil up until 2016, and the cryptid is often blamed for any bad luck that New Jersey farmers have with livestock and crops. 

4. Champ (or Champy) 
Sea serpents have been the subject of cryptozoological sightings for centuries, but Champ is one of the most famous in Vermont, New York, and parts of Canada where Lake Champlain extends for 125 miles. There have been 300 sightings since 1609, but the most notable was a report in 1970 that described the creature as “a twenty-foot-long serpent, thick as a barrel, with a head like a horse.”
