Today, Mary decided to make a trip to Walmart since she's been out of her CeraVe Salicyclic acid cleanser for a month. She had previously made the bad decision of trying other Salicyclic acid products from a small town general store, and it made her break out with large cystic acne. When Mary arrived at Walmart, she grabbed her favorite cleanser but noticed a serum next to it on the shelf that captured her attention. Since it was an Equate skin product, the affordable price tag and consistent results influenced her to purchase the serum. After using it, she noticed that it works quickly. Two weeks after using the cleanser and the new serum, Mary noticed that the random bump under her eye had practically disappeared. The bump first appeared when she was in her thirties and it remained for the next nine years. She also noticed that the large, under-the-skin acne that had developed near her left eye and neck was gone. Mary had never imagined that she would be nearing the age of forty and still be battling cystic acne, which has been an issue for her since she was around 12 years old. Last Halloween, she had purchased Adapalene gel for her teenage son who never used it, so she decided to try it out on her skin. She realized that she needed to make a change to the way she takes care of her skin. She researched the best way to battle oily, acne-prone, and mature skin. She discovered that Salicyclic Acid is most suitable for her. This is the first time she has used a product that made her realize she cannot live without it. The Salicyclic acid has proven to be a game changer for her skin type. It was also the first time that she decided to use a serum after the cleanser, and she recognized a noticeable difference in her skin texture. Mary stands by her decision of purchasing the Equate version of everything because of how cheap and effective it is. She has always been thrilled with the results from the brand, and she proclaims that Salicyclic Acid is no exception. Mary commends this product.
