Hollis walked into the room and naturally, I turned into a clumsy tangle of arms and legs. I have always thought of myself as mostly put-together and cool. I mean I never fall for the lines some guys use to get dates. In fact, I have a pretty decent dating life. Safe, fun, and responsible. Just how I like it.

So, I was totally unprepared for Hollis swaggering into my life. It didn’t help that he looked like a model from one of those top fashion magazines. Those guys are airbrushed into perfection. Hollis isn’t airbrushed. He’s…just perfection. I mean alpha male, stubbled chin, solid muscle with a few scars here and there perfection.

Of course, Hollis headed straight toward me. The best thing I could do was to just keep breathing. This was ridiculous. He wasn’t coming over to ask me out. He had his clipboard in his hand. He was getting information about the new IT department. The one I was in charge of. He was the QA guy. I needed to get a handle on my hormones. It was like some lovestruck teenager had hijacked my brain.

“Hey, Beck,” he murmured in his smoother than silk sheets voice.
“Hi!” My own voice cracked and shrilled. Definitely not smooth. And my face heated up until I knew even my ears were probably bright red. 
He held out the clipboard. “I’ve got the suggestions we talked about here.”
In a perfect world, I would give him a dazzling smile and whisk him and his clipboard away into my office for some alone time. In this world, I reached for the clipboard, missed by inches, watched it clatter onto the floor, and then stumbled forward as I made a clumsy grab for it. But not before Hollis also bent to catch it, and we banged our heads together. By the time we were both standing up again, and Hollis had the clipboard clutched safely in his hand, I could hear people snickering around us.

So, yeah, I had managed to practically knock out the guy who had make-or-break control over my shiny new IT department, the one I had poured hours of energy into, in order to impress the company bosses. Maybe a meteor would hit me and put me out of my misery.
