Diary Entry 1 - January 1, 2023
Preparing for our mission to Mars. She's a colder planet than Earth due to her greater distance from the sun. Her average temperature stays around -80°F. But things get even more extreme with temperatures reaching -195°F near the poles during winter. However, during midday near the equator, it can become quite bearable at 70°F.

Diary Entry 2 - February 15, 2023
The Martian atmosphere is rich in CO2 but about 100 times less dense than ours. Interestingly, it's thick enough to support weather, clouds, and winds. Seasonal variations cause carbon dioxide to freeze out of the Martian air during winter. Some say, in the past, the atmosphere was likely denser, capable of supporting flowing water.

Diary Entry 3 - April 5, 2023
Over time, lighter molecules in the Martian atmosphere have escaped, largely due to pressure from the solar wind. Mars lacks a global magnetic field, so the atmosphere is affected more directly. NASA's MAVEN mission is studying this process currently, uncovering more mysteries of our destination.

Diary Entry 4 - May 20, 2023
NASA's Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter has found carbon-dioxide snow clouds, making Mars unique in our solar system. Mars' winters are not just chilling but also dust-ridden. Dust storms there are the largest known, capable of blanketing the entire planet and lasting for months. This results from airborne dust absorbing sunlight and causing wind. I hope our equipment can withstand this Martian fury.

Diary Entry 5 - July 10, 2023
We have finally arrived at our destination after about seven months. Mars has a longer year compared to Earth due to its farther distance from the sun — 687 days compared to our 365. Days there are nearly identical to ours, with a complete rotation taking about 24 hours and 40 minutes. This will surely help us in maintaining our Earth-based routines.

Diary Entry 6 - August 25, 2023
Mars, like Earth, experiences seasons due to its axial tilt. The difference is, Martian seasons are more extreme. When Mars is closest to the sun, its southern hemisphere gets a short, warm summer, and the northern one gets a short, cold winter. When farthest, it's the other way around. This celestial ballet will be something to behold.

Diary Entry 7 - October 1, 2023
Still getting used to the environment here. The Martian axis tilt isn't stabilized by a large moon like Earth's. It has led to different climates on Mars throughout its history. A study suggests that the changing tilt might have caused temporary warming periods that allowed water to flow, releasing methane into Mars' atmosphere.

Diary Entry 8 - November 15, 2023
Mars has been the subject of observation since Galileo Galilei used a telescope to study it in 1610. Astronomers later discovered its polar ice caps. Some even mistook geological features for long canals, hinting at a possible civilization. We are, in a way, stepping into the footprints of these early observers.

Diary Entry 9 - December 30, 2023
Like several Martian rocks have made their way to Earth, our return home will also provide scientists with information for unique study opportunities. Although not like the rock Allan Hills 84001 (ALH84001) that was found in 1996 and believed to contain potential evidence of Mars's life, this expedition still contributes significantly to our understanding.

Diary Entry 10 - February 10, 2024
Reflecting on this mission manned mission, we have certainly come a long way since the robotic exploration of Mars that began in the 1960s. Early missions like Mariner 4 and Mariners 6 and 7 revealed Mars as a barren world. Later, Mariner 9 orbited Mars, mapping about 80% of the planet and discovering its volcanoes and grand canyons. Our journey continues this legacy of discovery, bringing humanity closer to Mars. We look forward to touching back down on Earth soon.
