In a faraway paradise called The Land of Gummy Yum, there lived two gummy kinds. The Gummy Yum Bears lived in the meadows and foothills that led up to Gummy Yum Mountain. They loved and appreciated their home. There were orchards that grew yummy gummy fruit along the edges of the meadow where the bears' village could be found. They lived off of yummy gummy fruit and Swedish fish that they caught from the stream that flowed down the mountain. The bears never used more than needed and were always grateful to Mother Gummy Nature.

When they first came to the Land of Gummy Yum, they did so with another gummy kind that they had cohabitated in their previous home of Candy Land. These gummies were known as the Gumble Wumble Worms. No one is quite sure of what exactly divided the gummy communities after they reached Gummy Yum, but divided they definitely became. 

The bears were taught at a young age to never venture towards the coastal jungles of Gummy Yum, where the Gumble Wumbles dwelled. Little ones of the bear community were always teasing each other with scary stories from gummy lore that told of savage gummy worms that feasted on little bears.

Lemon Limey Bear and Cheery Cherry Bear were two little bears that were B.G.F.F.s or Best Gummy Friends For Life. They were both very curious bears. Since the moment they heard the stories of the savage worms, both little brave-spirited gummies had been ready to investigate for themselves.

One evening, Limey arrived at Cheery Cherry's house for a planned slumber party. Cheery's parents had gone to Gummy Resort and Casino for the weekend and her older sister was put in charge of watching the younger gummies. To her dismay, Cheery's older sister eventually found that the best friends were nowhere in the house. They were headed on an exploration of the coastal jungle gummy regions.

When the little gummy friends arrived at the outskirts of the jungle, they didn't even hesitate. Both of them plunged into the jungle, full steam ahead. They were so excited and exhilarated as they ran through the jungle brush, they hardly even felt it when they were eaten by an Anaconda-sized Gumble Wumble Gummy Worm that ended their sweet little gummy lives that day.
