(1) Jade is bored with her routine working as a hostess at an Italian restaurant. 
(2) After a failed delivery, Jade's boss asks her to abandon the host stand and go to a market uptown to buy 20 pounds of fresh oysters.
(3) Jade protests that she doesn't know to tell good quality oysters from bad ones.
(4) The Uber driver that Jade's boss had already hired arrives and, having previously worked on an oyster farm, offers to help her complete the task.
(5) Jade's boss threatens to fire her if she doesn't return with 20 pounds of good oysters by 4:30 PM, so Jade jumps in the back of the Uber driver's car, and they speed away together.
(6) Jade and the Uber driver (named Vernon) get stuck in a horrible standstill traffic jam for almost an hour. Another agitated driver picks a fight with them and forces them to flee on foot, abandoning the vehicle.
(7) Jade and Vernon reach the marketplace but cannot find the vendor who sells fresh oysters; they are told that this vendor sells her wares from a different location every day, and the marketplace is Labyrinthian. 
(8) After searching for over an hour, Jade and Vernon find the oyster vendor but learn that she does not accept cash. Instead, she insists on trading tricks, secrets, and entertaining stories for oysters. Vernon helps Jade to perform tricks like juggling, standing on her head, and crafting optical illusions, but she gets just one oyster per trick and soon starts to run out of ideas.
(9) In a stroke of genius, Jade makes a bet with the vendor that she can sing a song that will bring tears to the vendor's eyes, and if so, the vendor must give her 20 pounds of oysters in exchange. The vendor accepts, unaware that Vernon, in cahoots with Jade, is frantically slicing onions right behind her back. Jade sings a torch song, the vendor sobs, and Jade wins her oysters.
(10) Jade and Vernon return to the traffic jam to reclaim the car but find it vandalized beyond repair.
(11) Jade and Vernon sprint through the city on foot, racing against time, as the oysters threaten to spoil in the heat.
(12) They return victorious, but both decide to quit their jobs on the spot and open their own oyster bar.
