"That werewolf is among us. I just know it!" farmer Jenkins cried from his backseat position in the town hall. His accusation created an uproar, with everyone defending their innocence all at once.
"What can we do to defend ourselves?" Catherine said in distress.
"We could all take long walks alone at night?" Dylan, the werewolf in question, said.
"That's not a bad idea." Mayor Bole mulled over the idea. "But it would be better if we could identify the werewolf and get rid of this scourge once and for all. I, for one, think it's Conway!" Conway stood up to protest.
"Oh, that's ridiculous! I was with you, Mayor Bole, when the werewolf attacked last night!" He turned to his right in frustration. "Dylan, will you please stop chewing on my arm?" Dylan whimpered and gave Conway's arm a final longing look before settling back into his seat.
"Well, I don't know," Mayor Bole said, shrugging indifferently. "Seemed to me like you weren't really interested in the hummus dip last night. Maybe because you like meat?" When he said "meat," he flashed Conway a side eye to gauge his reaction.
"I like meat!" Dylan said eagerly, wagging his tail.
"Shut up, Dylan," the mayor said. "We're trying to catch a werewolf here."
"Sorry." Dylan went back to chewing a half-eaten hand from last night's meal.
"I don't like hummus. So what?" The entire room gasped.
"He-he practically confessed!" Catherine cried out, pointing an accusatory finger at Conway.
"You weren't dancin' either," Jenkins said, his long, bony finger joining Catherine's in condemnation. "Everyone knows that werewolves can't dance."
"Yeah, do the Worm right now!" Mayor Bole added fuel to the fire.
"What even is that? This is the 17th century. You're being so anachronistic right now." The entire room exploded in a frenzy.
"He used a word with five syllables! Why, that's an abomination!" Jenkins said, practically leaping from his seat. All of a sudden, Dylan howled the distinct shrill cry of a werewolf. The room went still in an instant.
"Sorry, Dylan said, "But I was just wondering whether anyone wanted to go on a long walk with me. Just the two of us?" He grinned, long rows of teeth shimmering in the moonlight.
"Sure!" farmer Jenkins said with a laugh.
