1. Sight towers: A common trope in open-world games is the need to "activate" towers or other markers to unlock sections of the world. While intended to give the player a sense of the scale of the game world, they can be a dull unnecessary chore. 
2. Repetitive side quests: The need to complete a repetitive task every time a section of the world is unlocked or the plot is progressed is detrimental to immersion and renders the game feeling perfunctory and diminishes player choice. 
3. Unnecessary strategic layer: In settings where the player is the commander of an army or leader of a faction, it may seem to make sense to provide a strategic gameplay element. This would have the player command troops, manage resources, and make decisions on behalf of their faction. However, this can be poorly implemented and can result in players wasting their time playing a bad strategy game instead of a good action or role-playing game. 
4. Unbalanced gambling minigame: Open-world games commonly feature gambling minigames where players can bet in-game currency. As these mini-games can be an afterthought and poorly balanced, they are frequently exploited by players to destroy the difficulty curve for themselves by gaining unlimited money. This is worsened as they would gain these infinite resources in a repetitive, uninteresting manner rather than by playing the actual game. 
5. Broken economy: Many open-world games feature a large variety of items and currencies, which are not always well balanced in terms of their value to the in-game economy. Thus players may find themselves able to become incredibly wealthy in unintended and unconventional ways. This can diminish the sense of reward given for major in-game accomplishments and destroy the difficulty curve for players who would find the game too easy with infinite resources. 

What do you think of those suggestions for your article? I would be happy to discuss any of these common criticisms of open-world games further to help you with your article.
