This was not my first time visiting this establishment. However, after making a recent buzz in marketing, I decided to revisit it with a new mindset. The service was incredible. I waited but a few minutes before I was handed my food and allowed to choose any of the spots in the restaurant. From that point on, I did not see any staff at all for the remainder of my meal. This gave me a sense of privacy and respect for my experience. The dining room was open with windows on three of the four walls giving abundant natural light and allowing me to gaze over the manicured vista outside. 

Upon revealing my food, I knew I would be in for a treat. My first course consisted of French-fried potatoes, hot out of the fryer and with just the right amount of salt. A tasting of different dipping sauces was provided, including ketchup, honey mustard, and barbecue. Each tasting gave a new flavor profile to the crisp fries and their fluffy interior. 

Moving on to the main course, I was served a cheeseburger with two patties, American cheese, crispy bacon, lettuce, tomato, and the restaurant's proprietary secret sauce. The presentation of the sandwich was beautiful with the glistening of the meat and fixings nustled softly in the bosom of the fluffy sesame-seed-covered buns. My first bite sent me to heaven. I was blown away by the balance of flavor and texture with the heartiness and tenderness of the ground beef patty and the cheese melding the ingredients together. The bacon was grilled to a satisfying crunch. The real star was the secret sauce that added a rush of flavor washing over my palate. 

I had my selection of pairings, and I choose a lemon-lime carbonated pop that satisfied my thirst and refreshed me. 

Finally, I had a pure white vanilla ice cream swirl for dessert. The vanilla was a welcome taste as the creamy texture coated my mouth with satisfaction and sugar. 

The only complaint I have is that a proper sommelier might better help me make a beverage selection instead of leaving me to my devices. Overall, I greatly enjoyed my meal. I can see why it has captured the minds and mouths of many.
