Sure! Here are some amazing long-term strategies to build a thriving music career as an independent artist:
 
1. Safeguard your musical assets: Legal protection is crucial for musicians because it protects your intellectual property rights and you won’t have to deal with legal hassles in the future.
 
2. Make yourself heard: Create a strong online presence to become more visible and accessible to potential fans. Your music, bio, tour dates, and contact info must be up-to-date and easily searchable online.
 
3. Build a top-notch team: Select the right people to support your goals and match your work ethic. Find a solid booking agent that shares your vision and can land you gigs, as well as a manager who understands your unique sound and can help grow your brand's identity. 
 
4. Brand yourself uniquely: Carve out a unique niche and a compelling identity to set yourself apart from the rest of the pack. Build a strong online presence that reflects your style and musical identity. Create merch that represents your brand, and don’t forget to have fun along the way. 

5. Stay Ahead of the Game: Understand what people want to hear. Stay up-to-date with the latest music trends and use that knowledge to tailor your sound. Know your audience and what they respond to, and constantly iterate your approach to stay fresh and relevant.

6. Cash is King: As an independent artist, your financial situation is paramount. You'll need to become a savvy entrepreneur and learn how to make the most of every dollar spent. Budget wisely, pursue smart investments and don't be too proud to bring in financial advisors or business partners to help you succeed.

7. It's All About Who You Know: Networking is a must-have skill for all independent artists. Attend industry events, reach out to fellow musicians and industry professionals, and build a strong social media presence. Consistently seek out genuine relationships with people who can help get your music to the ears of the right people. Connections make the world go-'round in the music industry!
