Stay Safe with Hal the Hippo: Lightning!

(The flyer depicts an anthropomorphic hippo wearing a Fireman's helmet, smiling and pointing at stormy clouds over the horizon)

Hey kids! It's your friend, Hal! I'm a volunteer fireman as well as a hippo (did you know that I am a hippo?). I'm here to teach you all about how to stay safe when there's lightning. Now I know lightning seems frightening, and that's because Lightning can potentially be very dangerous! But if you take careful precautions to be safe, there's nothing to fear!

When thunder roars, go indoors! 
A good place to shelter from lightning is inside a safe, enclosed shelter. Homes, offices, stores, and cars with windows rolled all the way up can serve as safe shelters until the storm passes. However, that does not mean you are completely safe! 
During the duration of your time in the safe shelter, make sure to stay away from contact with water. 
Do not bathe, shower, or wash dishes. 
Avoid using electronic equipment of all types.
Do not use corded phones; they are not safe during a thunderstorm! But cordless and cellular phones are safe to use.
 
But what if you can't make it indoors? 
Ideally, you should remain aware of forecasted weather conditions before venturing outdoors. But if you are caught out where you cannot easily access a safe, enclosed shelter, what you should do is minimize risk.

But how do I minimize risk if I'm caught outdoors??
First things first, stay away from elevated areas such as hills, mountain ridges, or peaks. 
Never shelter under a lone tree or use a cliff or a rocky overhang as a shelter.
Stay away from bodies of water like ponds or lakes.
Don't clump up! If you are in a group, stay separate from each other. 
Do not stay in open vehicles like motorcycles or convertibles! Only enclosed vehicles are safe shelters. 
Finally, if you are unable to get to a safe shelter, it is best to crouch into a ball-like position with your heads tucked and hands over your ears, low and with minimal contact with the ground.
