Mr. Claus,

First, I just want to say that we all appreciate the work you've done for so long. You are an inspiration to us all, and we share your vision for a happier, more fun world. Having said that, you tend to drive yourself incredibly hard, and we end up going right along without any thoughts about our needs. We have to change that. We need time to ourselves. We need to be able to wind down from the unending production cycle. Some of the boys have been increasingly unsatisfied and have even considered simply leaving. Leaving, sir! I'm sure you understand how difficult that would make our mission to spread joy throughout the world.

To that end, I would like to suggest that you consider a few things that we need. First, we need shorter work hours. That's simply a fact. The pace has increased so much over the last twenty years that some of us are at the breaking point. We need more time to be with our families. We need time for ourselves. I would suggest looking to the elven nations down south to recruit more workers to ease the burden, but if that's not possible then I think you should look into the improvements in automation over the last decade. It really is impressive what can be done, now! And with that, the rest of us could work fewer hours, and some of us might even be able to assist with things you've been trying to improve, such as distribution and sleigh technology. Some of us would enjoy a chance to shine in these other areas, and this could be a great solution for all of us.

We also need improvements to the work lounges. Sir, we haven't updated the decor in a long time. It still looks like a lounge from the 1970s. Yes, I know that's when we last updated them, but really sir. I think you're a bit too fond of it. We could use some natural wood, and the televisions and appliances really need an overhaul. The new OLED TVs are wild, sir! 8K resolution! The boys would LOVE it.

There are other concerns that we can discuss in person. Let's schedule a time and I'll talk to you then.

Merry Christmas!
Hux Stockington, North Pole Labor Union Representative
