Sure, I can help you with that. Here is a list of eight jobs that would be perfect for your teenager:

1. Babysitter: This is one of the most popular jobs for teens, and there really is no shortage of people who need babysitters. Your teenager will need to demonstrate responsibility and be able to take care of children.
2. Camp counselor: Many camp counselor jobs are geared toward teens, and these jobs are generally a great way to meet new friends. As a camp counselor, your teenager must be able to lead and be responsible for younger kids.
3. Dog walker: Dog walking is also popular among teens, and your teen should be able to find dogs to walk through family, friends, and your neighborhood. Your teenager will be required to keep a set schedule for return clients and must be able to responsibly look after dogs.
4. Lawn mowing: While lawn mowing can be seasonal depending on your location, your teenager can also get experience in other lawn care areas such as raking leaves, trimming hedges, gardening, etc. Your teenager may need his own equipment, but many people already have mowers available to use.
5. Lifeguard: This may only be a seasonal position where you live, but many indoor pools need lifeguards throughout the year. Your teen will need lifeguard and CPR certification to get this job, but many pools offer this training as part of the job.
6. Mover: If your teenager is okay with highly physical work, being a mover may be a good option. This job requires the ability to move heavy objects and furniture and to stand/walk for long periods of time.
7. Newspaper delivery: If your teenager has a car or bicycle, this job may be a good fit. Some newspaper delivery routes may require your teen to get up in the early morning, so keep this in mind when searching for these jobs.
8. Umpire/referee: If your city or town has any local children's leagues, your teenager may want to consider becoming an umpire or referee for their games. These jobs generally require being in good shape and knowing the rules of the specific sport.
