How Are Diamonds Formed?

Have you ever asked yourself how diamonds form? They are so common because they are worn with all sorts of jewelry, but most people don't know where they come from. These little gems travel a long way before they reach the jewelry store. So how are they formed?

In this article, we will look at the main ways diamonds form and the places where we can find them. You will be surprised at all the facts about these sparkly stones. Here is a list of more information about diamonds:

1. Diamonds are not made from coal. Some may say diamonds form from coal, but that is a myth. Diamonds are much older than the plants that were the main ingredient for coal.

2. Coal seams are rocks in horizontal layers, but diamonds are in vertical layers.

3. The source of diamonds is carbon. When carbon atoms bond under pressure, they form crystals; crystals are what you see when you look at a sparkly diamond.

4. Diamond formation happens very deep under the surface of the planet Earth. This formation occurs 90 - 125 miles deep. Some are made quickly, in days or months, but most others take millions of years to form.

5. There are colored diamonds; that color is the elements that were present during the formation of the diamond.

6. In its present condition, it is impossible to determine the exact age of a diamond, but geologists who study specific minerals can estimate approximately how old they are.

7. A rough diamond formation can be paused if the temperature or pressure changes. It can take a break for hundreds or even millions of years before it continues to form.

8. Four main processes are responsible for most diamonds in the world: diamond formation in planet Earth's mantle, diamond formation in a subduction zone, diamond formation at impact sites, and diamond formation in space.

9. The vast majority of diamonds formed in diamond mines are found in the upper mantle and come to the surface with the help of volcanic eruptions.

10. Open-pit and underground mines contain enough diamonds for profitable mining.

11. When rocks are moved into the subduction zones by tectonic plates, they can return to the surface with diamonds. In these subduction zones, diamonds grow only 50 miles deep at temperatures as low as 390 degrees. That's cold compared to the  2,000 degrees it usually takes!

12. Rocks that have traveled to subduction zones and back are very small and not interesting for commercial use, but some stones came from that zone as blue diamonds.

13. Throughout history, Earth has been impacted by a few asteroids. These asteroids created a lot of pressure and very high temperatures. These conditions are excellent for diamond formation. For this reason, diamond retrieval at asteroid impact sites is not uncommon. Diamonds are in impact sites such as the Popigai Crater in Siberia and the Meteor Crater in Arizona.

14. NASA researchers have found large amounts of tiny diamonds in some meteorites. Unfortunately, these diamonds are so tiny that they are too small for the jewelry industry.

So there you have it; this is how diamonds form and appear on the Earth's surface.
