There once was an adorable pug named Ernie who lived with his owner, a kind woman named Katie. Ernie was the most lovable and loyal dog, and Katie loved him so. But Ernie had one tiny flaw that drove Katie absolutely crazy: his snoring.

Each night, Katie would try to sleep, but Ernie's snoring would keep her up all night. It was so loud that you could hear him clearly on the opposite side of the house upstairs! Katie tried everything she could think of to make him stop. She gave him a special pillow to support his neck, ran a humidifier and a dehumidifier, and even tried doggie acupuncture, but nothing seemed to work.

One day, Katie decided to take Ernie to the vet to see if there was anything they could do about his snoring. She just had to get some sleep. The vet examined him and told Katie that Ernie's snoring was caused by his little pug snout and allergies, which made it difficult for him to breathe properly.

The vet recommended that Katie make some important changes to Ernie's lifestyle to help him breathe better, such as keeping him at a healthy weight and avoiding strenuous exercise. The vet also put Ernie on doggie allergy medication. Katie followed the vet's advice, but Ernie's snoring only got worse! How could that be?

Katie was at the end of her rope until one day, she saw a video on Instagram of a pug sleeping with a special little device on his nose. It was called a canine snore guard and was designed to help dogs like Ernie breathe better by keeping their airways open.

In all honesty, Katie was willing to try anything, so she ordered one for Ernie right away. She was a little skeptical at first, but to her surprise, it worked! Ernie's snoring was reduced to nothing but a light sighing sound, and Katie finally got the peaceful sleep she so desperately needed and deserved.

From then on, Ernie slept soundly with his snore guard on, and Katie was grateful for the restful sleep. She threw away her earplugs and the white noise machine. Ernie was now the perfect dog for her in every way, and they lived happily ever after .... But Katie did wonder if they made an anti-gas machine for his late-night farts!
