Q: Why should you not feed or approach bears in Florida?
A: Feeding bears leads them to lose their natural fear of people. It's also illegal in Florida to leave out garbage or food because it can attract bears. Bears are also dangerous and getting close to them is a big safety concern.

Q: How should you secure your food and garbage?
A: You can store garbage in a sturdy garage or shed or secure it in a bear-resistant dumpster. In addition, you can modify your existing garbage set-up so that it's more bear-resistant. You should also try to put your garbage out the morning of pickup instead of the night before. 

Q: I have fruit trees. How should I keep the bears from trying to eat the fruits?
A: Make sure to pick ripe fruit from trees or bushes and regularly remove any that have fallen to the ground.

Q: How do you protect your gardens, beehives, compost, and livestock?
A: You can protect these areas of your home with electric fencing.

Q: Should I remove my wildlife and bird feeders?
A: Yes you should. If you wish to keep these feeders up, only put out enough food for wildlife to finish eating before nightfall. You can also modify them to make your feeders bear-resistant.

Q: Is it okay to leave pet food outside?
A: If bears have been spotted in the area, do not leave pet food outdoors. It's okay for short periods of time but be sure to bring any leftover food and dishes in after every feeding. 

Q: Can I leave my grill outside?
A: You should always clean and degrease smokers and grills after each use and if it's possible, store them in a sturdy garage or shed.

Q: What should I do if I see any bear activity on my property?
A: If you spot bear activity on your property, alert your neighbors promptly and share your knowledge about how to avoid conflicts with bears. You may also suggest that your local government or HOA's institute ordinances that require trash to be safely secured.

Q: Where can I go for more information on bears?
A: For more information on bears, you can visit the following website: MyFWC.com/Bear

Q: If I see someone harming a bear, what should I do?
A: To report animal abuse, or if you spot someone intentionally feeding them, you may call the FWC’s Wildlife Alert Hotline at 888-404-FWCC (3922).
