Darling,

I hope this letter finds you well. I apologize that I haven't been able to write as of late. I fear that the workload here has begun to take its toll on all of us. Talla tells me he is noticing many of the men struggling with morale, and suggests we address it before the week is out. I feel the elements are to blame. There is only so much we can do to accommodate these men, but I'm afraid it is not enough. They are sleeping in the dirt and I mean that literally, with nothing more than a canvas tent to protect them at night. Couple that with the heat and you have miserable working conditions that no one in the world should have to endure. We reached out to Norrington, but he declined additional funding to build barracks. We responded by asking for cots to at least get the men off the ground, but he refused that request as well. 

In response, Benjamin, and myself have talked about removing the cots from our tents, but Talla advised us that would not change anything. He cheekily stated that we should keep to cots because we will need all the rest we can get to prepare for the day these men decide to blame us for their fates. He said it with a smile, but I'm not convinced it was a joke. Talla is a good man and wise man. His people listen to him and without him here I think this task would have been impossible. Ben and I discussed moving working hours to the evening when the sun went down to help combat the heat exhaustion, but Talla quickly vetoed the idea stating that not only would the number of injuries go up due to the lack of artificial light at night, but that if the lions in the area weren't already a big enough headache to worry about, they certainly would become one. 

I came here to change the world. To do something great with my life. To lead men and become someone you can be proud of. I do not know if any of this will come to fruition. Please, tell the children I love them and that if things don't get better here in the next few weeks, I may be coming home earlier than expected.
