Waking from her travel back to the future, Cindy is spent. Going back and forth strains her body dramatically. Each time she returns, she has less and less energy. She finds it difficult to bounce back. Getting up, she makes her way to her room. Feeling faint, she pushes the door open with little strength left. She notices right away all of her possessions are still there. No one has touched anything. Cindy was sure they would have removed her things based on the last note she sent. She told them she was staying in the past, only to return to finalize her departure from this time. Maybe it was the fact that she would return one more time, that made them leave her things in place. It’s late at night, so she showers and goes to bed. 

The next morning, the usual knocks on her door don’t happen. Eager to see everyone, she makes her way downstairs. Walking into breakfast she spots Victoria. 

Victoria sees her and screams “Cindy”. The two embrace and go back to the table together. A plate is placed in front of her. The servant brings the various selections for her to choose from. Keeping it simple, she goes for a light breakfast.

Victoria is excited to catch up with her. “Tell me what has happened.” 

Cindy pours out the story with emotions running high. “Victoria, I told Chad everything. He stared at me as if I had lost my mind. At first, his silence gave me hope, but then when he said he was concerned about my well-being, I knew it was over. I should never have put it out there like I did. It was too much at one time. I am so heartbroken, Victoria.”

“Come, now. Don’t jump to conclusions. He may send you a note to come home.”

“Victoria, you should have seen his face. I honestly don’t think he will.”

Victoria says, “Cindy, there’s a lot you don’t know here. Some things have come to light that we didn’t know before.”

“Like what?”

Victoria searches the room. “It’s not my place to tell you. Ask Frederick to let Michelle know you’re back.”

Cindy is puzzled but says, “Okay. But honestly, what could she tell me now that we haven’t discussed before?”
