First, let's list their stats:

Bruno Mars - 5'5" 146lbs
Octavian Augustus - Unknown

It's hard to call based on the stats, but Octavian likely has the edge because Bruno and Octavian were probably around the same height, but having unknown qualities could be an edge in the competition since Bruno wouldn't know what to prepare against.

Bruno Mars might be nicknamed after a wrestler, but he's been singing and entertaining his whole life rather than working on any sports or physical activities that could help him in a boxing match. Octavian fought in wars from a young age, was wounded and overcame his injuries, survived a shipwreck, and he went on to win a civil war that transformed Rome into an Empire that dramatically changed the course of human history. So, Octavian seems to have an advantage.

Octavian would have known and possibly even trained for Ancient Greek boxing or Pankration. Some ancient boxing matches used spiked gauntlets, and others used wrestling techniques combined with striking which would be more similar to modern MMA. If you put Bruno in boxing matches like those, he probably doesn't stand a chance. 

However, contemporary boxing uses vastly different techniques that could give Bruno an edge. Ancient Greek boxing didn't have much footwork, so Bruno could get a slight edge if he learned to move correctly. Pankration fighting and even early modern boxing didn't aim for the head because the head contains extremely hard bones that can easily break the delicate bones of the hand. Breaking fingers back then could mean death. Not only could boxers no longer defend themselves in combat, but they could lose the ability to take care of themselves after the fight and compound fractures could easily result in deadly infections. Instead, boxers of the past aimed for body shots to the liver for maximum damage and even today the liver shot is a brutal strategy. Of course, Octavian's concept of boxing would have limited him to only headshots, but it was more like slap boxing where fighters couldn't move much. The liver shot still works today and could catch Octavian off-guard, and Octavian wouldn't have a concept of head defense like Bruno would have seen in movies or at in-person boxing matches. A single well-timed jab could be lights-out for the Roman Emperor.

Of course, if you give both of them time to train, and both fighters were trained equally, it's unlikely Bruno could put a dent in the former soldier.
