Sylvie: Sylvie is 5'9" tall. She is on the curvier side, with wide hips and a full chest. Her hair is long, jet-black, and straight with blunt bangs. She has a pale complexion. Her face is heart-shaped with expressive, round grey eyes, a slightly upturned nose, and bow-shaped lips. Her eyebrows are thick and as black as her hair. 
Sylvie has a food-inspired sleeve tattoo on her left arm. Some of the designs include a strawberry, a chef's knife, an apron, and a slice of lemon meringue pie. She also has a vertical labret piercing and a nose ring in her right nostril. She bears a scar on her left calf from a skateboarding accident years ago.
Sylvie's style is casual and comfortable. She has a small wardrobe, mostly consisting of dark clothes. She favors black leggings, denim shorts, black t-shirts, and tank tops. Her only shoes are an old pair of all-black Converse sneakers. She wears a black and red plaid jacket that belonged to her father, and a silver cross necklace on a black leather cord that was her mother's. She never goes anywhere without her old sage-green backpack, adorned with enamel pins and patches. For safety, she carries a black metal baseball bat, which she has covered in stickers. 

Dan: Dan is 5'10" tall. He has a tanned complexion, heavy stubble, and shoulder-length, wavy, mousy brown hair that he often wears in a ponytail. He has muscular arms and legs. He sports rugged good looks with full lips, deep, kind brown eyes, a wide nose, and a chiseled jaw.  
Dan has a tattoo of a rose on his upper left arm and a tattoo of a wolf on his upper right arm. His forearms bear several scars of varying sizes from his years of combat as a soldier. His style also reflects his former career. He favors combat boots, camouflage cargo pants, black t-shirts, and black tank tops that show off his biceps. He wears a dog tag on a silver chain around his neck, and his gold wedding ring on his left ring finger. He can always be seen with a black messenger bag, covered in button badges and patches from 80s and 90s bands. For protection, he carries an old double-action revolver that belonged to his grandfather.
