Sacha sat down on her chair in front of the class of kittens with a space book in her paw. She cleared her throat, she looked at the students and the teacher permitted her to start.

Sasha: "Hi, my name is Sacha I'm the mother of Misty, and I'm a cat mission specialist astronaut. My work revolves around conducting experiments and maintaining the spacecraft and equipment. The experiments are in the sphere of how gravity affects various cat materials and I also test new technologies in space. So this is the basics of my work, is there anything you wanna ask me?"
Oscar:  "Have you ever seen an alien cat?"
Sasha: "Haha no, I never saw an alien cat, but one time I got really scared while repairing the outside of my ship. In front of me I see another astronaut, and it was impossible because only me and my colleague were there and my colleague was piloting the ship. I became terrified and thought it was someone else, but no, it was my reflection in some space debris and I didn't recognize me because I was in my cat space suit. I know I'm an idiot, haha.
Oscar: "But do you believe there are more cats outside of Earth?"
Sasha: "Do I believe there are other cats outside Earth? Yes I do, the universe has a lot of space."
Milo: "What technologies do you test in space?"
Sasha: "Hmm, that is an interesting question I can't answer, almost everything I test is classified. Oh, I just remembered a funny one I can tell. My colleague Lucy loves Catit Creamy Lickable Cat Treats, but it's very hard to eat cream in space because of gravity. So she asked the scientist to make a firm Catit Creamy Lickable Cat Treats so they did. We went to space, and she was eager to test it. She pulled out the new Catit treats but they spread everywhere in the ship because the scientists forgot that we can't grab little things with our paws, so for the rest of the trip, I would see Lucy jumping around and diving to try to eat the Catit Treats, it was a really funny mission.
Teacher: "Kittens, this is it for the day. Wave your paws and say goodbye to Ms.Sasha."
Kittens: "Goodbye."
