Tiana stood behind her mother and mother-in-law, one hand on the shoulder of each great lady. She was so very glad they were here with her, helping her pave the way toward her throne. Though one had been born into wealth and privilege and the other born into a second-class, pigeonholed status where people with her skin color rarely raised themselves out of struggling mightily every day to meet their basic needs, something bigger brought them to equal footing. It was grief. Loss. A year ago, after a battle with a slow but incurable illness, Naveen's mother lost the man she'd been married to for nearly 40 years. There seemed to be a quiet understanding between the two women, sisters in heartache. 
Not that is was so dark as all that. Upon learning of his father's illness, Tiana and Naveen did something she'd never imagined. They'd sold the restaurant, packed up their New Orleans home, and asked the nanny that looked after their two daughters to accompany them across the sea. The girls, Lottie and Elodie, were doing fine. They'd barely understood that they were princesses, and all this was a grand adventure. Tiana felt a pinch in her stomach anytime she looked at Lottie. Her oldest, her girl that now would grow to one day be queen. It was better than being barred from half of life in the bayou, but it was far from a normal life. 
"You're worrying, darling," her mother said, pulling Tiana from her misgivings. 
"This is Naveen's birthright dear, and I have a surprise for you," the queen said. "Follow me." 
Tiana followed the queen mother down the winding, tapestried stone walls of the castle. She'd never get used to how sprawling the palace was, how many rooms there were. This walk wasn't comforting her. 
That was until the queen mother pulled open a door and said, "Oh, I hope you like it!" 
"Oh," Tiana said at first, words beyond her. 
There before her was a fully equipped, top-of-the-line kitchen. Every tool she could imagine and some she'd never laid eyes on before gleamed under the bright lights. Rolling pins stood sentinel beside marble slabs meant to evenly cool chocolate. And, best of all, in pride of place, stood a framed picture of her father.
