Ok, here are five suggestions for great places to retire. 

1. Lancaster, Pennsylvania 
Lancaster is a city that offers an outstanding balance between commercial and natural spaces that all types of residents can appreciate. It is home to expansive farms and well-manicured lawns in the suburbs. U.S. News recently ranked it at #61 for their Best Places to Live survey. It was also ranked the #1 Best Place to Retire, #3 Best Place to Live in Pennsylvania, and #16 Safest Place to Live. 

2. Harrisburg, Pennsylvania 
Harrisburg is another town in Pennsylvania that is considered an excellent place to retire. If you love to explore the great outdoors, they are easily accessible in this area. Bikers and joggers enjoy spending time at the nearby Susquehanna River and residents also like to hike the famous Appalachian Trail or go camping at one of the many state parks in the area. 

3. Pensacola, Florida 
If you would prefer to retire farther south, Pensacola is an excellent place to consider. The metro area is home to a good mix of history and nature, and the location is rich in culture. The Spanish first arrived in the area during the 16th century while the Native Americans have lived in Pensacola for hundreds of years. It is known as the "City of Five Flags" for the Spanish, French, British, Confederate, and American governments which have laid claim to the region. 

4. Ann Arbor, Michigan 
Ann Arbor is known as a city of contrasts. It can be both rural and urban, outdoorsy and high-tech, as well as counterculture and high society all at the same time. This college town is home to the University of Michigan and locals enjoy all the perks that go along with living in a traditional Midwestern college town. It has charming historic main streets that are lined with bookstores and taverns, a nice mix of longtime residents as well as those who are only staying temporarily. The town has a low crime rate and a diverse job market making it a great choice for those who want to retire or those who may want to look into a brand-new career. 

5. Fort Wayne, Indiana 
Fort Wayne is another excellent place to consider moving to when you are planning your retirement. It has a low cost of living and quiet neighborhoods making it a peaceful place to call home This midsize metro area is the heart of the Midwest and offers residents access to amenities such as multiple entertainment options and a thriving arts scene. It is also home to fun annual events such as the Three Rivers Festival and BuskerFest.
