They say trust is a two-way street, but I'm starting to feel as though it might be a dead end. I've always tried to make the most out of my life as a doormat. For the longest time, I sat in a department store with my fellow mats, and they would say, "Matt, you're such a great guy" and "Matt, you're one of the best." I felt like the best, too, beaming my "Welcome"  for everyone to see. I was a symbol of hospitality. Then, Jen and Dion took me home. They seemed like a great couple, and from what I heard, they were going to set up their new home for the first time.

I remember how excited I was to cross the threshold and see that open space. Where, oh, where would they put me? Perhaps hung up on the front door to welcome guests or propped up on a table by the stairs. All I knew was that people would see me and feel welcomed into the home. At least, that's what I assumed. I was put on the ground while the couple explored the house; it was only temporary, of course. After the couple got over their giddiness of going through the entire home, they came back to the pile of boxes they'd brought in. 

They both agreed to get started unpacking, but before they did, Dion picked me up. "First things first," he said with a twinkle in his eye. This was it! He was going to put me in a place of honor. I was a little confused when I was unceremoniously dumped outside right in front of the door, right in the footpath of anyone entering or exiting the home. Did they not understand my peril here? The door suddenly swung open and Jen drove her high-heeled shoes straight into me. Dion was soon to follow, stepping outside and closing the door as they went to collect the rest of the boxes from the car. 

My misery was only compounded over the next few weeks. The couple hosted a housewarming party. Hour after hour, guests traipsed in and out of the home, stomping on me without remorse. I was a tool to them, I realized then, resigned to my fate. Nothing but an accessory to be trodden upon, to wipe off the dust outside.
