It was a beautiful, sunny day in Los Angeles - the kind of day where you feel like you just need to be outside. At least, Dave felt that way. Dave decided to take a walk to his local neighborhood park. His plan was to walk around, explore the park, and enjoy the sunshine. That's not quite what happened. 
Dave arrived at the park early in the afternoon. There was a smell of fresh-cut grass in the air, people walking their dogs, a few fishing in the lake, and plenty of kids at the playground. It was your typical day at the park. Dave decided he was in an adventurous mood, so he wandered off into the dense forests. He was not a stranger to these trees - he spent his childhood running around here when he had troubles at home.
Today was different. There was a heavy ambiance in the air, although it wasn't foggy. He noticed out of the corner of his eye that there was a giant Oak tree with a large hole in the middle. It was so large it seemed that it could fit a human inside of it! How strange, he thought. He decided to approach the tree to get a better look at the hole and what might have caused that to happen. 
As he approached, he felt every hair on his body stand up straight, producing instant goosebumps. He extended his arm to reach out and touch the tree and ZAP! A lightning strike struck right next to him. In clear blue skies? How is that possible? 
Fearing what might happen if he tried to touch it again, he rested his arms at his side. On second thought, what could happen? He wasn't afraid of a coincidence. Instead of reaching for the tree again, he decided to try and climb inside of it. His left foot crossed the barrier first and it instantly felt like it was melting. Curious, he proceeded and stuffed his entire body inside the tree. His whole body felt like it was melting! Dave closed his eyes in fear and once he reopened them, he was no longer in the park. He saw a barren wasteland in front of him with a scorching sun and alien-like creatures scattering across the sand. Where am I? he said to himself. It's almost like another dimension...
