“This is your duty as an officer; you’ve put in the work and training, now apply it!” Josh told himself. 
He needed to act now, or many good men might never return to their families. The fatalities to the Japanese in the war thus far had already been too high, but no more would occur, not under his watch. Josh quickened his pace as he heard another muffled peal, and felt a small explosion rock the hull. He broke into a run. 

Several hours earlier, it had all been different. Nobody on board had expected to experience conflict; the trip was purely operational, after all, a routine test just off the coast. The crew had gone about their light duties lazily, with only the engines making any noise, the day monotonous and droning. 
There had been laughter, joking, card games and reading, the camaraderie of men settling in for a long trip, who had not yet tired of the novelty. 

Josh furrowed his brow. Who would do this to their country? By sabotaging the engines, they risked going down into a watery tomb with everyone else. Who was unscrupulous enough to do this? He had a good idea. Ever since their departure, there had been one person that had drawn Josh’s attention. What was his name? Lumiè-something-French. Shifty little character, always playing cards, dishonestly no doubt, though nobody ever caught him. Always skulking around alone at odd hours. 

Where was everyone? The hallways were conspicuously empty. He had heard cries earlier, but had not passed a single person yet. 

Josh reached the engine room, smelling an acrid smell before he entered. He noticed a small hole in the adjacent instrumental panel. Near an open wall panel over a pile of wires was Lumiè, hunched, and focusing intently on a small charge of sorts, but he was not alone. Josh felt his breath leave him. Yura. 

Yura had been the government consultant on the project, endlessly asking questions. She had been around the entire craft; of course she’d know how to disable the critical components! He should have seen it before. He tried to fight back the feelings of rage and betrayal. Neither had seen Josh yet, but he needed to approach this carefully, and logically.
