Here are some ways to grow your brand on Twitter. 

1. Refine marketing strategy. 
First, you must set clear goals and expectations, define your target audience, research the competition, and focus on what makes you stand out. By doing this, you give yourself clear metrics to be measured by. A goal allows you to track progress and identify when more work may be needed. Knowing your target audience makes it easier to produce content. Researching your competition can both inspire you and better you. Focusing on what stands out from the crowd will enable you to create engaging content. 

2. Create valuable content. 
If your content doesn't give your readers any value, the likelihood of them engaging with you or continuing to follow you is slim. Your audience sees a whole load of content daily that is useless for them or simply too like other content. Create valuable content to stand out and grow a following that knows you constantly have them in mind. This will help to solidify your audience.

3. Engage with your followers. 
Tweets providing value are great, but the one thing we value most is human connection. Engage and connect with followers through DM or in replies. This will help foster a genuine connection with your audience and show them that you care and are responsive to them. This is extremely important, considering how many people are online. If you create that bond with people, they can be more forgiving when you make mistakes and more supportive when needed. 

4. Use trending hashtags.
Hashtags are an incredible way to grow the visibility of your tweets. Try to see what is currently trending and produce content that hops on that bandwagon. The more people that see your tweets, the better, and using a trending hashtag vastly improves the chances prospective new followers will see your tweets. Be careful not to use too many hashtags, as this can be seen as spam.

5. Reuse and Repurpose.
Coming up with new content all the time can be pretty tough. There is no harm in reusing or repurposing old content. In many cases, the point will remain valuable if it's valuable content. Simply saying the same thing differently or highlighting a new use case for information is an excellent way to churn out lots of content over time. Obviously, it's not good to copy and paste your old tweets. Try improving them with better wording so your content constantly improves.
