The monk opened his eyes from his meditation, and immediately knew what I needed to do to achieve peace. He decided to hike up the Sacred Mountain in the hope that by reaching the mountaintop he will gain a new perspective and ultimately achieve inner peace. The monk gathered himself and began his hike from the bottom of the mountain 3,000 below the believed source of his nirvana.

As the monk hiked up the mountain, he came to a crossing where he was met by a tiger that was trapped in a thorny hedge. The tiger growled as the monk approached it; the monk, unafraid of the tiger and instead feeling compassion for its plight, began pulling the thorny vines away from the tiger in an attempt to free it from its bonds. The tiger continued to growl but became more curious as the monk freed it from the bush's grasp. Once the tiger was free, the monk bowed before it and offered a peaceful smile. The tiger, rather than attack the monk, laid down in front of the monk, appearing to be grateful for the monk's assistance. The monk, pleased with the outcome, got up and continued on his path.

Further up the mountain, the monk was intercepted by two bandits who were obstructing the path. The bandits appeared menacing and looked like they were ready to pounce on the monk. The monk, on the other hand, was calm and assured of himself. The bandits produced knives from their robes, thinking they would take the monk's possessions with force. However, the monk reached into his robes and produced a loaf of bread and a clay bottle containing water; he offered the items to the bandits, who received the items with a sense of gratitude. The monk walked past the bandits, who offered no resistance and instead bowed to the monk with humility and respect.

The monk was within a few hundred yards of the mountaintop when a dark cloud formed around it and threatened to drench the monk in water. Lightning began striking the ground below the clouds, but this did not deter the monk from continuing on the path. As the monk walked through the storm clouds untouched, he reached the top of the mountain and was greeted with a view of the entire world; the view immediately gave him a sense of peace.
