Kotone continues to skim through the practical book, hoping that she can find a quick antidote or stalling spell to help this man. The herbalists that were there could not diagnose him fast enough. His breaths were getting deeper and harder, he was starting to pant like a wolf finding its meal for the day. Kotone keeps looking and looking for a spell and she landed on a simple antidote. She thought to herself "This looks easy enough." She ties her hair back into a ponytail and starts to pray. The first step to any spell was to pray so the goddess can find you and give you her blessing. She prays and prays until the power starts swelling up inside her. The village folk starts to take notice of the swirl of magic surrounding her and start to walk away from the sickly man. Kotone finishes praying and then reads the next part of the spell. It wasn't that complicated, she walks up to the man on the ground and places her hand on his head. And with one vicious roar, she screams, "Antidote!" The ground around her starts to crack and the man starts violently shaking, eyes glazing over white. After a few seconds, the spell was done and the man's eyes return to normal. He gets up, feeling fine and recovered. The village folk couldn't believe it. She was a real healer. Kotone sighs at a job well done and proceeds to faint in front of the village folk.

Kotone wakes up in her bed. She faintly remembers the good deed she did as she tries to climb out. Little did she know, the spell took a huge toll on her body and every limb and organ started screaming in pain. Kotone screams so loud you would think the dragon is approaching. The older woman from the fountain walks in and starts scolding her. Then she laughs.

"Kotone, you did a great job, You passed the trial."
"What about the well?"
"That was never part of the trial. It was always the plan that one of us would fall over from poison."

The older woman hands over the history book and tells Kotone, "This is your next trial, learn everything in this book then come talk to me." She leaves and Kotone was still unsatisfied. But that can wait until later.
