You belong here in the deepest, darkest bowels of this place; endless suffering will be your prize.

Once a man of cunning and deceit, of unlimited power on the surface; here, you are but an aimless soul destined to live out the rest of eternity at my feet. You will grovel, and I will delight. You will wince with pain, and I will laugh with glee. You will beg for mercy, and I will give you none, for your misdeeds toward the living will now be brought squarely upon your head. 

There is no death here, only neverending torment. What awaits you now are the fruits of your wicked labor. I will lead you to the unpromised lands, the lands forsaken by your gods who have turned their backs on you in shame. Kneel before me, my child, for I have watched you with great interest. I look forward to picking your brain, both figuratively and literally.

This desolate landscape is now your home, where you have many other brothers and sisters who welcome you with open, blistered arms. I look forward to implementing the most prized of my tools; I will start your introduction with a million full years in the rack to stretch the muscles and skin of your delicate human frame to its breaking point. Once you have graduated from the rack, I will place you in your new home: a solitary, lonely tent made from your skin which I will flay from your body in strips to weave into a tapestry and place upon tentpoles made with the bones of your legs. You will no longer be able to move as I line the interiors of your house with memories of the people you have hurt in your living years. You will stare at them until your soul hurts with the deepest of sorrows, a reflection of the pain and torment you caused to those who had the unfortunate luck of crossing your path.

Finally, after the lights of the firmament above fall out of the sky and down to your precious Earth, and the mountains crash into the oceans, while those who are still alive hide in terror from the wrath of your gods, you will be here, in the fiery bosom of Hell; the end of the world will be no comfort to you, for you will live out your existence here with me.
