Edgar Raines - as he was known to the rest of the financial world - had achieved success on his own, without the help of his prestigious family's name. Seeking to make a name for himself, Edgar set out on a journey that took him from the city of Guadalajara, Mexico, to Orange County, California, where he quickly sought employment at the closest and most available job opportunity he could find. In this case, it was as a cashier at a local In-N-Out burger restaurant. 

Edgar decided to change his name before his job interview, declining to go by his birthname (Edgar Ramirez) as he believed a less ethnic name would open more doors and create more opportunities down the road. Edgar also wanted to put as much distance between himself and the Ramirez family name to ensure any opportunities he gained would not be based on the fact that his family name was synonymous with the Mexican-American oil company established several generations before his own time. Edgar desired to be a self-made man, someone who could prove to the rest of the world - and himself - that success can be achieved in one's lifetime, and that it doesn't necessarily rely on already being rich.

In-N-Out cashier was the first successful venture he crossed off his list. The next: manager. And then the next: corporate. Edgar Raines' reputation as a rock-steady, reliable, hardworking individual preceded him. In his corporate role, Edgar implemented many changes to the In-N-Out business process that were used to streamline the making of their food, reduce costs, and line franchise owners' and business executives' pockets with cash. 

Instead of resting on his laurels, Edgar had a sound investment strategy in place: he invested chiefly in Apple stock and Bitcoin before they went parabolic, and he became a sort of "stock whisperer" in the process. The name Edgar Raines was known for quality, success, and achievement, with many drawing comparisons to Edgar and to another famous name that was equated with those attributes: 

Ramirez.
