President Dwight D. Eisenhower created the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) by signing the National Aeronautics and Space Act on July 29, 1958. Assets and research programs previously administrated by the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA) were transferred to NASA as part of the act.

The creation of NASA was a response to the USSR's launch of a series of Sputnik satellites. The USSR launched the first Sputnik satellite on October 4, 1957. This launch is generally recognized as the start of the Space Age. It also officially began the Space Race between the USSR and the United States of America.

The United States of America initially saw NASA and the Space Race as a matter of national security. Whoever controlled space would have the high ground in the event of a conflict. At the time, the USSR and USA were locked in the Cold War, a political and ideological rivalry between the two superpowers.

NASA was given the task of developing the space capabilities of the United States, including creating the capacity to launch living organisms and hardware into space. Early efforts to launch organisms into space included launching two monkeys named Able and Baker on a suborbital flight on May 28, 1959. Both monkeys survived, though Able died two years later and Baker spent most of her life on display after the flight. NASA's Mercury Program also launched chimpanzees on test flights before sending astronauts.

During the 1960s and 1970s, NASA conducted the Mercury, Gemini, Apollo, and Skylab programs, which taught many valuable lessons about conducting space missions that it still uses. Apollo sent crews to the Moon for the first time during the late 1960s and early 1970s.

While the Cold War ended with the collapse of the USSR, NASA continues to conduct scientific research in space and conduct its crewed space programs. It is currently a partner in the International Space Station and is preparing to return astronauts to the Moon with the Artemis Program.
