Got it. Here are some suggestions for nutritious casserole dishes that aren’t too festive: 

1. Tuna noodle casserole with spinach and artichoke - For this dish, you'll need canned white tuna, wide egg noodles, cream cheese, baby spinach, jarred or canned artichokes, garlic, butter, flour, milk, dry sherry, panko breadcrumbs, fresh parsley, and salt. It should take about 70 minutes to prepare. 

2. Green bean casserole - This casserole calls for green beans as well as bacon, mushrooms, homemade gravy, and crispy fried shallots. It takes about 2 hours to put together. 

3. French onion and chicken casserole - Make this casserole with onions, chicken breasts, melted parmesan, gruyere cheese, mushrooms, chicken broth, and spices. It will take approximately 40 minutes. 

4. Green chile enchilada casserole with beef - This recipe includes ground beef, canned green chiles, onion, refried beans, corn tortillas, enchilada sauce, and shredded cheese. You can make the dish in about an hour. 

5. Broccoli and wild rice casserole - For this dish, you'll need broccoli, shredded chicken, cheddar cheese, wild rice, butter, chicken broth, milk, sour cream, canned cream of chicken soup, and crumbled ritz crackers. It will take about 50 minutes to make. 

6. Sweet potato and chicken taco casserole - This casserole takes about an hour and a half to make. It includes sweet potatoes, shredded chicken, onion, garlic, bell peppers, corn, black beans, canned fire-roasted tomatoes, spices, tortilla chips, shredded cheese, and taco toppings of your choice (such as salsa, guacamole, and sour cream).

7. Butternut squash and kale casserole - This casserole is a filling and nutritious vegetarian option, with onion, garlic, butternut squash, kale, butter, milk, flour, gruyere cheese, some stale bread, and various spices. You'll need about an hour and a half to put this together. 

8. Cheesy baked ziti casserole - This makes another great vegetarian option with ziti pasta, marinara sauce, mozzarella, parmesan, and cream cheese. You could also choose to add extra vegetables such as spinach, mushrooms, zucchini, or whatever else you'd like to include. Without additional ingredients, this takes just 40 minutes to make. 

9. Zucchini, turkey, and parmesan casserole - For this casserole, you'll need ground turkey, zucchini, parmesan cheese, butter, sour cream, egg yolk, fresh chives, and panko bread crumbs. It should take 45-50 minutes to make. 

10. Chicken and spaghetti squash casserole - This dish calls for one large spaghetti squash, 3 chicken breasts, green pepper, diced tomatoes, cream of mushroom soup, greek yogurt, shredded cheese, fresh basil, and a few other spices. It takes about 75 minutes to make this dish.
