The BLT is a classic sandwich for a reason. It's got everything from salty bacon to crisp lettuce and tops it off with a juicy tomato. But let me tell you, we can make it even better.

First things first, let's talk about bread. Now you don't want something too crunchy like a French baguette or ciabatta roll. So we aren't going down that route, but you also don't want a regular old loaf of white bread either. The best bread is a loaf with some density and bite to it, like a country white loaf. You could even use brioche if you want something richer. 

Next up are the toppings. Cooking your bacon of choice is the easy part. An air fryer or oven makes it simple to clean too. But where this recipe shines are the extra ingredients. I always add sliced red onion to my BLT. It adds a spicy and sharp bite that cuts through the fattiness of the bacon grease. I also add in gorgonzola cheese crumbles, but any tangy blue cheese will do. The important part is how we are adding layer upon layer of flavor. Every piece is important till it rises into a crescendo.

The most important part, though, is the tomato. Slice them super thin, I mean nearly see-through, then season them with salt and pepper and set aside. The salt draws out some of the water and really makes them taste like they are bursting with tomatoey goodness. You will not believe this flavor bomb hack. It's like a zing shooting through your body, and your jaw will drop.

Now to assemble the sandwich; what I do is get two slices of bread out, then I use a thin layer of mustard on one piece. Anything works though I prefer a dijon. Then a thin layer of mayo on the other half. Next, I add the cheese on both sides and put them into a toaster oven until the bread is brown and the cheese is melty. Finally, you take it out, put on the cooked bacon, tomato, lettuce, and onion, and there you have it! Cut it on a diagonal and chow down. I promise you will not be disappointed.

And feel free to jazz it up any way you like. Some hot peppers would work great too! Yum!
