Dennis rubbed his eyes, aware of a distant noise as he slept. It sounded as though someone was knocking on the door. Presently, his eyes opened, and the noise persisted. Dennis sat up. Yes, there was definitely something tip-tapping on the front door. He went to investigate and was astonished to see a hand protruding through the broken glass of his front door. He took a deep breath, steadying himself. It wasn't fair to judge prematurely that this person was intending to rob him, so he waited patiently as the hand flopped around, looking for the handle. The thief flicked the lock and pushed the door open gently.
"Good evening, sir!" Dennis said cordially, and the thief started violently. The intruder stammered as if to make an excuse but seemed frozen in fear.
"I do think you've broken my door. If I was judging by impressions, I'd say you were here to rob me." Dennis said with a knowing chuckle. The thief chuckled along uneasily, not sure what he'd stumbled into.
"Please, sit." Dennis gestured broadly to the living room. "I'd love to hear why you're breaking down my door in the middle of the night." The thief was perplexed but still followed Dennis into the living room. A moment later, the two were sat with steaming cups of tea.
"So, what brings you to my humble abode?" Dennis asked.
"Uh, someone forgot their keys and needed help getting into their house. Must have gotten the wrong house number." The thief's eyes darted around the room.
"Of course," Dennis said, "And that must be why you have that set of keys." He gestured to the lock-picking kit the thief had clumsily tied to a keyring on his belt.
"Uh, yeah."
"And why, pray tell, do you have a ski mask?"
"It helps me focus," the thief said quickly. "Less distraction that way."
"Naturally, but you should really be careful." Dennis waggled a finger at him. "People 'round here might take you for a thief. Not me, of course. I tend to see the bigger picture."
"You're a very perceptive man, I'm sure." The thief stood. "Look, I really gotta go find the right house, so—" Dennis jumped up, opening the door.
"No bother at all. Have a nice night."
