Horen the owl was very deep in a hole of his own making. Of course, being an owl, he didn't actually make the whole. In point of fact, it wasn't even a physical hole but a metaphorical one. It may be better to call it a mess that Horen found himself in. Yes, that's it. Horen the owl was in a very big mess of his own making. 

His master, the great Arch Wizard Seelough, hadn't yet woken up to start his wizardly duties. Horen usually took this time in the morning to prepare things as best he could for his master. Such preparations included cracking a few eggs on the stove, laying out some nice new robes, and polishing up his spectacles. Of course, the Arch Wizard Seelough could accomplish all of this with magic, but then what would be the use of a familiar? Job security was really important to Horen. Unfortunately, one of Horen's talons scratched up a lens on his master's spectacles. 

Horen was mortified at his misstep. He would need to remedy this quickly in order to keep that aforementioned job security in check. Thinking quickly, he wound back the alarm clock and bought himself some time before flying out of the window towards town. Flying overhead, and with the spectacles in his talons, Horen circled high above the town looking for a familiar building that he had entered a few times before perched atop his master's shoulder. Swooping low, he landed on the windowsill and gave it a tap with his beak. An older woman with long white hair tied back in a bun turned with surprise at him, before a warm smile stretched across her face. She opened the window and in Horen flew.

"I remember you," said the woman. "You're friends with old Seelough on the hill, aren't you? What brings you to my shop today?"

Horen placed the spectacles on the table and gave them a slight push with his beak with a soft hoot.

"Ah, I see," she replied with true understanding. "Not to worry, dear. You've come to the right place. I'm no doctor, but with my jeweling skills, I can fix these spectacles right up in a jiffy." 

At that, Horen relaxed with relief. 

"There," the woman said after an hour.
