The full moon cast an eerie glow on the creepy, old Manor House. As I approached, I became increasingly nervous. It appeared more and more ominous in the gathering gloom. The old house was more threatening, more sinister than I could ever have envisaged. 

It had fallen into a derelict state and its facade was one of utter dilapidation. There were crumbling walls, peeling paintwork, and cracked walls. There was also a gaping hole in the roof, where tiles had blown off last winter in the gales. Cobwebs decked every window and hung like macabre Halloween decorations.

Then, there was the garden. Just a tangle of overgrown shrubs and trees, where roots had broken up the path. The heads of grotesque-looking statues stuck out amidst the tangle of weeds. They looked supernatural in the dusk. Almost unearthly! Some said the garden housed an ancient graveyard. Former residents of the house were laid to rest in the place where they had lived and died. They were destined to roam forever as ghosts within the walls of the manor.

The house stood as a relic from a past era. People said it was old, ancient even. Nobody could date it, but everyone knew it was a house with a terrible reputation. The exact nature and circumstances were shrouded in mystery. Numerous rumors of its dark former life were whispered in hushed tones. Some talked of a murder: an innocent young girl, strangled in her bed as she slept. Others dismissed it as a legend. It was a secret lost to the depths of time. 

Some people told of strange goings-on. There were unexplainable noises at night. Haunting screams echoed out at midnight, as eerie, bloodcurdling moans, and dark shadows complete with disfigured faces were seen in the windows. That was enough to give even the bravest soul nightmares. The tales became more ghastly, more terrifying, and more outlandish every time they were recounted. I tried desperately to push these images to the back of my mind, but I could not escape the impending doom and feeling that horrific evil lingered beneath the walls of this house.

This place was truly hostile. I paused, momentarily overcome with fear and trepidation at my mission. Through it all, I had made my mind up. I would face my fear and go in.
