I'm sorry to hear this! Suspicious charges can be frustrating. Here are some recommendations for how to best protect your funds:

1) Stick to large, reputable banks and institutions. Although there is some data that suggests large banks are more likely to be targets of cyberattacks, they are also more prepared to handle them. Small, hometown banks often have less rigorous security standards and a smaller amount of available cash flow, meaning that they cannot immediately refund your funds and must wait until the dispute has settled.

2) Complete all purchases on a credit card, rather than a debit card. Although this seems counter-intuitive, as credit cards incur interest, they are also much safer. When disputing a credit card charge, you do not have to pay the funds until the dispute is settled. It's much easier to stop a charge than it is to recover funds once they have departed your account. Furthermore, interest is only paid on credit card charges that carry over to the next month or interest period, and some might even offer perks like cash back on purchases or point accrual towards future discounts or interest rates.

3) Use a verified transaction company, such as Paypal, when completing online purchases. Paypal has buyer protection and can handle disputes efficiently. Smaller sites with their own payment processors might not be as safe and verified as they assert themselves to be, nor will they be as conveniently reachable in the event of a dispute. 

4) Refrain from linking your bank account, debit card, or credit card to any services. Saving your information in their system creates a database that can be breached at any point in the future if your password is discovered or the company suffers a cyberattack. Typing your information each time makes this less likely, although not impossible. 

5) Change your passwords frequently and don't save them on websites or in your browser. Using strong passwords and changing them frequently significantly reduces the likelihood they will be involved in a company's data breach. You may not be immediately notified of a compromised password, so don't reuse them.

6) Diversify your accounts. As the saying goes, "don't keep all of your eggs in one basket." Your checking account should be used for flowing cash, while your savings account should hold any lump sums that you may need access to in emergencies. Beyond your emergency fund, you can store cash in certificates of deposits (CDs) or investments that earn interest.

7) Stay aware of your account and purchases. Turn on purchase alerts if your bank offers them. Balance your checkbook and review your account frequently to notice any strange charges. The earlier these charges are caught, the easier they are resolved.

I hope these suggestions help better protect your funds in the future!
