The family was going out to breakfast one Sunday morning, but this wasn't going to be like a normal trip to a diner. Mom, Dad, and their two young children all excitedly climbed in the car to head on their way. Dad explained that this was a different type of restaurant called a dim sum restaurant. Instead of ordering from a waitress and having one big plate of food prepared back in the kitchen, at dim sum, you order a variety of bite-sized Chinese dishes. You can pick from things like steamed dumplings, buns filled with sweet or savory things, rice rolls, and small plates of stir-fried vegetables or meats. All the dishes come around on large carts or trays, and every table can take a look and choose what they want as they pass by. The kids thought it sounded fun, and the parents were excited to do it again. 

Soon they arrived at the restaurant. After checking in they were quickly ushered to a booth, and there was action all around them. Carts were wheeling everywhere! A friendly server presented water for everyone, and a pot of tea for mom and dad to drink. It wasn't long after that the first cart arrived at their table. They had yummy-looking egg tarts that tasted like warm vanilla pie.

The parents encouraged the kids to be adventurous and try new dishes. The kids tried a plate of sticky rice wrapped in lotus leaves and were pleasantly surprised by the fragrant, savory rice and the hidden treasure of meats and vegetables inside. Dumplings of all shapes and sizes were presented. The children's laughter filled the air as they shared their newfound favorites and traded bites with each other. Everyone appreciated the warmth and joy of sharing plates, laughter, and stories with their family.

Everyone slowly made their way back to the car when the meal was done. Everyone was so full! The kids couldn't wait to share their dim sum adventure with their friends. From that day forward, dim sum became a cherished tradition, and their taste buds yearned for new culinary discoveries.
