Here’s a list of 10 tools and ingredients commonly found at a Wiccan altar:

1. An athame - This is a ritual blade that witches often use to represent the physical manifestation and direction of their intention; it doesn’t need to be used to cut anything so many witches keep the blade dulled. This item is considered highly personal so while the classic style of an athame is a silver blade with a black leather hilt, you can choose whatever style or color resonates best with your personal style. 
2. Crystals - Various types of crystals all hold their own metaphysical meanings, some of which will be more relevant to your needs than others. But generally, clear crystals are believed to function as amplifiers that strengthen the power of most spells and can serve as substitutes for most other crystal types in a pinch. 
3. Candles - Countless spells call for the lighting of a candle to initiate the casting. Candles can also serve to represent the element of fire on your altar. 
4. A mortar and pestle - This tool is especially handy for grinding herbs and mixing ingredients for spells. 
5. A chalice, goblet, or small bowl - Often, spells will call for a vessel to contain water or another liquid, which may or may not be consumed during the casting. 
6. Glass jars with lids - Many spells will prompt you to mix ingredients together in a clear vessel and then store the mixture somewhere. You'll want to have some airtight glass jars handy for your castings. These can also be used to collect moon-charged water. 
7. A set of kitchen spices - It may be a bit pricier to buy herbs and spices in sets, but luckily this is a purchase you can multitask with. Lots of herbs and spices commonly used for cooking can also be incorporated into spellcasting, so you can be sure this set won't go to waste. Oth
8. Broom - It's not just a stereotype. Wiccans often use brooms for ritual cleansing before or after spellcasting. 
9. A totem, statue, or figurine - You can choose which representation of the divine, if any, you prefer to worship. Many Wiccans decorate their alters with small statues or other items that remind them of the deity or spirit that inspires them most. 
10. A grimoire - Also called a "Book of Shadows," Wiccans buy or craft blank journals in which they can record their experiences with spellcasting, alongside notes, ideas, plans, and anything else that inspires them.
