Sure, here are 25 questions with answers listed below, taken from the provided article.

1) Question: When was the Kingdom of Hawaii overthrown?
Answer: The Kingdom of Hawaii was overthrown on January 17, 1893.

2) Question: Who led the effort of the Kingdom of Hawaii to be overthrown?
Answer: A group of 13 Caucasian businessmen and lawyers called the Committee of Safety. Its 13 committee members consisted of six citizens of the Kingdom and seven foreign residents of Hawaii (five Americans, one Scotsman, and one German).

3) Question: How was the Kingdom of Hawaii overthrown?
Answer: The Kingdom of Hawaii was overthrown through a staged coup d'état against Queen Liliuokalani and her government.

4) Question: What was the ultimate goal of the Committee of Safety?
Answer: The Committee of Safety's ultimate goal was annexation to the United States.

5) Question: How did Queen Liliuokalani become Queen, and when did this occur?
Answer: Queen Liliuokalani succeeded her brother Kalakaua after his death on January 29, 1891.

6)  Question: Who formed the Annexation Club and when was it formed?
Answer: In 1892, The Annexation Club was formed by Lorrin A. Thurston.

7) Question: Who was Lorrin A. Thurston?
Answer: Lorrin A. Thurston was a leading politician, lawyer, businessman and native-born citizen of the Kingdom who formed the Annexation Club in 1892.

8) Question: What was the goal of the Annexation Club?
Answer: The club’s goal was to be ready to act if the queen proposed a lenient constitution to replace the restrictive one forced on Kalakaua in 1887.

9) Question: What was the restrictive constitution forced on Kalakaua in 1887 called and what did it do?
Answer: The restrictive constitution forced on Kalakaua in 1887 was called the Bayonet Constitution and it severely limited the monarch’s power.

10) Question: When did Queen Liliuokalani inform her Cabinet that she intended to propose a new Constitution?
Answer: After much agitation and maneuvering on both sides of the political fence, Queen Liliuokalani informed her Cabinet on January 14, 1893, that she intended to propose a new constitution.

11) Question: How did the Annexation Club immediately respond upon learning that Queen Liliuokalani intended to propose a new Constitution?
Answer: The Annexation Club quickly learned of her plans and formed the Committee of Safety among its members. They were also able to gain the support of the US government minister John L. Stevens and Captain G. C. Wiltse of the USS Boston, which was the fully armed US warship anchored in Honolulu Harbor.

12) Question: What was the Cabinet's response to Queen Liliuokalani's proposal for a new Constitution?
Answer: The queen’s Cabinet refused to support her or any new constitution she offered.

13) Question: What did Liliuokalani do to try to ease tensions after proposing a new Constitution and did it work?
Answer: Liliuokalani issued a proclamation stating that any changes she would seek to the constitution would be accomplished within the framework of the current one. Although this proclamation was attempting to ease tensions, it ultimately did not work due to the businessmen rapidly exploiting the opportunity to finally overthrow the monarchy.

14) Question: When did the Committee of Safety issue their proclamation and what did it do?
Answer: On January 17, 1893, a day after US sailors and marines landed in Hawaii, the Committee of Safety issued their proclamation which declared martial law in Hawaii, deposed the queen, and established the Provisional Government until union with the US could be finalized.

15) Question: What was Queen Liliuokalani's response to the Committee of Safety's proclamation?
Answer: As urged by her Cabinet, Queen Liliuokalani surrendered her power to the US government and departed the Palace for her private home nearby.

16) Question: How did the foreign consuls react to the Committee of Safety's proclamation?
Answer: By midnight, almost all of the 17 foreign consuls in Honolulu had recognized the new government.

17) Question: How did the new Provisional Government try to annex Hawaii after the Committee of Safety issued its proclamation and did it work?
Answer: The newly formed government immediately sent envoys to Washington DC to seek a treaty of annexation. However, the Royalist faction also sent their envoys to plead the queen’s case. In the end, an annexation treaty was sent to Congress but was eventually withdrawn after the inauguration of Grover Cleveland as US President.

18) Question: Why did the Japanese Navy send a warship to Honolulu on February 23, 1893?
Answer: To provide protection for Japanese citizens and express Japanese concern after the overthrow of the monarchy. The cruiser remained in Honolulu until May 11, 1893.

19) Question: What was the name of the warship that the Japanese Navy sent to Honolulu on February 23, 1893?
Answer: HIJM Naniwa.

20) Question: In late 1893, what was President Cleveland's stance on the coup in Hawaii?
Answer: President Cleveland was critical of the involvement of American troops in the coup, declaring it a misuse of the power of the United States.

21) Question: What were the United States Senate and Congress' responses to President Cleveland's stance on the coup in Hawaii?
Answer: Senate hearings followed, but Congress did not act to either restore the monarchy or annex Hawaii.

22) Question: What was the Provisional Government's response when learning that the progress of annexing Hawaii was stalling?
Answer: The leaders of the Provisional Government decided to form themselves into the Republic of Hawaii.

23) Question: Who was the first president of the Republic of Hawaii?
Answer: Sanford B. Dole, who had also been president of the Provisional Government. 

24) Question: How did the pineapple industry develop?
Answer: The pineapple industry developed when James D. Dole arrived in Hawaii from Boston in 1899.

25) Question: What occurred on January 6, 1895?
Answer: Several hundred Native Hawaiians and other Royalists mounted a counterrevolution to restore the monarchy. However, due to a lack of organization and government spies in their midst, the attempt failed within three days.
