OSCAR THE GROUCH BRINGS HIS UNIQUE GRIT TO THE NEW YORK YANKEES

New York, NY - The New York Yankees would like to announce the signing of a promising new player who brings a fresh eye and a truly unique style of play to the Yankees this season. Oscar the Grouch, a much-loved character from Sesame Street, will be joining the Yankees for the 2023 season.

While Oscar is known for his grouchy personality and love of trash, he is best known for his absolute authenticity. Oscar has a real passion for the game of baseball. Unbeknownst to the world, he honed his skills over the years by throwing and fielding garbage and started a local trash-can league. It was in this league he caught the attention of scouts. Now, he's ready to take on this new challenge by showcasing his talents on Yankee's field!

The New York Yankees recognize Oscar's potential and are impressed by his determination and unconventional style of play. Oscar the Grouch is a true original, and the Yankees believe his grit and determination will bring a new dynamic to our team. We're beyond thrilled to welcome him to our Yankees family.

Oscar the Grouch will join the Yankees as a utility player and showcase his skills both on the field and in the dugout. This first year, his playing time is expected to be limited to pinch-hitting, but Oscar's presence alone is anticipated to energize the team and keep the dugout clean.

In a recent conversation with General Manager Brian Cashman, Oscar shared his thoughts in his characteristically grumpy manner. "Baseball is just another way to find new trash treasures and irritate people, so why not?" he grumbled. "I'm ready to show them what I've got and enrage the entire city of Boston! Down with the Red Sox!"

We know this addition to our rooster will generate considerable buzz and excitement among our fans, and they will be eager to see how he will bring his unique style to the game. We expect Oscar's presence on the field to be an unforgettable experience. Fans can catch their first glimpse of Oscar in pinstripes during the upcoming exhibition game in two weeks. There will even be an opportunity for autographs, and trash can be thrown on the field for Oscar after the game.
