Zuc's Guide to Finding the Perfect Audience

No other component of Facebook instills fear in marketers more than Facebook's algorithm. The mere hint of a change to it sends the best of the best of them into a tailspin. It's a machine-learning, traffic-eating, complex set of codes that knows how to solve problems. On its own. And Zuc has invested a lot of cash into making sure it does a good job.

Naturally, it's pretty smart, too. Way smarter than us. And over the past few years, it's gotten smarter. So smart that it has reduced the effort needed to manage and optimize ads, targeting, bids, and budgets. Can it find you the best audience for targeting your ads? Yes, it can. It just needs data from you.

Feed the Machine.
By far, the easiest and best way to find the perfect audience is to give Facebook your customers and let them figure it out for you. Who better to start with than your existing customers, right? The most effective customer data to feed Facebook is your website traffic generated from Facebook. As you know, you'll need the Facebook Pixel installed on your site to capture this. From there you can create Custom Audiences and use those audiences to create Lookalike Audiences that best mirror your existing customers to find new customers. 

You can also upload your CRM data (emails, phone numbers, etc.) and Facebook will create a custom audience off of that. You can also build a custom audience off of your Facebook page. You can also make a custom audience off your engagement. You can also segment a custom audience by triggered events to better move your customers through your funnel. You can also use a custom audience to retarget. You can also... get the point? There are a lot of options here. And all of them can be used to make lookalike audiences which will broaden your reach.

Custom and lookalike audiences are Zuc's gift to you to make your Facebook ad life easier. They are a potent tool that can help you to specify, segment, and develop the perfect audience that will yield the best results.
