Entry: 30th May, 2023

The task at hand is no common one, not a mere question of theft or deceit, but of unearthing long-buried secrets from the tumultuous past. It seems the German government, still haunted by the ghosts of the tragic 1972 Munich Olympics, has entrusted the monumental task of unraveling the events of yesteryears to a group of esteemed historians. In the spring month of April, the German Interior Ministry carefully selected an assembly of eight learned minds, mostly hailing from Israel or the Fatherland, in response to an agreement with kin of the unfortunate Israeli athletes. Lives were lost to the ruthless hands of Palestinian militants, a wound that remains open to this day.

Today, under the stoic gaze of the Interior Ministry's stone walls, they held their maiden meeting. Nancy Faeser, a woman of high authority and Minister of Interior, was solemn in her pledge that the dark clouds shrouding the events of the horrendous attack would finally part to let in the light of transparency. "The answers which we owe to the victims' family members and the public shall finally be given, answers that have been entombed for more than 50 years," she declared with firm resolve. The Ministry's plan was clear: regular publications and scholarly events to slowly but steadily lift the veil of mystery. As I recollect, the German President, one Frank-Walter Steinmeier, offered his public apologies for the German shortcomings, extending his remorse to the Israeli nation and the relatives of the fallen athletes. This was during a ceremony in September, marking half a century since the dark incident unfolded. In an attempt to ameliorate the situation, the German state proposed a settlement of 28 million euros for the bereaved, a part of which had been disbursed prior. An admission of previous authorities' inadequacies was made, as well as the promise of a deep-dive review.

The shadows of that grim day on Sept. 5, 1972, remain in the annals of history. Eight members of the notorious group Black September breached the Olympic village's paltry defenses. The Israeli team's quarters became the setting for a macabre scene, with the wrestling coach Moshe Weinberg and weightlifter Yossi Romano losing their lives in the ensuing struggle. As the harsh narrative of the past unfolds, it's clear some Israeli athletes made a successful escape, while others weren't as fortunate. The truth, it seems, is still hidden in the shroud of time, and this new commission seeks to unveil it. The stage is set, and I shall keep my eye on the proceedings.
