1. To all you folks out there wondering if Night Vale deserves a spot on your summer road trip this year, the answer is yes! Night Vale is a perfectly safe, friendly community, and we eagerly welcome visitors at all times of the year when the Glow Cloud isn't here.
2. We've gotten some questions from tourists about strange phenomena they may or may not have seen, but no need to worry! For 30 hours out of the year, Night Vale is completely free of all strange phenomena.
3. Top tourist attractions in Night Vale to check out include the invisible clock tower, the abandoned mine shaft, the abandoned missile silo, the harbor and waterfront recreation center, the old town, and definitely not the dog park.
4. We'd like to take this time to honor all those that have died in gruesome manners this last tourism season. For the next five minutes, all 132 of you will be remembered.
5. Looking for family-friendly travel destinations? Try Night Vale! Our little community is always eager to meet new human and non-human visitors alike, so consider adding our little desert hometown to your travel plans.

1. The Sheriff's secret police are currently looking for a local cryptid accused of stealing the invisible clock tower. The culprit is described as a giant Mothman with two wings, two glowing red eyes, two arms, and two legs.
2. For the foreseeable future, please follow the temporary detour on Oak Street as a large, raging worm has taken up residence there and is not letting cars pass through.
3. To avoid instant incineration, citizens are urged to avoid walking, breathing, or being in the general vicinity of any of the angels that live at Old Lady Josie's place. Rumor has it they are very mad right now.
4. Today's traffic update is this: No traffic exists anymore without Night Vale. What do you mean, "traffic"? That's not a thing that exists. And if it did, it certainly wouldn't exist in Night Vale.
5. The Mayor has announced that instead of an election, she will remain mayor for an indefinite period as she "seeks to free Night Vale of the tyranny brought on by general elections and democracy".
