Administering standardized assessments to primary students has been a subject of some debate for decades. Primary students are those students in pre-kindergarten through second grade. The administration of the assessment proves challenging because the reading levels of children vary to such a large degree. Many children are not yet independent readers at this point. Additionally, because of the variability of reading levels, the results of the assessments can cause educators and parents to draw inaccurate and incomplete conclusions about a child's academic potential. Assessments can be administered orally and individually but that requires a tremendous amount of resources, including time and staffing; furthermore, oral assessment administration can lead to questions about the reliability and validity of the results. Variability in the educators' skill and precision at administering oral assessments also creates questionable results. 

The benefits are significant if these challenges can be overcome. Assessing each student's reading level at regular intervals and using that information to make instructional decisions on an ongoing basis prevents students from falling behind due to educators' lack of awareness. Standardized tests, even those with flaws, provide information about student populations so educators will know if groups of students identified by race, culture, or economic status are experiencing disparities in learning. Disparities, often referred to as gaps, are difficult to close, but if identified early, they can be addressed before they become overwhelming for the child. Standardized assessments are complex and controversial, but they can provide valuable information if used appropriately. 

As technology improves, perhaps the administration of these tests and consistency in the educational experiences of children will improve. There are promising indications that new technologies and applications will provide educators with more accurate and actionable information to use as they help students move toward becoming independent readers.
