Bonnie Parker met Clyde Barrow when she was just 19 years old. At the time, her husband (whom she had married when she was 16) was serving time in jail for murder. A short time later, Clyde was imprisoned for robbery. Bonnie visited him every day and eventually smuggled a gun into the prison to help him escape. He was caught shortly after his escape, however, and sent back to prison. Later, in 1932, he was released on parole and the two immediately reconnected. After they stole a car and committed several robberies, Bonnie was caught and did a short 2-month stint in jail.

After her release and for the next 21 months, the couple worked with various accomplices to rob banks and stores across five states: Texas, Missouri, Oklahoma, New Mexico, and Louisiana. They had multiple close calls wherein they narrowly escaped capture during surprise raids, but they seemed to always come out on top. Their flamboyant encounters with police and sensationalized stories in the news added to their notoriety and infamy. Bonnie's womanhood, which was quite uncommon in the criminal world in those days, and their love story further romanticized their crime spree. Add to it the fact that in the early 1930s, America was right in the middle of the Great Depression and people were fed up with banks, which they viewed as oppressive and greedy. But while some Americans viewed them as Robin Hood-style heroes, the gruesome reality is that they were ruthless killers who were responsible for the deaths of 13 people, including 9 police officers.

Bonnie and Clyde continued to evade capture while being pursued by various state law enforcement officials, so Texan prison officials eventually hired retired Texas Ranger Captain Frank Hamer to assemble a posse and track them down. After a three-month investigation, and using inside information from a friend who betrayed the duo, Hamer tracked them to Louisiana. Early in the morning on May 23, 1934, Louisiana and Texas lawmen huddled in the bushes on the side of a country highway. When Bonnie & Clyde drove through in their Ford V-8, the law enforcement officers pumped more than 130 rounds of bullets into their car, killing them both.
