1. Ingredients:
3 cups old-fashioned oats
1 ½ cups all-purpose flour 
1 ¼ cups brown sugar (for those with a sweet tooth 😋)
1 cup unsalted butter (helps to keep that dough together)
2 large eggs (not scrambled, just whisked)
Don't forget these additional goodies 😁
1 tablespoon ground cinnamon
1 tablespoon vanilla extract
1 ½ teaspoon baking soda 
1 teaspoon Kosher salt (or that sweet and salty flavor combination)

2. Take a moment to preheat your oven to 350 degrees Fahrenheit or 176 degrees Celsius. Make sure it is preheating for at least 10 minutes. 
Grab two mixing bowls and let's get these ingredients to mingle with one another. 
- The first guests to arrive at the party are butter and brown sugar. Mix those two together on the dance floor, with a spoon or a hand mixer. 
- (Ding-dong) Oh look, more guests have arrived, come on in eggs and vanilla extract. Blend these in along with the butter and brown sugar. This will be your wet bowl of ingredients. 
- Now this other room at the party is pretty quiet and people aren't chatting much. It's the dry bowl; flour, oats, cinnamon, baking soda, and salt. They are mingling together but they could use some more flavor. 

3. What should we do about that? You got it! Let's shake these two groups up and bring this party to the next level! Ok, now your dry and wet ingredients are getting along and getting better acquainted. Continue stirring these ingredients until it's a smooth mixture. 
4. Take an ice cream scoop or tablespoon and scoop your oatmeal cookie batter into your hand and roll it into balls. 
5. Spread them out 1 inch apart on your cookie sheet. (Personal space is important in social settings) 
6. Place that cookie sheet into the oven for about 15 minutes and watch the magic that is created. 
After they are brown and ready to come out, place them on a cooling rack to cool for about 10 minutes. (Always nice to get some fresh air during a party) 
7. After cooling, they are ready to be devoured. I hope you're hungry! Enjoy!
