THE LEGEND OF DUGGI JEROME

This is the story of Duggi Jerome,
A man who made good all on his own.
He was number one; hand in every racket
Money laundering, booze, drugs and the killin' bracket.
Yeh Jerome, the orphan boy and once a nobody
Was on top of the world; The man with the totty.

Jerome was slick in pinstripes and a fedora
The archetype gangster with a menacing aura.
A square jaw with pierced eyes and tash,
A man living well and with tons of cash…
The blond by his side... a beautiful doll
But you don’t get close to a gangster’s moll.

Jerome was King Pin around his town,
Moll by his side and ‘heavies’ abound…
He’d be seen on all of the grounds
With all the right people at all the right times
He was front-page news and making headlines.
Jerome was ‘A’ list: wanted: to be seen with
Politicians and stars corrupted by his fame made their bids…

Jerome was a man with everything.
Money, women, power, friends
And all the pleasures life could bring.
He was feared and ‘respected’…
But still, that one goal
Of being the greatest:
Better than Capone...

So, he set up his BIG SCAM.
It would make him the MAN.                                          
His mark left in history 
As the man who dared,
To own the city and become Mayor.
No one would be spared in his brilliant plan;
And by his side was the killer man, ‘ONE GRAND DAN’.

A final night at Jerome’s speakeasy
To finalise the details
Amongst the raucous laughter…
And flowing cocktails.
A gangster’s mob about to join the super league
Once they had done their thing 
And completed their deed. 

And then it happened… all of a sudden
Local fuzz breaking in and shooting a dozen.
A chaotic scene at Jerome’s speakeasy
As the ‘Untouchables’ completed their duty.
Jerome: found dead, a bullet in his head, plans in his hand
They had finally got their man...

The legend of this gangster still survives
The orphan boy who made good is no surprise.                           
Shot that night and his quick fall from grace
Added to the myth and Jerome’s speakeasy place.
So remember the man who made good on his own
That is the legend of gangster Duggi Jerome…
