The Best Five Magic Items for Wizards in Dungeons and Dragons 5th Edition

Wizards are by far one of the most popular classes in Dungeons & Dragons. They dedicate their lives to the pursuit of arcane knowledge and uncovering the secrets of the world. They’re extremely powerful spellcasters and with the right items, they could be unstoppable. Here is a list of five magic items for wizards!

5. Ring of Spell Storing
The Ring of Spell Storing is a must-have for wizards, especially low-level wizards. This item allows you to store up to five levels of spells within it to use at a later time. You can even cast the spells and give the ring to another player to use. Low-level players have fewer spell slots, and the spells within the ring are held there indefinitely until they are used. This could be very advantageous for managing spell slots in combat when the chances of a long rest are slim.

4. Arcane Grimoire
The Arcane Grimoire can replace a wizard’s standard spellbook and grant bonuses to the spell save DC and attack bonus. Depending on rarity, the bonus can be +1, +2, or +3. It also allows wizards to regain an additional spell slot when they use their arcane recovery feature - which lets them recover a limited amount of spell slots during a short rest.
This is a great item because of its spellcasting bonuses, ensuring more of your spells are effective in and out of combat.

3. Rod of Absorption
Wizards are very powerful and can wreak havoc on a battlefield. But sadly they don’t tend to fare well when it comes to getting hit. The Rod of Absorption comes in handy to help against spell attacks. A wizard attuned to this item can use their reaction when they’re targeted by a spell that only targets one creature to absorb the energy of the spell. The rod holds 50 charges of spell slots (for example a level 4 spell is equal to 4 charges) and the attuned wizard can then use the energy from within the rod to create more spell slots for themselves.
This is an excellent item for wizards with low armor class that would be instantly killed by an upcasted Inflict Wounds. Plus, the bonus spell slots are always useful.

2. Tome of Clear Thought
Because wizards are intelligence-based spellcasters, having an item that allows your intelligence maximum to increase can be game-changing. By studying the Tome of Clear thought the character's intelligence score is increased by 2 and so is their intelligence maximum. That means that instead of the 20 cap, players with this item can reach 22. That effectively gives the player an additional +1 to their spellcasting ability.

1 Arch Magi Items (robe or staff)
The Robe of the Arch Magi and the Staff of the Magi are two of the most powerful items in the entire game. Both items grant bonuses to the attuned character's spell save DC and attack bonuses, but they also give players access to other spells and bonuses to their armor class.
These items are perfect for building a more resilient wizard while also granting a myriad of other bonuses.
