It's been said that we live in the golden age of television. And yet, breaking into the industry has never been more challenging. Before even landing a paying gig, filmmakers are expected to master cinematography, sound, camera work, script development, editing, and more. 

The good news is that today's most successful filmmakers are eager to share their secrets. If you have Hollywood aspirations, you'd be wise to heed their advice. Here are five must-know tips for aspiring filmmakers:

1. Film school won't boost your career.
Sure, theater or film school graduates have some valuable technical knowledge. But according to Hollywood titans like Steven Spielberg, Christopher Nolan, and Quentin Tarantino, a diploma isn't your ticket to stardom. Each of these legendary filmmakers is completely self-taught.

2. Don't be afraid of being typecast. 
While everyone aspires to be a writer, director, or producer, it may be wise to spend some time in one of the many crucial behind-the-scenes roles. As long as you're working on set, you're gaining valuable experience. So don't skip jobs in departments like PR, costume, sound, location, etc.

3. Build your portfolio, not your resume
The most common piece of advice given by filmmakers is some variation of "show, don't tell". Don't wait for the right moment or the right team - just get a camera and start shooting. Your resume will not be nearly as important to producers as your portfolio.

4. Don't watch movies, study them.
Quentin Tarantino famously said, "I didn't go to film school, I went to movies." Instead of just watching a movie, try to see it from the filmmaker's perspective. Spend time researching the team's interviews, watching the director's commentary, and studying the concepts they discuss. 

5. Networking is Key
One thing has remained true throughout the history of show business. It's not what you know, it's who you know. Developing a strong and diverse professional network should be a top priority for any aspiring filmmaker. And the best way to connect with people in the industry is to network at events for up-and-coming writers, producers and directors. In a few years, these people could be your first collaborators.
