I can gladly provide you with some ideas besides Facebook. Here is a list of some social media sites you may want to explore:

1. YouTube - If your business uses video marketing, then this is a great option to showcase that video content and also connect with current and potential customers. People like to see products being used, tutorials and news that is relevant to your business's niche, and highlights of happy customers. Updates on the business growth, new launches, and upcoming meet-and-greet opportunities might also be included.

2. WhatsApp - Staying in communication with customers is a big part of a business's success and this platform is built for communication. People turn to this social media app for things like providing fast customer support, pushing out shipping updates, and even letting people know about sales and specials.

3. Instagram - The popularity of this social media platform originally came due to amazing photo filters, which remain a key part of the site. If your business creates a product or performs a visually stunning service, you might just find that Instagram is the perfect place to showcase these images for the world to see.

4. Twitter - Considered a microblogging site, this platform is largely popular for people who want to share or receive news and other real-time information. If your business is focused on trends in the financial, news, entertainment, or sports world, it may be a great fit. Alternatively, Twitter can be a resource to help your business with market research projects and insights.

5. LinkedIn - When it comes to connecting with other businesses and members of the business community, this platform is generally preferred above all the rest. Use it for recruiting employees, connecting with potential partners, researching vendors, or networking with other professionals and business owners. It can also be a valuable resource for understanding how to develop strong business branding.

6. Pinterest - People and businesses alike love this site because it is a place to be inspired and provides a way to organize things they find around the web into convenient boards where they can accumulate ideas and information. Pinterest is pretty image heavy, but it also includes videos and GIFs, and is a great platform for a business that wants to showcase its products, services, or anything innovative and interesting. 

7. TikTok - If short, catchy videos are something that your business creates well, this platform might be a good fit. It has gained major popularity with companies that want to target a younger audience of customers, as well as those who love to showcase their products creatively and in new ways.
