Jerry peered through the blinds in the kitchen and saw the dim glow of the street lamp illuminating the snowy pavement outside. Today was his 89th birthday, but he didn’t feel much like celebrating. His wife had passed away a year earlier, and he hadn’t seen any of his relatives for years, so he wasn’t expecting any visitors today. 

Stirring the instant coffee into a mug of boiling water, Jerry hobbled into the living room, turning on the television. The news was all doom and gloom, as per usual. He tried to change the channel, but the batteries in the remote control were dead. He sighed and took a sip from his coffee. 

On the mantelpiece were two photographs. One was of Jerry and his late wife, Julie, at their wedding sixty years ago. The other was of Jerry and his best friend, Mike, who had also sadly passed away around a decade earlier. Jerry thought of previous birthdays spent with those two people that he loved so dearly and smiled with sadness in his eyes. 

Due to the treacherous weather outside, Jerry thought it would be best to not risk going to the shop for his newspaper today. He was already a little unsteady on his feet, and didn’t fancy slipping on some ice on his birthday. Instead, he resigned himself to a day, alone, drinking coffee and watching television. 

The hours went by, and Jerry continued to stare vacantly at the television, still stuck on the same channel. He eventually fell asleep in his armchair, once the caffeine started to wear off. Then, he was suddenly awoken by a knock on the door. 

Opening his eyes, Jerry pushed his glasses back up to the top of his nose and put on his flat cap. He thought it was probably someone wanting to sell him something, or someone who needed help to jump-start their frozen car outside. 

Jerry unlocked the door and pushed it open. To his surprise, there was a crowd of people standing there, and they all began to sing happy birthday! It was all of his nieces and nephews and their children. They had come to surprise Jerry, who struggled to hold back the tears of joy. 

That evening, Jerry had one of the best birthday parties he’d ever had in his 89 years.
