Parliament is next week expected to resume debate on contentious clauses in the Electoral Amendment Bill after a marathon and heated sitting which started on Thursday afternoon last week went into early Friday morning as legislators could not find common ground.

Debate on whether driver’s licences can be accepted as proof of identification in forthcoming harmonised elections dominated proceedings in the National Assembly.

Legislators were divided on whether driver’s licences could be accepted as identification documents when voting, with Zanu PF Members of Parliament rallying behind the Justice, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs Minister to reject their use, while those from the opposition CCC party said there would be no prejudice suffered should they be used.

Debate on the Bill lasted beyond Thursday midnight after the National Assembly adopted a motion by the Minister to suspend automatic adjournment at 6.55 pm so that they could deal with an array of amendments that had been proposed by opposition lawmakers.

Some of the proposed amendments were rejected, while others were deferred, with compromises being made on several proposed amendments either to accept them or to have the mover withdraw.

It was, however, the use of driver's licence that dominated debate the whole night with legislators proffering varied opinions on it.

In the end, the National Assembly agreed to reject an amendment by the Dzivaresekwa MP proposing for their acceptance.

The Electoral Amendment Bill will operationalise the latest constitutional amendments for the election of 10 youth members of the National Assembly, one from each province, as well as the continued election of 60 women, six from each province, to the National Assembly under a party-list system. 

It will extend the new constitutional provisions for the election of women on a party-list system to provincial councils and local authorities and will prevent people from being nominated for election if they have been convicted of certain offences.

The Bill seeks to stop the use of driver’s licences as proof of identity by persons who register as voters and those who obtain ballot papers at polling stations. 

During the debate, it was argued that only identification documents issued by vital national State organs like the Registrar General’s Office should be used, while others felt that since driver’s licences were issued by a Government department, the Central Vehicle Registry, they could be accepted.

Opposition legislators, led by the Harare East MP, said given that on voting day, one would have already registered to vote, a driver's license would still be ideal since it carried most of the required details and bore one’s photograph.
