Sure! Here is a list of twenty organizations and companies in the United States that are actively working on creating a sustainable food system.

1. Big Green: This organization focuses on getting people to grow food through educational resources, grants, and more. 

2. Bread for the World: This is a faith-based organization that raises awareness and advocates for solutions to hunger and food insecurity in the US.

3. Chef Ann Foundation: This foundation focuses on providing healthy, unprocessed, and delicious meals cooked from scratch in schools throughout the country. 

4. Cooking for Salud: Based in California, this organization works with English and Spanish-speaking families on behavior change and how to cook healthily at home.

5. Deep Medicine Circle: This group is led by women of color working to change the food system and heal from colonialism in the US. 
 
6. Ecdysis Foundation: The foundation is all about promoting regenerative agriculture to create better products and a more sustainable food and farming system. 

7. Farmers Market Coalition: The coalition works to promote farmers' markets nationwide, focusing on access and awareness. 

8. Fed by Blue: The organization promotes “blue foods” for sustainable food sources and healthy diets. 

9. FIG: Based in NYC, this organization works to create a better food system for everyone by educating community members through workshops and farm field trips. 

10. First Nations Development Institute: This is an institute dedicated to assisting Native Americans and creating a food system around cultural values and fairness.

11. Food Recovery Network: Created by college students, this is a network now on several college campuses in the US for reducing waste on campuses while reducing food insecurity in the area. 
 
12. Food Research and Action Center (FRAC): This center aims to influence policy to better reflect the needs of citizens who struggle to eat or access nutritious diets.

13. FoodPrint: FoodPrint advocates for and educates people on how to make environmentally sustainable choices when it comes to diet. 

14. FromSoil2Soil: This organization runs courses to educate people about gardening, cooking, herbs, and more to hopefully help reconnect society with the Earth. 

15. Global Seafood Alliance: The alliance is there to educate and advocate for more healthy and sustainable seafood consumption by consumers. 

16. Good Food Institute: The GFI is dedicated to finding creative ways to reduce meat consumption by consumers to reduce environmental impact. 
 
17. Harlem Grown: This nonprofit is educating youth in NYC about urban farming, nutrition, and sustainability. 

18. Harvard Law School Food Policy and Clinic (FLPC): The FLPC is all about using policy to change the global food system for the better. 

19. Healthy Living Coalition: This coalition is focused on addressing nutrition insecurity and promoting a healthy diet for all by raising awareness and influencing policy. 

20. James Beard Foundation: The foundation is geared at improving the restaurant industry and has a specific program aimed at chefs to aid in creating a more healthy and sustainable food system.
