1. Finding the right place to set up camp is essential: You want to avoid setting up your tent on a slant, and finding a flat space also helps with drainage. Make sure the area where you want to put your tent is clear of debris, roots, branches, and rocks. Also, review your surroundings, and make sure the trees around where you'll be setting up are alive and not at risk of falling while you're staying in the area. 
2. Allocate a spot for your garbage and remain close to water sources: Designate a spot 20 feet from your campsite and away from any wildlife where you can store your disposables. Additionally, it is best to try and find a spot close to the bathroom. If your campsite has a water pump, make sure it is easily accessible, but if you're backcountry camping, stay close to natural water sources like streams and rivers. Remember, if you are using natural resources, be prepared and pack items that will make the water potable, like chlorine tablets and a water purifier. 
3. Maximize the efficiency of the tent: Ensure you have ample space for the number of campers you will have joining you. It is helpful to bring a small tent just for supplies so that you do not have to bring everything you need into your tent and crowd that space. Waterproof your tents by bringing a tarp and staking it to the ground to keep it in place. 
4. Keep your food and kitchen space contained: To reduce the risk of wildlife coming to your campsite, be sure to either keep your food in a car if you have one or in a bag hung away from your campsite. When you're cooking, try to position yourself downwind so as not to attract any animals nearby. 
5. Practice building a campfire: This is a hotly contested debate amongst avid campers, but luckily there are many ways to build a fire. You should certainly keep wind directly and protection in mind. Try to clear the brush and other debris from the fire pit area. For fire safety, it is helpful to bring a bucket of water and a shovel nearby in case the flames get too big. All items used in the fire should be dry and dead, such as dry leaves, grass, and needles for tinder.
