Of course. Below, I have written seven tips for writing a standout CV.

1. Start strong. 
Start your CV by listing your best achievements to date. Highlight your skills and experience, and just champion yourself. The goal of a CV is to convince a potential employer you are the right fit for them, so don't be shy and tell them exactly why your skills and experience will assist their company. If you don't get this bit right, it is unlikely recruiters will get much further into your CV. 

2. Emphasize past results rather than responsibilities. 
When detailing your work history, try to avoid discussing what you were responsible for and instead highlight your actual results. It is far more meaningful for someone to see results rather than try to infer what you have achieved through roles and responsibilities. It sounds better to say, "I ensured the completion of 5 major projects within my time at the company," rather than, "In my role, I was responsible for major projects."

3. Customise. 
One CV does not fit all jobs. Try to tailor your CV to the job you are applying for, and bring to the fore the experiences that suit the role and company you are applying to. Research the company to understand who they are, then tailor your CV to match its ethos and culture.

4. Highlight growth and change. 
Change is good, and growth is even better. If you have been promoted or changed roles at a previous company, mention that. Recruiters will take that as you are versatile and willing to learn. This will give them affirmation from the actions of your previous employer that you were both competent and proactive. 

5. Demonstrate your network. 
Showcase that if you have a large network and are well connected. Employers will see that as an opportunity to hire you and get the added bonus of your well-established network as a resource. If you are hired, they get two for the price of one. 

6. Show industry insight. 
It doesn't hurt to give a small opinion if you are applying to an industry that's currently topical or experiencing changes. Doing this shows you are current, in the know, and committed to your career in this industry. You don't have to give an opinion. You could forecast a change you foresee and mention how you see this impacting a role. 

7. Use powerful words. 
A CV is extremely important in grabbing a recruiter's attention. Using powerful words like implemented and adaptable will help you stand out from the crowd and keep your CV in the prospects' file. Consider the difference in the sentences "I am willing to change" and "I am very adaptable" one seems weak, and one seems far stronger. You can research topical power words online or use the thesaurus feature in Microsoft word to make your language stand out.
