Where should the scene go from here:

"Kou-san. What are you reading?" Kizuna asked, sliding her desk up to his during lunchtime.

Without looking up from his novel, he replied, "Kokoro by Natsume Souseki."

"Isn't that really heavy to read while eating?"

"Not really. It doesn't weigh much."

"I meant the story, though," Kizuna said with a sigh.

Kou looked up and replied, "Oh. I mean, this is my third time reading it. It's one of my favorites, so I like to go back and read it sometimes. There's always something new to get out of it, I feel."

Kizuna looked at his serious face and asked in response, "What does your heart yearn for, Kou-san?"

Kou closed his book and set it on the desk. Sometimes Kizuna would sit quietly and enjoy their lunch together, while at other times, she wanted to talk more. Kou didn't mind either way. Their conversations were stimulating enough that he found merit in them. She was also relaxing to be around. Unlike some of his friends, he never felt exhausted after spending time with her. He pulled the wrapper on his bread further back and took another bite before answering her question. "I think it yearns to move other people's hearts. That's probably why I write stories."

"What kind of stories have you written recently?" she asked.

"I finished one about a man who is lost in a city and finds himself wrapped up in a strange incident with a beautiful woman who turned out not to be real."

"Sounds interesting. Could I read it sometime?"

"Maybe sometime. If I'm happy with it. Say, Kizuna-san, why do you like me?"

Kizuna stiffened, avoiding eye contact as she fumbled over her words. Kou corrected himself, saying, "As a friend, that is. Sorry, not trying to make it weird."

Kizuna's shoulders sank. "Right, friends," she muttered, then so Kou could hear, "Honestly, I get really tired around other people. They are exhausting. I don't feel like that with you. It's like...If I want to talk, I can, but I don't have to. It's very comfortable."

"Mmm...I feel the same way," Kou replied flatly, and Kizuna blushed.
