I’m hot and hungry. I’ve got to eat now. It’s almost 9:30 already.

Piercingly loud beeps suddenly filled the air, making me jump and my heart race. Ugh! I freakin’ hate my sensitive smoke alarm in the kitchen. Yeah, I wanted to triple-toast my toaster strudels. Yes, they’re a little black. That’s the way I like it. I hate so much that the stupid smoke alarm goes off at every little thing. It scares me every time. I’m easily startled!

At least these well-done toaster strudels help. They’re the sausage and egg ones. And they taste great. It helps get my mind off this morning and this weekend. I hadn’t eaten breakfast yet because I was busy. I was cleaning a mess. My wife opened our bathroom cabinet door too hard. It’s mounted on the wall—or at least, it was. It all came crashing down. I heard a big clash and stuff busting. And man, it sucked! Broken glass, trash everywhere, wood splinters, and pieces of porcelain. The cabinet fell with such force that it busted off our built-in porcelain toilet paper holder. It’s one of those old-fashioned ones built in the ‘50s. Maybe it’s a good thing because we manually tore the other one off anyway. It’s out of style.

Anyways, this weekend was hard, too. My toddler has a serious case of the terrible twos. She’s testing her boundaries. Weeks ago, she was really good about honoring a request from me. But not lately. Even when I ask nicely! I’ll say “no more,” and then she’ll do it one more time. I understand that it’s how kiddos understand boundaries and free will and all that. But man, it can be annoying! She hit me a few times when we were trying to gently go down for a nap yesterday. I had it. I put her in her crib instantly and ran out and closed the door. I had no patience.

My wife’s stressed lately, too. She’s got a big performance review with her passive-aggressive boss. With that, our daughter being testy lately, and the influx of bugs seen in our house lately, I can understand her stress.

I think I’m gonna stress eat some waffles now. Mmm, chocolate chip Eggo waffles.
