You will need: 

For the chicken -- 

1 pound of skinless, boneless chicken breasts 
1 teaspoon of Italian seasonings 
3/4 teaspoon kosher salt 
1/4 teaspoon pepper
2 tablespoons extra virgin olive oil 
1 tablespoon butter 

For the noodles -- 

16 ounces of fettuccine pasta, either homemade or prepackaged and ready to boil 

For the alfredo sauce – 

2 cups grated parmesan cheese
1/4 teaspoon pepper 
1/4 teaspoon salt 
3/4 teaspoon Italian seasonings 
3/4 teaspoon garlic powder 
1 clove garlic, minced 
2 cups heavy whipping cream 
1/2 cup butter, cut into cubes 

Directions: 

Bring salted water to a boil and add fettuccine noodles. Cook until al dente (usually 8 to 10 minutes), then reserve 1/2 cup of water from noodles. Drain the remaining water and set the noodles aside to rest. 

Use Italian seasonings, salt, and pepper to season chicken while a large skillet heats olive oil on the stove over medium to high heat. Add the chicken and cook until golden brown on both sides. Add 1 tablespoon butter to the chicken when you flip to the other side (usually 5 to 7 minutes per side). 

Remove the chicken from the heat and allow it to rest for 3 minutes. Cut into slices or cubes – your preference, then transfer to a foil-tented dish to keep chicken warm and moist. 

Use the same skillet you used for the chicken to make the Alfredo sauce. DO NOT WASH THE SKILLET BETWEEN COOKING THE CHICKEN AND THE SAUCE. The flavor of the cooked chicken will incorporate into the sauce. 

Heat butter and cream over medium to low heat until well-mixed and the butter is melted. Add minced garlic, garlic powder, Italian seasonings, salt, and pepper. Stir to combine. Bring to a simmer for 3 to 4 minutes until thickened into a sauce. Add two tablespoons of pasta water, then stir the parmesan cheese slowly into the sauce until well incorporated. 

Remove sauce from heat and toss with fettuccine noodles. Divide into bowls, then top with a few chunks (or slices) of chicken and a sprinkle of parmesan cheese and black pepper. Serve.
