The blaring alerts and sirens were replaced very suddenly by the roar of rushing air. I tumbled gradually through the air. The bulky emergency kit pressed heavily against my leg, which, oddly, felt both reassuring and unnerving. Though I knew I was moving at hundreds of miles an hour, everything seemed like slow motion. 

Then came the loud FLOP! of the unfurling parachute, and everything sped up again for a brief second. The harness yanked against my body with a jolt that made my teeth chatter. Once my acceleration had stabilized, though, it was back to slow motion. 

And there was the silence. Other than the wind whistling past my helmet and an occasional flutter from the parachute, the world seemed empty – almost peaceful.

I caught sight of my F-18's tumbling remains just in time to watch it shatter against the ocean's surface. There was a brief flash of ignited jet fuel and then nothing. My beautiful bird simply disappeared. 

That sobered me up enough for the questions to start coming. What had hit me? I'd had no indication of unknown aircraft. No nearby islands were large enough to host surface-to-air missiles. Not a single unfriendly radar was painting my jet. Even the weather was as placid as one could possibly ask. Yet my fighter had taken a catastrophic hit at 30,000 feet. 

At least I wasn't over unfriendly waters. I'd have to remember my survival training, but as long as my beacon was functioning, the SAR guys would be along in a reasonable amount of time. 

It was about that point that I hazarded a look straight down. For lack of a better word, my brain just sort of fizzled at the sight. 

Below me, rising out of the empty ocean, was an immense black shape. My brain had never seen something by which to compare it. The thing moved in fluid motions, and long tendrils appeared to writhe along its surface. Immense tentacle-like appendages unfurled in multiple directions. Yet something about the shapes suggested it was not necessarily organic either. Whatever the case, the THING was jet black but for several rows of glowing orange orbs that ran along its longer axis.

And as I fell closer and closer toward the giant THING in the water, I could swear some of those orbs were LOOKING at me.
