As soon as that school bell rang young Jimmy jumped out of his chair and out the doors. Fifth grade was such a drag and he couldn't wait to get home, turn on some cartoons, and eat his favorite snacks. Luckily, his house was just across the street.

Entering the house, Jimmy shucked off his shoes, tossed his backpack to the floor, and ran to the kitchen. First, he turned on the little television his Mom kept on the countertop. Then he opened up the cupboard to search for his Oreo cookies, the one thing he had been waiting for all day. Except they weren't there. Nearly frantic Jimmy started calling out for his mom before realizing she wasn't home.

That's when he saw it on the table. His mom had already set out a tray of cookies with a note telling him to enjoy himself and to be a good boy. An empty glass stood next to the plate piled high with cookies and Jimmy quickly filled it with milk from the fridge. This was the best part. Sitting down, his feet barely touching the floor, Jimmy dunked an Oreo into the milk. He let it soak up for a few seconds before consuming it in one all-too-big bite.

Every cookie was a different adventure and a different creation. Sometimes he would eat the cream first, and sometimes he wouldn't even dunk them at all.  Then, staring at his last two cookies, a new idea came to him.  Picking both cookies up, he put them directly into the milk and let them sink to the bottom. 

After a minute passed. Jimmy grabbed a spoon and plunged it into the milk. He tried to fish out his cookies only to find nothing but crumbles. Disappointed at first he poked around more and stirred up the dregs. The milk turned from a pristine white to a muddier brown as chocolate bits danced, swirled, and mixed in. Marveling at his new concoction, Jimmy took the spoon out and gave it a sip. Then another sip, and then he drank the whole thing in one go. This was better than any cookie he had eaten. An Oreo milkshake! What a discovery. Jimmy set the glass down satisfied and with dreams in his head of making another one tomorrow after school.
