I can help you with that. Here are some simple ways to allow yourself to become more approachable.

1. Smile - a simple, friendly facial expression comes off as inviting to people. You want to make sure the smile seems natural and warm when you are at the office or at a work event. Upon making eye contact with someone, it's good to acknowledge them by smiling a bit bigger.
2. Eye contact - you want to make sure to maintain eye contact when you greet someone and while having conversations. For example, if you are at an event or conference, you want to make eye contact and smile at any strangers that look in your direction. If you get the feeling that you are staring when making eye contact, you can blink occasionally or simply focus on the area in between the person's eyes.
3. Angle towards people - it's good practice when talking to someone to angle your body towards them to show that you are interested in the conversation. You want to focus on turning your feet and legs towards that person and allow your body to follow. This is good to do either sitting or standing. However, if you are sitting, you might also want to lean in slightly as it will show that you are listening and engaged in the conversation.
4. Look up - it's good to keep your head and eyes up when you're walking around the office or at events. This is because when you are looking up and ahead it is easier to make eye contact with others and greet them. It's important to note that people read your face to determine your approachability. Staring at the floor or your feet will cause the person to not be able to assess your interest.
5. Avoid fidgeting - having nervous habits can give the impression that you are anxious. You want to avoid fidgeting with things like your keys, pen, or hair or simply doing something you might not be aware of, such as cracking your knuckles or touching your face. You'll want to focus on keeping your hands at your sides or in your lap or just using them to gesture rather than fidgeting during conversations.
