Dear congressman,

My name is Boudreaux and I live here in the deep south of Louisiana, the very heart of alligators and cajun food. As you know, we here in the bayou areas of our beautiful state are a simple people. We wake up in the morning, take our pirogues out for fishing and crab-trapping, come home to make seafood gumbo, and fall asleep to the sound of cicadas outside of our windows. Life is humble for us. However, there are times when we need to stray from our daily routines and make our way into the city. We want to be law-abiding citizens, so it is only proper for us to go into the city to run much-needed errands like mailing our taxes and updating the brake tags on our pick-up trucks. This is where our problems truly come into play. 

You see, congressman, I have been taking care of my pet alligator, Antoinette, since we were both babies. I am sure you are aware that it is illegal to tie your alligator to the fire hydrant in Louisiana. My alligator is my companion and gets me through the day. I get anxious in the city, and I am asking for your help in drafting a new law that would make exceptions for emotional-support alligators to be tied to fire hydrants. When I go to the city to participate as a productive, law-abiding citizen of our beautiful country, it is made more difficult by the lack of resources for my emotional-support pet. For Antoinette's safety, I would like to be able to tie her to the fire hydrant while I go into different buildings for my errands. I am asking that all emotional-support alligators be given an exemption to this law, thereby assisting bayou dwellers like me who have a hard time navigating city life and alligators like her who need a safe place to wait without the risk of getting run over.

Thank you for your time, congressmen. I ask that you consider my proposal and help me to draft such a law. I will also be heading a petition as I am not alone in my concerns. Your support would be greatly appreciated.

Sincerely, 
Boudreaux
