 The peeling flatbed stopped with a sputter, but the empty boxes in the back didn’t even budge. There were many of the containers, packed too tightly to even move an inch. 

A man jumped down from the truck, two tin pails firmly grasped in each hand. “Oy, Sunny, here’s a good place,” he said. 

“I’ll be right out; I just need to put on my sunscreen,” she replied. 

“Well, don’t take too long; we need to get a move on before the out-of-staters wake up.” 

“Fill them up, and I’ll haul them back and empty them into the tubs. You could put it on me, and I’d be done faster, you know.”

“The tourists can’t get enough,” Morris said as he moved up into the bushes. “You put it on yourself; I’ll get to pickin’. The first crop of huckleberries is worth their weight in gold.” 

Sunny dangled her legs out of the truck’s cabin and finished applying the sunscreen. She didn’t rush to follow Morris; they had all day for that. 

Finally, she jumped down and headed in the direction that he had left. Sunny came across the first set of pails, but both were empty. She could hear Morris grunting and chewing up ahead but didn’t mind if he was eating instead of filling the pails. She didn’t want to haul the buckets yet anyways!

Morris grabbed another handful of berries to top off the pail. Where was Sunny with the empties? He backtracked until he came upon the empty pails. At least she’d dumped them into the bins before wandering off. He placed the full buckets for her to lug back.

Sunny relaxed on a warm rock for a bit, then went to find Morris. She saw the buckets, still empty. Up ahead, she saw him straining, bent over the bushes. Even at this distance, his back hair was full and thick. “Morris” Sunny yelled. “I’m going to the creek until you’re done eating, but when we get back to Helena, I’m taking you in for electrolysis!”

Morris finished filling the next set. He headed back to the empties but stopped short as he arrived. Sitting expectantly, grinning a purple smile next to the overturned buckets, was a small baby brown bear.
