It may or may not be the case that those with US passports actually travel less than other nationalities. However, anecdotal evidence and personal experience tell me that this is the case. Before anyone gets offended or defensive, as I said, these are my personal observations and hypotheses as someone who has traveled quite a bit, lived overseas, and interacted with people of various nationalities in both my personal and professional life.

1. The United States is massive, so why leave?
The first thing that comes to mind is that Americans can basically go on any type of vacation they want without leaving their home country! The US is an ideal geographic location for a nation. You can wander the dramatic coastlines of the Pacific Northwest, traverse the desert out west, go skiing in the mountains, visit any one of America’s lakes or rivers for watersports, and have a stunning beach vacation in the Gulf of Mexico all without ever leaving the country. 

2. Americans don’t have the same work and career flexibility as other nationalities. 
Even though this is changing slightly with more remote work opportunities and hybrid work settings becoming more mainstream, generally speaking, Americans do not have the same flexibility related to their work schedule as Europeans, for example.

3. Americans are simply more hesitant to visit other countries. 
I hate to use the word “scared,” but, I think that in America, we are raised to think that the world is a big, scary, and dangerous place. However, without getting political or anything like that, the US is actually rated 28th for homicide in 2023, which is higher than any other developed country and higher than many developing ones. I recognize that this is just one statistic, but one can’t deny that America is no longer the “safe” place it perhaps once was. 

4. Many Americans lack exposure to other cultures. 
This isn’t anyone's fault, and it’s not detrimental or anything, it’s just an observation. Most of the rest of the world has American culture injected into their newsfeeds, music, television, and other forms of entertainment and popular culture. Whereas in America, we view all of our own culture and no one else’s for the most part. This tends to lower the baseline level of curiosity about the rest of the world for much of the American youth.
