The Resurrectionist is a man in his 30s from the Midwest, who was killed by an incident that is not initially explained at the beginning of the story but is later determined to be the result of a demon sent to Earth to kill a human for sacrifice. The Resurrectionist is subsequently revived by "The One True Power," an omnipotent being who took mercy on the man and deemed the killing unjust. However, by reviving the man, The One True Power imbues him with his ability to resurrect other dead people. This newfound power comes with a price: Any person revived by the Resurrectionist becomes forever immortal. The One True Power inadvertently curses the man with this immortality, and now the man, calling himself the Resurrectionist, must live forever without the release of death.

During the story, the Resurrectionist comes across many people who die for no apparent reason who were innocent and did not deserve to die. However, the Resurrectionist must weigh the consequences of bringing these people back to life with the possibility of him giving them immortality and having them turn on him knowing they will never be able to rest in peace.

In one particular instance, the Resurrectionist decides to revive a woman he falls in love with before her death; as a consequence, the woman becomes enraged by the thought of living an eternal life and becomes the Resurrectionist's immortal enemy. The Resurrectionist is forced to fight the woman forever to prevent her from killing innocents who she feels "deserve peace."

Despite the challenges the Resurrectionist faces regarding the moral and ethical implications of bringing people back from the dead, his primary motivation is to find a way to reverse the curse of immortality by attempting to find The One True Power and convince it to allow him to die. The search for The One True Power takes the Resurrectionist through the many planes of existence both above and below the earthly realm, where he encounters demons, powerful spirits, and even a group of assassins with the same revival powers, who have an agenda to wipe out the entire mortal human race.
