I was scared. I had to give a presentation about my game coming out. But I couldn't. The stage fright was taking me over. I almost started crying. I tried my hardest to keep my tears at bay. Then I turned around and my mentor, Kimberly, was there. She was my partner in helping promote this game. She came over to me and looked at me straight in the eyes. She knew that I had stage fright. I was about to cry and she was right behind me. 

"You know, I had stage fright a while back too. It was a hard-fought battle between me and it." I wasn't expecting this. I didn't know Kimberly also had stage fright. "People may tell you that you should imagine the crowd in their underwear or something dumb like that. I'll tell you what worked for me." She then started to pull out her cell phone. On the phone was this cute charm of a flower. It was a real flower that was preserved, dried, and encased in resin. I was pretty sad that you couldn't buy it anywhere. It was one of a kind. 
"I told you the story about how I created this charm, right? It was me and a friend. We exchanged charms and told each other to think of the other one if we were in a tough spot. So I just clutched my phone and looked at the charm every minute or so. Worked out perfectly. After doing it a few times, I just got used to talking on stage." Kimberly proceeds to take the charm off her phone and hands it to me.
"Here, now when you're on the stage, you can think of me. Just look at it every minute or so and just think you're talking to me. Luckily, holding your phone during a presentation has gotten so common, no one is going to think it as less professional."
I almost started to cry again. I knew I had to hold it in until after the presentation. I grabbed the charm from Kimberly and clutched it so tight that it could've pierced my hand. 

"Shana Whalve, to the backstage for preparation."

I gave Kimberly the biggest hug and walked backstage. I was still scared. I'll be alright though. A friend is helping me, thankfully.
