At the Tudor court, small, flat-fronted waists leading to full breasts pressed down by the square-necked gown were all the rage. How was that achieved? In short, it was the use of busks that produced the silhouette and structure of the upper part of gowns. A busk could be made out of wood, bone, or sometimes metal. During the Tudor period, these flat inserts became more and more ornamental. They could be etched with personal messages or swirls of branching flora. These busks were the first step toward the corset we would later become so familiar with, providing rigidity and forcing good posture that advertised to the world that a woman was high-born. 

One very important piece of underwear was the "bum roll." Showing up for the first time in the 1500s, this stuffed tube of fabric was tied around the lower portion of a lady's waist to increase her hip circumference and the amount of fabric she could wear on her skirts. Since silks and brocades were the going materials of the day and deeply exclusive because of cost, the more fabric worn translated into more wealth a wearer was likely to have. These bum rolls allowed for wide swathes of skirts, more pleats, and flounces. These undergarments also helped the women to bear some of the weight of their heavy skirts without it sitting directly on their hip bones. Tudor fashion was more about statement than comfort. Like busks, bum rolls were essentially shapewear, modifying the female silhouette to what was considered ideal at the time. 

One of the most important pieces of jewelry a woman of this period may have owned would have been her girdle belt. This was a long string, often of silver or gold and embellished with gems, that highlighted a woman's small waist and hung downward. Some women wore a pomander ball at the end of their girdle belts for when the city air got especially ripe. Others, like Anne Boleyn, used it to carry small prayer books about with them. Katherine of Aragon was even known to clutch the girdle belt of her patron saint while in childbirth, though this doesn't seem to have provided her with any luck. There are portraits of Kaherine herself in an immense string of pearls girdle belt that matches her royal necklaces. One of Jane Seymour, Henry's third wife, shows a girdle belt with a pattern of pearls and red gems that leads to a very large oval stone set in gold at the end.
