

Marketers of blue light glasses claim that their products block harmful blue light to reduce digital eye strain, which can cause headaches and eye discomfort. However, there isn't a lot of sound research to back these claims. It's also important to note that some brands are more effective at blocking blue light than others. 

For those that suffer from migraines and light sensitivity, a specific light-filtering (not just blue light) lens may be beneficial. For the majority of people that just want to reduce digital eye strain, blue light glasses may not do much. People are better off monitoring their screen time and following the 20-20-20 rule according to experts. This involves looking at something 20 feet away for 20 seconds every 20 minutes. 

Where did the idea come from that we need to be blocking blue light you ask? The biggest source of blue light is from the sun, but when we say blue light, we're usually referring to artificial blue light from digital screens. In an evolving digital world, people are spending more and more time in front of screens. This is associated with some health problems like eye strain, headaches, and sleep disturbances.

Some scientists hypothesized the role of blue light in these issues.  An in vitro study (meaning in cells not in real humans) alluded to the fact that blue light harms ocular cells. A research study in mice illustrated that as exposure to blue light increased, instances of cataracts increased. Other recent research concluded that blue light glasses did not help mitigate the effects of screen exposure compared to a placebo. Research into this area is ongoing, but there is no undisputed answer at this point in time. 

There is slightly stronger research into the effects of blue light on melatonin. Some anecdotal evidence suggests that wearing blue light glasses before sleep may improve sleep quality. 

To summarize, if you are looking to reduce digital eye strain, blue light glasses should not be the sole solution. If you feel that they help, by all means, invest in a good pair from a reputable brand. The best ways to reduce eye strain though is to remain at arm's length from your screen, follow the 20-20-20 rule, and try and reduce your overall screen time.
