Sure! Here are ten family-friendly Christmas movies along with a snack and/or activity:

1. The Polar Express: Have everyone wear their coziest pajamas for this movie night and serve hot cocoa with marshmallows or whipped cream! You could also make jingle bell bracelets or ornaments and color printable coloring pages based on the film.

2. Elf: Buddy the Elf loves candy and sweets, so consider a candy bar for this movie night! You can also find an online printable (or create your own) to determine what each person's "elf name" is! 

3. Home Alone: Pizza is the perfect meal to enjoy while watching this Christmas classic. For a fun activity, each family member could share something they love about their family. You could also have a Rocking Around the Christmas Tree at-home dance party.

4. The Santa Clause: It's all about Santa this time! Make cookies for Santa, but make extra to enjoy while you watch the movie. A good activity to pair with this film is writing letters to Santa. 

5. Dr. Seuss’ How the Grinch Stole Christmas: Invite your family to dress as characters from Whoville and be sure to take pictures! For a snack, anything green works -- green jello, cookies with green icing, green grapes, or even popcorn tinted with green food coloring.

6. Mickey’s Once Upon a Christmas: This cute family film is full of Disney characters. If your kids have any plush Disney characters, have them join the movie night. You can also find printable coloring pages based on the film that everyone in the family can color. For a snack, you can make Mickey pancakes with one large pancake and two small pancakes (for the ears). Use fresh fruit and/or syrup for Mickey's eyes, nose, and mouth.

7. The Snowman: This sweet Christmas film is based on a book that you could check out from your local library and read as a bedtime story. You could also make paper snowflakes as a fun, simple activity to go along with this movie. 

8. Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer: A fun game to play with this movie is Pin the Nose on Rudolph. It's as simple as using construction paper or a printed picture of Rudolph, taping it to the wall, and using either a red circle adhesive label or a small piece of red paper with tape. Take turns playing Pin the Nose on Rudolph (played in the same manner as Pin the Tail on the Donkey). 

9. Santa Claus is Coming to Town: A Christmas classic, this claymation special is a family favorite. For a fun snack and activity, you can string popcorn and decorate the tree. Singing along to Christmas songs before or after the film is a fun activity too. 

10. A Charlie Brown Christmas: If you haven't already, you could decorate the Christmas tree before or after watching this movie. A fun treat to try is a hot cocoa bomb, which is available in a variety of flavors.
