Mike, an older gentleman, and his wife Olivia lived on a quiet street. Until recently, that is. Lately, their neighbor's kids had been hanging out in front of the house and revving their car engines. Mike found it very annoying and complained constantly. Olivia just took out her hearing aids and enjoyed the peaceful evenings anyway.
One evening Mike decided to go down and give the kids a piece of his mind. He was sick and tired of the noise. Olivia didn't want him to go, she worried that losing his temper was bad for his heart. She placed a blue-veined hand on Mike's arm and asked him not to go. Mike shook her hand off and stomped out of the house, determined.
"Mike, wait!" Olivia called after him, trying to catch up.
Mike turned around just in time to see his wife trip and lose her balance in the street. He rushed to her side to help her. Olivia moaned in pain and clutched her ankle. "I think it's broken."
Now Mike was even angrier, his frustration at the kids' noise and worry for his wife coalescing into a white-hot ball in his chest. He cursed loudly. Olivia gasped and said "Mike!"
Mike helped Olivia up to get her out of the street, barely able to support her slight weight.
"Are you OK, Miz Gretner?" a young voice said.
Mike looked up to see one of the kids responsible for making the noise. Just as he was about to bark at him, the kid bent down and scooped Olivia up in his arms easily.
"Where do you want to go, Mr. Gretner?" The kid asked.
"The car, she thinks it's broken. I'll take her to the ER." Mike gestured toward their car in the driveway.
"Sure thing. Are you OK to drive her? You look a little pale." the kid seemed very concerned.
Mike nodded and realizes his anger was gone, leaving only a sick feeling. "Yes, I'm fine. Thank you for your help."
Once they'd gotten Olivia comfortably in the car, Mike took her to the hospital. As he drove he realized how relieved he was to have help with Olivia. Maybe those kids weren't so bad after all. He decided to try not to be annoyed at the noise so much.
