1. Get to know your garden
Before you start gardening, get to know your garden. Check if it is turned to the north or the south. You have to know where the sun is so you know what to plant in which place. Also, learn what type of soil is in your garden. See what is already growing. If you see plants like camellias, magnolias and pieris the soil is acidic. If you can't see the camellias, magnolias and pieris, you have more alkaline soil. You can do a soil test to know what plants you can grow.

2. Plan your garden
Sit down and make a plan for your garden. This way you can decide what to grow where. Without a plan, you can get carried away when buying things at the garden center. Without a plan, you may also end up with a lot of plants that don't look good together. If you don't plan things well, you may get plants that do not suit your growing conditions. Planning will also help you to use color and structure wisely. It will help you create a garden that looks great throughout the year.

3. Learn how to plant
You must know how to plant your plants right. This way you will ensure they grow well. Take the time to weed and prepare the soil before you plant anything. Add mulch or fertilizer where necessary. If you're unsure how to plant something, look online for instructions. Trees planted too deeply will not thrive. Root balls that sit too high in the soil will dry out quickly and the plant will die.

4. Feed and water plants regularly
Learn when and how to water plants. It will help you keep them alive so they don't die. Water the root ball rather than the leaves because it's the roots that absorb the water. Soaking the rootball only once every week is better than watering a little bit every day. Feeding is also important. You should feed your plants every fortnight during spring and summer when they are growing. You will need to feed more if growing in containers.

5. Start small
When starting a new vegetable patch, do a little bit at a time. Cover areas you don't want to work on with cardboard or black plastic. That will stop weeds from growing while you work in a different area.

6. Keep an eye on pests
Most garden pests don't do much harm to plants and can be left alone. Some natural predators will keep them in check. But sometimes pest populations can become an infestation. That's when you need to act. Keep an eye out for increasing numbers of pests like aphids, slugs and snails. This will help keep your plants safe and save you a lot of trouble.

7. Make use of compost
Composting kitchen and garden waste is good for the environment, wildlife, your money and your garden. Let the waste break down for a year. Then use it as a mulch around the base of plants in your garden and veg patch.
