A newspaper challenged a magician to escape from special handcuffs. The magician accepted the challenge during a performance at a theater. It was reported that many people turned out for the event. The escape attempt dragged on for over an hour. At one point the magician asked if the cuffs could be removed so he could take off his coat. The representative of the newspaper refused. The magician promptly took out a penknife and, holding it in his teeth, used it to cut his coat from his body. Some 56 minutes later, the magician's spouse appeared on stage and kissed him. Many thought that in her mouth was the key to unlocking the special handcuffs. However, it has since been suggested that she did not enter the stage at all. The magician then went back behind the curtain. After an hour and ten minutes, the magician emerged free. As he was paraded on the shoulders of the cheering crowd, he broke down and wept. At the time, the magician said it had been one of the most difficult escapes of his career.

After the magician's death, a friend was quoted in a book, admitting that the magician had been tested that day and had appealed to his spouse for help. The book goes on to claim that the spouse begged the key from the representative of the newspaper, then slipped it to the magician in a glass of water. It was stated in another book that the key required to open the specially designed handcuffs was six inches long, and could not have been smuggled to the magician in a glass of water. The friend offered no proof of his account, and many modern biographers have found evidence (notably in the custom design of the handcuffs) that the challenge may have been arranged by the magician and that his long struggle to escape was pure showmanship. A person who investigates paranormal claims believes that the only way the handcuffs could have been opened was by using their key, and speculates that it would have been viewed "distasteful" to both the newspaper and the magician if the magician had failed the escape.

This escape was discussed in depth on a TV show in an interview with an expert on magicians and escape artists.

A full-sized construction of the same handcuffs, as well as a replica of the key for them, are on display to the public at a museum. This set of handcuffs is believed to be one of only six in the world.
