"A Bump In The Road"

Yesterday started out for me to be a day like any other day: the sun was beating down on me, a bunch of tall redwood trees stared down at me, and occasionally a bear or a raccoon would stop by to say hello and take a breather. This was the life I was getting used to in a state park that was a good 50 miles away from any signs of civilization. I was always in good health, everything was peaceful, and rarely did I feel "tired."

I decided to get in touch with my very active friends on the information superhighway, and one of them informed me about a job opportunity in an extravagant senior living community. It was a "concrete" job offer, and I would get a "raise" if the residents failed to heed any warnings about slowing down. I accepted the offer on the condition that I would need a ride over there and a crew promptly came and picked me up. I felt elated and thought to myself "At long last, I'm paving my way toward great success!"

Unfortunately, the new job has turned into a nightmare. The crew slammed me into the ground, poured a layer of blacktop over me, and made sure that I couldn't move; one could say that I was "tarred and tethered." Then there is the ungodly traffic! These seniors think that they are still 18; 50 miles per hour is their usual speed, but there is this one grandma from Pasadena who just can't seem to keep her foot off of the accelerator! Her extremely excessive speed has now given me constant back pain.

I decided to take the senior community to court due to negligence; I "pitched" my case to the judge, but he decided that I didn't have a good enough "resin" to pursue charges.

So here I stay in this community. Now I'm even more scared because my co-worker 1000 feet behind me says that there is a shuffleboard tournament starting next week and all nearby communities are invited! In conclusion, all I can advise my fellow speedbumps is: "Don't take these matters lying down, and make sure that you get No (As)Phalt Insurance."
