 My head's spinning, but I try to keep my cool and maintain composure. Back in the present day, I have yet to finish writing this scene, so I have to be mindful of the possibility that a wrong move on my end could trigger the murderer–or any of the suspects, for that matter–to do something erratic, bizarre, maybe even violent. I have no idea how to escape this situation and return home, but in the meantime, I figure the best course of action is to do what Hurst would do: solve the mystery before the murderer can escape to strike again. 

I tangle my fingers behind my back, hoping the characters–or are they real people now?--won’t notice my nerves if I keep my fidgeting hands out of sight. My eyes dart around the room as I try to decide who to question first. There’s Lady Augustin with her upturned nose and seasonally inappropriate fur stole, perched on the sofa with her lips pursed at the indignity of it all. Then there’s Doctor Hawley sitting with his elbows on the arms of his chair, fingers steepled, his face unreadable. Charlie Carrigan stands by the open window, smoking a cigarette and gazing down at the gardeners on the lawn, as though ignoring everyone in this room could make this whole situation simply dissolve into the past. 

Nathaniel James paces anxious circles at the far end of the room, impatient to get back to his auction, while his doe-eyed wife Velma coos gently to calm him like a handler trying to quiet a ferocious dog. Javier, the butler, and Gloria, the housekeeper, both stand near the door at attention, as though this were just another facet of their work responsibilities. Neither of them appears too distraught over the fact that their master is dead, nor do they seem terribly worried about job stability. Given the multiple, contradictory wills found in the victim's safe, one would think they’d be a bit unsettled by the uncertainty of their futures, and maybe ask a few questions. But both keep their lips sealed and their eyes focused on the opposite wall, watching the rest without staring or engaging. 

It all suddenly strikes me as laughably absurd. How can they take themselves so seriously? Don't they realize how formulaic this all is?
