Dear Emilia,
I could imagine things from last year and how we kind of left it off at some point in the past, probably because we both were scared to think too much about it and push ourselves to make decisions that we weren’t ready for. Or it was probably a test of time, which you so wonderfully passed and decided to send me a letter you wrote a while back without changing a thing. It is the most amazing thing ever, but at the same time a bit scary, even when you mentioned that things have ‘changed’ a bit since then. I read between the lines that things are not as strong as they were before – in fact, not even as strong as the latter parts of this letter you wrote before. That is okay – it’s understandable and it's justified. 

Either you have an amazing ability to explain yourself so well, or you seem so innocent to me that nothing you wrote in the letter feels wrong. You are right about everything, or at least think exactly the way I think and feel. 

For a while now I’ve been wondering if what is true is true, and what is false is false. What ‘reality’ really is? It was one of the questions that confused me the most and it kept me occupied for a while. What’s true and real for you might not be real for someone else because, for us, our reality is what we can perceive, sense and feel through the 5 (six) senses and the heart that we have. And if everyone can perceive things differently, does that mean there are different realities? How can there be different realities? And if there are, how would we ever know what’s true and what’s not? It seems like there is no one reality or truth. When I thought about it, it was extremely unsettling for me. Then I came across something that I read in psychology literature. That changed quite a lot for me. It gave me more humility and made me more understanding and considerate of others. I think even more than before, and I’ve hardly left with any beliefs anymore. Just like you, I’ve become more objective in many things, but emotions for me are still a whole different ball game.
Sincerely,
Mark
