To: Funders of Project: Sword and Shield Role-Playing Game
From: Project: Sword and Shield Developers
Subject: Project Update

Hello everyone! We here at Project: Sword and Shield are thrilled to give you this new update for the game and to let you know about what we have in store for the future.

First of all, as you know, we have reached the beta testing phase of development for Project: Sword and Shield. This means anyone who has contributed to our crowd-funding campaign will be sent a code within the next 48 hours of this email, which will allow you to log into the game and play the campaign in its current form. We want to get enough of you to play the game to stress-test our servers for the upcoming multiplayer campaign expected to be released in two months and to also give you the chance to check out the work we've been doing and what you have paid to support.

Secondly, we'd like to provide a roadmap and timeline for the completion of the game and its subsequent roll-out to you, the supporters, and those players who purchase the game when it is released soon after. Our current outlook on the release of the game looks to be on time, with the original intended release date (August 1, 2023) being the target date for release to you, the supporters. On September 1, 2023, the game is anticipated to be ready for wide release to the public. We are releasing the game to supporters before doing a wide release to everyone to show our appreciation to you (the supporters) by giving you a chance to experience the game before anyone else and to get a head start on creating and leveling up your characters. In addition, we will be giving all campaign supporters several in-game items for free which will not be available to the public, just as another token of our appreciation.

Another reason we will be providing early access to supporters is to make sure the completed game (including multiplayer) works perfectly before we do the wide release on September 1. This gives you an entire month of playing the game and offering any tips or suggestions, or pointing out any bugs that might exist.

That's all for now.  Thank you all for your support!
