To: techdesk@company.com
From: Dave David (dave.david@company.com)
Subject: Computer Issues

Hello,

I've been having trouble with my work PC since yesterday, and I'm hoping you could help me fix it. Here is what I am encountering:

Last week, I arrived at work and turned on my computer as usual. The computer went through the usual startup, which led to the login screen prompting me for my username and password. I entered both and was logged in to my desktop when, all of a sudden, the computer shut down completely as if it were powered down. 

I then tried turning the computer back on, logged back into the desktop, and about a minute later, the computer shut down again. This time, I could smell a burning smell, like burnt plastic or electronics. I didn't see any smoke, but the burnt smell was prominent and seemed to be coming from the back of the PC case. 

I decided to give the computer about half an hour to rest before attempting to turn it back on again; I figured the computer was not in a well-ventilated area, and the computer overheated, which led to it powering down. After about 45 minutes, I finally turned the computer back on, logged into my desktop, and was able to draft half of an email before the computer shut down again.

I'd like to avoid continuing to turn the computer on again and am hoping there is something you can do to help.

Thank you,

Dave David
Sales
Fourth Floor
Company


To: Dave David (dave.david@company.com)
From: Sal Edwards (techdesk@company.com)
Subject: Computer Issues

Hi Dave,

It sounds like your computer's power supply may be going out if it hasn't already. I will need to replace the old power supply in your computer with a new one. I can have that done today and have the computer ready to go for you tomorrow morning when you return to work.

Go ahead and send me a ticket so I can get started on the requisition order for the power supply (which we have here at the IT office) and I'll send one of my guys up to get the computer before the end of the day today. Barring any complications, we'll have your computer back at your office tomorrow.
