It was 6 P.M. Karl was hanging out in his living room, thinking about what to make for dinner. He starts to head into the kitchen and takes a peek inside the fridge to see what he has. There were a lot of pizza ingredients from the pizza party that happened at work a couple of days ago. Karl also remembered that he had a pre-made pizza crust hanging out near the bread box. It looked like it was Karl's destiny to make pizza today. He gathers all the ingredients, places them on the counter, and gets to work.

Karl prepares the pizza crust and places it on a steel pizza pan. He turns the oven to 375°F precisely. On the crust, he starts to brush it with a light layer of butter. It starts to glisten like the sea on a sunny day. Karl opens up a container with the pizza sauce they made at the pizza party. The deep red sauce with garlic and herb started to call to Karl as he pours and spreads it in a circle on the crust. Karl thought he should put the cheese on next, but he had another, better idea. He grabs his choice of meat, pepperoni, and sausage and starts to layer them on the sauce. He only dreamed of a pizza double layer with meat and cheese. The tiny squish that the pepperoni makes as they're placed on top of the sauce was almost heavenly. The sausage was the icing on the cake for Karl. Next was the cheese. He grabbed the shredded parmesan that was hanging out in the fridge and started to cover the pizza with the stuff. Extra cheese, no. Extra, EXTRA cheese. So much cheese that you'd think Karl owned a cow of his own. Lastly, Karl places the remaining pepperoni on top. He adds his choice of vegetables: mushrooms, and red onions on top of the pizza. It was complete. 

Karl's creation was complete. A double pepperoni, sausage with mushrooms and red onions, extra EXTRA cheese pizza. Just saying the name filled Karl's heart with all the fuzzy feelings in the world. The oven was primed at the perfect 375°F. Karl slowly places the pan on the top rack and closes the door. All he has to do is wait.
