Dear Editor,

Many thanks for raising this important issue in your paper. Dog owners must be very careful when using oil diffusers in their homes, particularly ones containing tea tree oil. Tea tree oil can be lethal for dogs.

A New Zealand grandmother shared a heartbreaking story about how her beloved pooch was poisoned by the oils in her diffuser. The poor dog was left unable to recognise her when she returned from working a late shift as a nanny. It is great that Marrianne Whyte shared her warning on Facebook because it raises awareness of this issue. In fact, her post has been shared 1.5 million times.

When she tried to wake her dog up, she thought the dog had been having a dream, or been experiencing night terrors. However, she found that he was "still acting weird" the next day. The following day Marrianne set off for another shift but had to return home early after receiving a worrying call from her dog sitter because the dog wouldn't come out from under the bed. It was very out of character because he was a happy dog. After returning early from work Marrianne Whyte found the dog in a confused state, so she took him to the emergency vet. 

It was then she discovered that the tea tree oil in her diffuser is toxic for dogs. There is a happy ending to the story, because fortunately, tests confirmed that Marriane's dog hadn't suffered liver damage. However, the vet gave him fluids under his skin to get rid of any toxins. Cat lovers should also be aware, as Vet Clinic Pets on Parker, so rightly points out. Cats are also at risk of being poisoned by essential oils. Cats don't have a liver enzyme called glucuronyl transferase, which is required to break them down. Cats' livers are slower at eliminating these compounds, which can lead to toxic build-up. 

Dogs, like me, do not lack this enzyme, but we are still sensitive to essential oils and we are liable to become very sick if exposed to them. Owners can look out for common signs of poisoning as a result of inhalation from an oil diffuser, by watching for laboured breathing, lack of coordination and difficulty walking, drooling, diarrhoea, lethargy, depression, low body temperature, weakness, muscle tremors and vomiting.

Therefore, you see the terrible effects that these diffusers can have on animals like me. I thank you for highlighting and raising awareness of this problem. I hope that no other dog will have to suffer as a result of tea tree oil diffusers.

Regards,
Rolo the dog
