Opening scene. 
A woman sits alone at a booth in a nearly deserted restaurant. She is between 25 to 30 years old and has an air of authority about her. Her phone rings and she answers it. A man is on the other end and we can hear the entire conversation. 

Woman: Yes?
Man: Ms. Smith?
Woman: (sighs and leans back) Mr. Cromwell. What can I do for you this morning?
Man: I wanted to see when you would send the money.
Woman: You're rather sure about my decision.
Man: Did you look over my offer?
Woman: I looked it over and after some consideration, decline your request.
Man: But you know how dire it is for my people. They are poor, food is very expensive and wages are very low. I need this money to help my people.
Woman: Mr. Cromwell, one of my people checked out your story. You're right. Your country is a mess. Your citizens are suffering but I notice that the ruling elites are living large. So you want my money. How do you plan to help your people with it?
Man: We need to upgrade the country's infrastructure. The roads are terrible, half of the water treatment plants are not operational, the power grid fails daily and the airport needs to be enlarged.
Woman: The airport? According to my research, you upgraded the airport six months ago. And I understand that the only ones who can afford to fly are the ruling elite. 
Man: Well, we deserve a few extras for the responsibility of running the country.
Woman: You mean running the country into the ground. Mr. Cromwell, I decline your offer. Get your money somewhere else.
Man: (indignant) So you're not going to help my people?
Woman: No. I'm not going to help you. This money wouldn't do a darn thing for your people. You would keep it for yourself. Not a chance.
Man: You may want to reconsider. I am the leader of a country. My operatives will be paying you a visit.
Woman: Send whoever you like.

Suddenly, the restaurant slows fades away and a space backdrop fades in.  A theme song plays in the background as a voice calls out:

Voice: Princess Danaria, Guardian of the Planet! Defender of the poor! Upholder of freedom! Princess Danaria, a Hero for our time!

Scene fades.
