THE GLOBAL INFORMER NETWORK

What is Wooze, and Why Is It So Popular?

April 20, 2021

Written by Stephánie King.

Just a few months ago, a new concoction was formed that's creating a paradigm shift in the brewing industry. Chemists and brewers brought their minds together to create something completely unique. It started off at Poor Richard's Brewhouse as an experiment. It was created by combining and fermenting coffee, watermelon, candied sugar, and bitter hops. Local enthusiasts are calling it "the ultimate drink enhancer." Some are even having it neat!

We spoke to Jorge Washington to find out more.

INTERVIEWER: "It's a pleasure to speak to you, Jorge. Tell us more about your incredible success with Wooze."

JORGE: "Thank you, Stephánie. Well, it's a complicated process. You mix a little bit of this, and a little bit of that. We're experiencing flavor profiles and tasting notes we've never discovered before. We believe it's really going to disrupt the industry."

INTERVIEWER: "Do you think that Wooze will change the future of beer, wine, and spirits forever?"

JORGE: "How could it not? Wine enthusiasts, beer geeks, whiskey fans, and cognac connoisseurs are all saying the same message: 'we want more!' In two months, we've already hit 14 million in individual retail packet sales. That's at least 10 million satisfied customers and counting."

INTERVIEWER: "How can something go so well with both wine and beer? What about the other things you mentioned?"

JORGE: "People were surprised to see that something made with coffee and watermelon goes with literally anything. For a lager, it introduces just a hint of some additional hop characteristics that just give it that much more 'oomph'. For a Scotch, we're seeing that fans are loving how just a drop can add complexity and depth to a Scotch with roasted and juicy profiles. Lastly, wine enthusiasts have gotten a lot of use out of Wooze by simply allowing their wines to provide more taste."

INTERVIEWER: "Incredible. You're doing an amazing job, Jorge, and we wish you all the best. Be sure to check out Wooze at Poor Richard's Brewhouse today!"

Related articles
Facebook
Twitter
