Sure thing! Here is a brief overview of the different types of video games available to play:

1. Role-Playing Games (RPG) - Role-playing games involve playing a fictional character (you can design an avatar of yourself to play in the game) in a certain setting (fantasy, dungeon, wasteland) and playing out a storyline that can organically evolve. The hallmarks of RPGs include an experience-based leveling system, equipment (weapons, armor) that can add attributes (faster running, increased resistance to damage), and quests (tasks that can be completed for experience, equipment, or in-game currency.)
2. First-Person Shooters (FPS) - First-person shooters are shooting games that put you directly in the game character's shoes as if you were seeing everything through their eyes. FPS games usually revolve around either a single-player campaign where the player fights against enemies using a variety of guns through multiple levels, or in multiplayer online matches with other human players (Deathmatch, King-of-the-Hill, Capture-the-Flag, or Cooperative play).
3. Fighting Games - Fighting games are games that usually involve two players (either a human against a computer-controlled character or a human versus another human) fighting against each other using many different fighting techniques, including hand-to-hand combat, weapons combat, and sometimes even superpowers such as laser beams or energy blasts. The winner of the match is the player left standing.
4. Sports Games - Sports games are digital representations of sports that are available in real life (basketball, football, hockey). Sports games allow you to play as a player in a sports game, playing the game as it would be played in real life. Some of these games are made so well that every detail seems almost life-like, and may include real players from the real sports making cameos in the games as playable characters.
5. Side Scroller/Platform Games - Side scroller and platform games are 2-dimensional games where the player controls a character who moves from left to right or vice-versa on the screen and must navigate obstacles such as walls or ladders through jumping (via platforms) or climbing. 
6. Multiplayer Online Battle Arena Games (MOBA) - MOBAs are games that are played online against multiple other human players in a game setting. The games usually consist of groups of players on separate teams attempting to beat each other either by eliminating the opposing team's players or by capturing an objective (such as a flag or castle). The difference between MOBAs and first-person shooters may seem small, but MOBAs do have added features such as different skills for players that can add new dimensions to the game and foster cooperation and communication between teammates to win a match.
7. Action-Adventure Games - Action-adventure games usually involve playing a character in a situation that involves action and/or adventure, such as exploring caves or climbing mountains.
8. Stealth Games - Stealth games require cunning and quiet to kill enemies and maneuver through the game environment. Many stealth games are based around characters that would require stealth to perform their duties, such as ninjas and assassins.
9. Survival Games - Survival games are about playing a character who must survive in their surroundings or the environment. Game modes include surviving against multiple hordes of enemies such as zombies or other enemy combatants using weapons or tools designed to hurt or kill your enemies.
10. Simulation Games - Simulation games allow you to simulate fictional or real-life scenarios in a game setting. Some examples of simulation games include simulating real life (owning a house, interacting with neighbors, making meals), being a farmer (operating a tractor, tending to the land, growing crops), or even pressure-washing dirty fences. There are many simulation games to choose from.
