In a beehive far away, in a land called Nepal, there was a bee named Barry. Barry wasn't like all the other bees in his hive. He had aspirations to be more than a worker or drone bee. Barry's dream was to climb Mount Everest, the tallest mountain in the world. 

So, one day, Barry decided to chase his dream and began his journey to climb the mountain. His bee friends laughed and buzzed in disbelief as Barry packed, but he was determined to reach the top. Soon he was on his way!

As Barry began his ascent, he realized that he wasn't the only one climbing the mountain. There were hundreds of humans and many ice worms who were also chasing their dreams up the mountain. Along the way to base camp, there was a caterpillar who wanted to fly, a ladybug who wanted to long-distance swim, and a grasshopper who wanted to salsa dance. They were all chasing their dreams and cheering each other on, encouraging and motivating one another to reach their goals. It was so inspiring.

Barry, being a bee of course, was naturally equipped with wings, but they weren't enough to get him up the steep and rocky terrain. So, he used his tiny arms and legs to climb, just like the other climbers.

As he kept going higher and higher, Barry faced many, many obstacles, from sub-zero temperatures and heavy winds to a blizzard. But he didn't let anything stop him. He kept going, determined to reach the top.

Finally, after many days and days of climbing, Barry made it to the peak. He was exhausted, but his heart was full of pride. 

Barry immediately began making his way down the mountain. When he finally made it out of the snow and ice, he stopped to rest on the first flower he found.  Suddenly, he felt a sharp pain in his backside. He turned around to see a grumpy old mountain goat, who had mistaken Barry for a flower and tried to eat him. The goat quickly realized his mistake and apologized, but Barry couldn't help but laugh at his luck.

And that's the story of Barry, the first bee to ever climb Mount Everest. A story we almost never knew because Barry almost ended up being eaten by a goat.
