Your bedroom should be a place where you feel safe and comfortable from the moment you step foot in it. You should long for the sanctuary of your bedroom in the evenings, especially after a long workday has left you feeling stressed and haggard. 

Did you know that there are 335 million people in the United States and one-third of them aren’t getting enough sleep? While there are many contributing factors to the lack of good doze, one main component is the lack of a properly relaxing and cozy space. 

For a calmer mind and better sleep, here are five ideas for making your bedroom a more relaxing and cozier safe place. 

1. Choose colors that remind you of calmness and peace. 

For many people, various shades of blue or purple are calming colors. Cerulean blue, for instance, is a favorite because it reminds most people of the oceans. Whereas, purple is often symbolic of luxury, which many people associate with a plush and cozy bedroom environment. 

However, color therapy is different for everyone, and the trick is finding colors that are soothing and calming specifically to you. It can be any color that evokes a peaceful brain response. While you don’t have to flood your bedroom with that singular color, a few splashes in pillows, blankets, and even on the walls could have a safe, comforting effect on your brain and body. 

2. What’s your “perfect storm” for a good night’s sleep? 

As everyone’s calm colors are different, so are everyone’s ideas of an ideal sleep space. While some people love complete darkness and a cold bedroom with a fan on high throughout the year, others are happier and sleep better with a nightlight in a quiet room of warm, still air. It’s a personal preference, often associated with the ways you slept growing up. Ergo, it could be a catalyst for better sleep and a calmer mind as an adult too. 

It may take trial and error, but work on discovering the environment that is most conducive to your calm state of mind and a good night’s rest. Once you’ve found your “perfect storm” of peace, it should be easier to create a cozy, calm environment in the bedroom. 

3. Bring nature into the bedroom with crystals, a vase of flowers, or windowsill succulents. 

Nature is balance, and finding balance in your bedroom could mean reminding yourself of the equilibrium found in nature. For instance, you could add greenery with windowsill succulents, or bring a bloom of color onto your nightstand with a fresh vase of flowers. 

Into the mystical side of nature? Crystals are symbolic of inner feelings and your psyche, so invest and display crystals that represent what you want. For instance, black tourmaline repels negative energies, while amethyst encourages good dreams and deeper sleep. 

4. Engage your senses with softness and soothing scents. 

Calmness and peace are felt across all of your senses, so engage in those before bedtime. You could, for example, invest in a sound machine for the gentle lull of ocean waves or a cacophony of cicadas and crickets to remind you of your childhood. You could also surround yourself with softness, like plush pillows and luxurious blankets atop crisp, clean sheets. 

Another way to invite calm into your bedroom is with the right scents. Lavender is naturally soothing to the mind, while vanilla is a subtle, mellow fragrance that transports your brain back to simpler, peaceful times. 

You don’t have to douse your pillows and blankets but use a room spritz to liven the air or do the same with a candle. Just don’t forget to blow out the candle before you doze off. 

5. The less clutter in your bedroom, the less clutter in your mind before bedtime. 

Clutter of your safe space is clutter of your mind because when the clutter becomes too much, your brain will latch onto the worry and responsibility of eventually having to clean and organize everything cluttered. It’s a thought that can keep you awake at night! 

Use your day to declutter and organize your bedroom. The less worry you give yourself, the better sleep you’ll have, and the calmer your mind will be. Remember that the aim here is to create a haven for yourself.
