As the caravan crested the hill, the castle finally came into view. Its sturdy foundation of dark stone appeared as though it had grown right out of the ground, like an ancient tree with deep, sprawling roots. Meanwhile, its narrow turrets and spires reached up like thin, greedy fingers into the quickly darkening skies. Candles were already lit to illuminate the windows, and the drawbridge had already been lowered in anticipation of their arrival. Banners of the king’s family colors—deep pine green with hints of burgundy and golden yellow—hung from the castle’s towers and fluttered in the breeze, lending the building an appearance of animation. Even from this distance, Lora could hear lutes and drums echoing on the wind and smell roasting meats. She felt her stomach rumble and dug her heels into her steed’s side to take off, galloping down the sloping road toward the castle gates.

They were received by servants and stable boys who promised to take care of the horses and deliver their cargo to the rooms that had been prepared for them. Once their capes were shed and hung by the door, they were ushered swiftly through the portcullis into the entrance hall, a long and wide corridor with lit braziers cupping roaring flame on both sides and more banners of the king's colors adorning the walls. Footsteps echoed off the stony floors as the caravan marched silently behind their escort toward the great hall where the king was awaiting their arrival. Lora forced a deep breath to slow her anxious heartbeat and trained her wandering eyes on the double doors ahead. 

The doors opened, and the sound of trumpets blared as they finally laid eyes on the king. He sat on a throne at the far end of the hall, surrounded by standing attendants who stared in silence as the caravan approached. Lora led the way, ignoring the banquet table spread with an untouched feast, even as her mouth flooded with saliva. She bowed to the king. When she raised her head, he was smiling down at her. 

"Welcome!" his voice boomed. "You must be parched from your journey. Cupbearer!" 

A young man scurried over to hand her a goblet of plum wine. Lora traced its warm metal rim with a finger, then sipped delicately, letting the sweet and sour flavor roll over her tongue.
