Got it! Here is a list of tips for choosing SEO keywords.

1. Use keyword research tools - One free and simple keyword research tool is Google Search Console. Google Search Console actually will show you what terms match your content in Google itself. Alternatively, there are several other keyword research tools you can use.
2. Know the types of keywords - There are four main types of keywords, some being simple words, and some being entire phrases. When you know about the different kinds of keywords, you can make them a part of your SEO content strategy. One type of keyword is buyer intent keywords, which are used in the buying process's last stage. There are also short-tail and long-tail keywords. Short-tail keywords are less than three words, and long-tail keywords are longer and have less search volume. There are also question keywords, which are questions.
3. Know search intent - Why are people searching this content? When you know this, you can use the intent of searches to craft content around. You can also use search intent to improve blog titles. Try to find search intent keywords that bring you targeted traffic and use these keywords in your meta description as well as the title. The types of search intent are "informational", which is when someone looks for information, "navigational "when someone is looking for a specific site, "transactional" when a person is looking to purchase something, and "commercial" when someone is looking for the perfect product for them.
4. Make a keyword list - Lists can help you find focus on your goals and drive your business forward. An optimized list of keywords can help you know what keywords you need to use to garner traffic to your site and create leads.
5. Know where to use keywords - Once you have a list of keywords, you need to know where to use them. You should be using your keywords pretty much everywhere actually. They should be used on the page in the title, headings, subheadings, and written content. They should also be used in the meta description, image names, image file names, image alt text, and URLs.
