Mr. Rose opened the bank account app on his phone and discovered the multiple trades he made a week prior had finally made money...$50 million to be exact. He was a multi-millionaire overnight. He was prepared for this moment, as he had been planning for several years, and now he was in the endgame.

Mr. Rose immediately hired three people: an accountant; a lawyer; and a personal driver. He needed these three people to help him make his moves since he didn't know how to manage this much money on his own, he wanted to protect himself from any legal issues involved with owning this much money, and he needed someone to drive him around to free him up to make calls and decisions on the move.

Mr. Rose then bought several things he needed in the meantime: a large SUV designed for business (including TVs, stereos, privacy partition between himself and his driver, comfort seats that could recline into beds, and a table to do business. He had his driver, Alfred, take the wheel while he (Mr. Rose) sat in the back and started making phone calls.

Alfred then drove Mr. Rose to his lawyer's office. Mr. Rose informed his lawyer, Mike, about the wealth he'd accrued overnight and requested his assistance setting up the necessary wills, trusts, and non-profit companies Mr. Rose needed to ensure the wealth he accumulated would not be frivolously spent as quickly as it was gained and that it was protected from excessive taxation.

From there, Mr. Rose contacted a real estate agent he had dealings with in the past, Mr. Matsumura, and inquired with him about a listing for a beautiful, $10 million residence located on the coast of the island, nicknamed "The Waterfalling Estate" for its proximity to a naturally-occurring waterfall next to the main house. The residence, located on 10 acres of land, sat majestically on the top of a high cliff overlooking the Pacific Ocean. Mr. Rose intended on buying this residence and using it as a base of operations until he could purchase another property and build his dream home, and he intended to move his close family in with him to Waterfalling in the meantime until he could move and hand over the keys to the estate to them.
