Lily Bean, a precocious eight-year-old girl, opened her eyes in the morning light. She reached over to grab Teddy, her favorite stuffed animal that she had slept with every night since she was one, and couldn't find him. She felt all through the covers but Teddy wasn't there! Panic gripped her as she frantically tore apart her room, but the bear was nowhere to be found. Teddy had vanished without a trace!

Lily Bean's mind raced! Who had come into her room and taken Teddy? Who would do such a thing to something she loved so much? She decided she would be like a detective and solve the mystery. The window was shut and there were no signs of a break-in - it must be an inside job.

First, Lily Bean questioned her little brother. He looked really nervous as she interrogated him. But he shrugged his shoulders and swore on his goldfish's life that he didn't take Teddy. She really didn't think her brother did it.

Next up was her fluffy black cat, Salem. All she could get out of Salem was a "Meow". Disappointed, Lily Bean realized that Salem was an unlikely suspect and wouldn't offer her any valuable information. She pressed on.

Lily Bean went downstairs to find her parents. She interrogated them at the kitchen table. That's when her mom gave her the most amazing news, she had taken Teddy to wash him! Relief washed over her! Teddy was hanging on the line outside drying, so she ran to retrieve him.

As she stood there, looking up and down the clothesline, she couldn't comprehend what she was seeing. The line was completely empty. There was no Teddy. All she saw were two clothes-pins lying in the dirt.

Suddenly, some movement caught her eye and she turned to see a shadowy figure in the corner of the yard with eyes glinting in the sun. Teddy was in the clutches of the shadowy figure. Fear coursed through her veins as Lily Bean realized she had stumbled upon something far more than a missing toy and she wasn't sure the two of them would make it out of this alive. 

With her heart pounding and adrenaline pumping, Lily Bean's met the eyes of the creature as it began to move toward her...
