Host: "Hey kids! Today we are going to talk about the four stages of metamorphosis of butterflies and months. 

Does anyone know what metamorphosis means? Well, let me tell you, it means a "transformation or change in shape."

So when a caterpillar evolves into a moth or butterfly, they go through metamorphosis. 

The four stages in the metamorphosis of moths and butterflies are egg, larva, pupa, and adult. Let's talk about each stage, okay?

The first stage is the egg stage. The grown-up female butterfly lays her very tiny eggs on plants that then become food for the hatching caterpillars. She lays a lot of eggs to make sure a lot of them live, and depending on the kind of butterfly, eggs can be laid in Spring, Summer or Fall. 

Cool, huh? 

Okay, let's move on to the second stage, the Larva Stage. This is also called the caterpillar stage if the insect is a butterfly or moth. In this stage, the caterpillar eats so much because the food is stored and used later as a grown-up moth or butterfly. 

Did you know caterpillars can grow up to 100 times their size in this stage? WOW!!! Amazing, right? 

The third stage is the Pupa stage. 

When the caterpillar is fully grown and stops eating, it is called a pupa. 

A pupa may hang from a branch, hide in leaves, or bury underground. The pupa stage can last from a week to a month, or even longer. Some even last two years. WHAT?! 

That can be a long time. 

Now kids, it may not look like a lot is going on from the outside, but inside so many changes are happening. Special cells in the larva are growing very fast. These special cells will become legs, wings, eyes, and other parts of the grown-up butterfly. 

Some of the cells in the larva will give the growing cells energy. 

The fourth and final stage is the Adult Stage. The adults look very different than the larva stage. For example, look at this [picture of a caterpillar]. Caterpillars have a few tiny eyes, stubby legs and very short antennae. 

The adults [show a picture of a butterfly] have long legs, long antennae, and compound eyes. Compound eyes are clusters of very small receptors that allow insects to see in multiple directions at the same time. Very different than our human eyes. 

Another difference is that adults can fly using their large, colorful wings, but they can't grow. 

Remember when we said caterpillars can grow to 100 times their size in the larva stage? Well, adults can't do that. See, the caterpillar's job was to eat, but the female butterfly's job is to get pregnant and lay eggs. 

Some of the adult butterflies get their energy feeding on nectar from flowers, and some don't eat anything at all. 

Another difference between caterpillars and adult butterflies is that adult butterflies can fly to find just the right plant to lay their eggs. This is important because caterpillars can't travel that far.

Fascinating isn't it, kids? Wow, we learned a lot today. Make sure you tell your parents and friends that you learned the four stages of the metamorphosis of butterflies and months. 

First comes the Egg Stage. 
Second, is the Larva Stage.
Third is the Pupa Stage.
Fourth is the Adult Stage. 

Good job, kids! Until next time!”
