Your day started off normal.

You came into your Psychology lecture with exactly ten minutes to spare. Even though you got there slightly early, a majority of people had already been seated and were preparing to take notes for class. Feeling the side of your backpack to make sure your laptop was inside, you walked down the steps on the left side of the hall to make your way to the row you usually sit in. You held your skateboard above your head as you scooted past everyone to get to your spot: the seat right in the middle.

“Always giving me the same look, you big jerk,” you throw your friend, Sam mock sass as he watches you prop your board against the row in front of you, and unzip your bag. A lock of your hair flies into your face, and you blow it away quickly. “As if I’ll ever get to class at the same time you do.”

Sam chews on the end of his pen while he over-dramatically chastises you. “Aren’t we all in the same hall? Why do you get here last? That’s all I’m saying.”

Your eyes are suddenly pulled to the front of the room as the professor starts the lecture. Everyone grows quiet and is intently taking notes, but just as he starts to introduce another topic, the door to the right of the classroom creaks open, and someone enters. Out of habit, you all turn your heads to see who came in.

It’s someone you don’t recognize. He’s blond, and you could tell from the distance between you and him that he was pretty tall. One of his hands is tucked into the pocket of his slacks, and the other is curled around a backpack strap that rests on his shoulder. Your eyes stayed glued on the man as he shuffled into a row near the back. After forcing yourself to turn away from him and pay attention, you see Sam out of your peripherals, looking at you, trying not to laugh.

“What?”

“Uh, now is not the time to be focusing on Mister Big, Blond, and Beautiful over there.”

“Shut up,” you hiss your reply to Bucky, who is chuckling quietly. For added emphasis, you hit his arm. He’s still laughing as he grabs his pen and starts jotting down notes.
