  In a country called the United States of America, there is a special FBI team called X-Files tasked with the investigation of marginalized, unsolved cases involving paranormal phenomena. The team consists of Mulder, a skilled criminal profiler, an ardent supernaturalist, and a conspiracy theorist who believes in the existence of the paranormal, and Scully, a medical doctor and a skeptic who has been assigned to scientifically analyze Mulder's discoveries. 
 The X-Files team got tasked to go to Corpus Christi, Texas to investigate a paranormal phenomenon. They arrived at Corpus Christi and immediately started their investigation by interviewing witnesses and victims of the paranormal phenomenon. From what they gathered from the interviews, the paranormal phenomenon occurs in a bar called "La Terra del Mar", when a song from the band Led Zepplin called "Stairway to Heaven" is played in a jukebox at the same time someone climbs the stairs to the basement. The persons seem to disappear for a few days, later to be found naked in nearby woods. 
 One person that refused to do an interview was the owner of the bar. This gave a sign to Scully and Mulder, and they thought it was a scam to generate publicity, but they had to do their investigation.
 One day has passed since they arrived at Corpus Christi and they decided to make a reservation for dinner for two at the bar. The night set, and they went to the bar, they entered the bar, and the owner immediately became nervous. The owner asked them to leave but they refuse since they had to do their investigation. If the owner didn't comply, they would get a warrant. He broke down in tears explaining the bar was the only thing he has, and if there is something paranormal in his bar, the government would take the bar from him. 
 Scully laugh and said the case could easily be solved if he played the song while she would go up the stairs. Mulder did exactly that he changed the song from the jukebox to "Stairway to Heaven" and Scully began to climb the stairs. Mulder lost sight of Scully and after waiting for a couple of seconds he turned off the music and went to check on Scully in the basement, but she wasn't there. He didn't know where Scully was.
