Night came, and as the man finished brushing his teeth, he put his toothbrush in a cup, turned off the lights, and went to bed. But things still stirred in that house; you see, the toothbrush was glad to have served its purpose once more, but it longed to be together with the tube of toothpaste just across the bathroom counter. Its heart ached to be close to the toothpaste, and it was gleeful for the mere moments in which they would be together before spending so much time apart -- until the next time the man needed to brush his teeth. And all it could do was stare longingly, wishing it had the means to reach the object of its affection. With such a strong desire, something must have taken pity on the poor toothbrush, as sparkles hit the bristles of the toothbrush, and suddenly, it could move! Well, nudge really, but this was more than the toothbrush was ever capable of before, and it wasted no time.

The toothbrush nudged, nudged, and nudged again, hoping to escape the confines of the cup the human placed it in. It struggled and struggled until it was able to use its weight and force to knock the cup down, giving it the chance to nudge right out of the cup. It made moves, making sure its handle was completely out of the cup, before nudging itself towards the tub of toothpaste. However, it came across a possible problem; between it and the toothpaste was a large chasm, known as the "sink". If it fell into the sink, there was no way it would be able to get itself out, not until the human awoke and made use of it once more. The toothbrush could try to get around it, but it would have to travel around the outside, and there was a chance it could fall onto the floor too. That might be an even worse fate, as no doubt if the human found it on the floor, it could very well be thrown away, forever separated from its beloved toothpaste.

Yet it was clear, there was only one option. It was not going to return to the cup, it was already too late for that. The only path ahead was around the sink, risking falling to the floor, to reach the only thing it ever wanted to be close to.
