Sure! Here is a list of tips on how to increase the chances of winning grant money. 

Grant writing can be an intimidating feat, but also an important aspect of business and community development. Here are some tips to increase your chances of winning funds: 

1. The first tip is to thoughtfully target funders. Grant funding research indicates that most awardees receive funding from private foundations, and after that, community foundations and corporations. So, while government grants tend to offer larger sums of money, they are harder to win. 

2. Though there is no magic number for the number of grant applications you should do, try and submit three at a minimum. Like any application process, the more you submit, the greater chance you’ll have of receiving a “yes.” Completing multiple grant applications is also good practice; you’ll likely get better and faster with each proposal. 

3. Well-researched grant proposals are more likely to be funded. This part of the application will take time and planning. If you don’t feel up to it or have a grant writer in-house, consider hiring a grant writer to help with this part, or with the entire application. 

4. It may seem obvious, but it’s imperative to meet the eligibility requirements. Sometimes grant applicants think that if the project or program is good enough and the proposal and well-written, funders may let it slide. More often than not, funders are looking for ways to eliminate applications due to the high number of applications received. Not meeting the eligibility requirements is a surefire way to get your proposal eliminated from consideration. 

5. Pay attention to all of the application’s formatting requirements and guidelines. This is another way your proposal can be quickly eliminated if you do not follow the guidelines to a tee. Funders want to trust that you are detail-oriented and compliant with their standards and requests from the start. 

6. Ensure you submit a readable and error-free proposal. Bear in mind it will be another person or a group of people that review your grant application. The better the readability, the more likely the reviewers will be able to understand your objectives. Especially if you are writing in a second language or if you aren’t keen on writing in general, again, consider hiring a professional grant writer to make sure your proposal is a well-written compelling argument that explains your objectives. 

7. Make your proposal unique. As mentioned above, funders are only human, and they will be able to determine patterns in applications. Try not to base your proposal on templates off the internet or copy another proposal. It takes more time and effort to be unique and authentic, but the rewards are greater. 

8. You’ll want to have your finances in order, because funders may request additional materials that indicate you, your business, or your program is fiscally responsible.

9. Play on your strengths. If you can prove without a doubt that the work you or your organization employs benefits the community, you’re in a good position. Additionally, specific programs are more likely to receive funding than startup or operational costs.
