One hot summer day, Cade found himself with just 30 minutes to mow his yard. He had procrastinated all day, and his dad would be home soon.

He pushed the self-propelled mower to the front yard as some boys from school rode by on their electric scooters. They invited him to go swimming at a neighbor's pool. Cade was crushed that he couldn’t go, with mowing to do, and surely his dad would ground him for playing Xbox all day.

Then, inspiration struck.

“Thanks, guys, but I’ve got a $2500 award to win,” he told them.

“Award?” asked one of his friends. “Who's going to give YOU $2500?"

Cade dismissed them with a couple of shakes of his hand and said, “You go, I want that $2500 all to myself.”
 
This only served to increase the interest of the group of boys.  "How are you gonna get all that money?" another boy asked.
 
“Well…” Cade sighed, impatiently. “There's a new Instagram challenge: take pictures of your yard before and after mowing it, then they pull the timestamps off your metadata, and if you did it the fastest, relative to the size of your yard, you win and some John Deere lawn mower company gives you $2,500. Or," he paused, thinking, "I guess it could be split five ways."

The boys offered their enthusiastic support in mowing the yard. "$500 is a lot of video games!" they said.

Cade pretended to think about it, then agreed. “Okay, less work for me! Here's the plan: I'll take the 'before' picture, set this lever to 'full speed' mode, and we'll take turns and get this done. Ready?" He took the photo and ran after the get-away mower, to the end of the yard and back.

“My turn!” each boy said, and Cade watched them battle it out to mow the rest of the yard. With two minutes to spare, the yard was mowed. Cade took the “after” photo" for the "challenge," just as his father drove up the driveway from work.

“What are you boys up to?” he asked.

“Not much, said Cade, “but the guys are going down to Marianne’s house to swim. Cool if I go, too?”

“You did such a nice job with the yard, Cade!” said his dad. “Of course! Be back before dark!”
