Bernie the bearded dragon was known for his curiosity. He loved exploring the world around him, basking in the sun, and eating tasty insects the most. So when his owners, Tom and Emily, told him he was going to the Grand Canyon, he was both nervous and excited to embark on his first road trip. The Grand Canyon sounded so... Grand! Would he have insects to eat? Somewhere warm to sleep? When he saw his owners carefully packing his tank and heating lamp into the backseat of their car along with those little packages of yummy insects, he knew everything would be just fine. 

As they drove through the roads from Colorado to Arizona, Bernie enjoyed a warm patch of sun shining through the car windows. He watched the scenery change from lush forests to barren deserts, with huge red rock formations off in the distance. It was all so fascinating and new.

When they finally arrived at The Grand Canyon, Bernie was blown away. Tom and Emily carefully carried his tank to the lookout point, where Bernie could see the view of the canyon. He was in awe of the winding canyon of many colors spread out before him. 

As the day wore on, Tom and Emily hiked many trails and explored the scenic overlooks while Bernie basked in the sun in his tank, munched on yummy insects, and took in all the sights. The environment was so foreign to him. He was born in captivity and had always lived in tanks. But as the sun began to set, something odd stirred in him. Bernie grew restless. He wanted to explore the canyon himself, to feel the sand and rock beneath his feet.

So Tom and Emily pulled out his harness. Bernie was surprised and a little nervous but excited too! They carefully strapped Bernie's harness onto his back and took him for a walk along the canyon's edge! Bernie felt like a true adventurer, a real wild dragon, as he climbed over rocks and explored the hidden crevices of the canyon. He even met a kind and chatty desert-horned lizard! It was incredible!

As the sun set over the canyon, Tom and Emily tucked Bernie back into his tank for a good night's sleep and Bernie couldn't help but dream of the adventures that awaited him tomorrow. It was an excellent day!
