Elephant: "Good morning Lion! I have been thinking about something and I wonder if you think about it too. Have you ever imagined what it would be like to live outside of the zoo?"

Lion: "Silly elephant, what do you mean 'outside the zoo'? The zoo is all there is."

Elephant: "No, Lion, I have heard stories long ago about the world outside the zoo walls. Before you came there was an elderly Elephant, she was like a grandmother to me and she arrived here from outside. Oh, the stories she would tell."

Lion: "Dear friend, Elephant, please tell me what she said. I have often wondered if there was more to the world than the barricades we see."

Elephant: "She spoke of the endless savannah where many animals roam and there are no fences. She says there are grassy plains where the breeze stirs the grass and large streams where we can drink and bathe all day." 

Lion: "Ah, that does sound lovely. I would love to run free and hunt my prey. I have often dreamt of the chase, and of being in a place where the humans do not stare at me all day."

Elephant: "Yes, I would love to feel the earth beneath my feet and have the company of a large herd. But there are still people there, Lion. Different people than the ones who watch us. Nana said in the wild the humans hide from the animals."

Lion: "Well why would they hide? They seem to enjoy staring at us through the glass and from the sidewalk. Hiding makes no sense." 

Elephant: "Well, she said that the humans hunt the animals. They hide so they can surprise them with bullets. That is why she was brought here so many years ago."

Lion: "Oh that is scary! I do not wish to be in the wild anymore. I think I will stay here and run across the savannah in my dreams where it is safe."

Elephant: "Me too. I would rather be here where the humans feed us and stare at us. It is better than being where they want to hurt us,"

Lion: "You are so right, Elephant. Now I am off to nap in the sunshine and dream of the wild. Have a good day."

Elephant: "You too, Lion. We will talk again soon."
