[The sun is setting on the commune just outside Seattle. Sylvie, wearing her red plaid jacket, black leggings, and black t-shirt, looks for a way to scale the fence. When she sees the commune is impregnable, she groans loudly and kicks the fence, alerting Dan to her presence.]

Dan: "Now hold it right there. You an outlaw?"
Sylvie: "Do I LOOK like an outlaw to you?"
[Dan looks her up and down for a brief moment, then chuckles.]
Dan: "Well you aren't armed to the teeth, so I'm gonna have to say no. Are ya hungry?"
Sylvie: "What's it to you?" 
Dan "Well I wouldn't be able to sleep tonight if I let a young lady go without a hot meal. Come on." 

[Scene cuts to Dan's kitchen. It's rustic but homely. He walks in and fixes a plate of food, gesturing for Sylvie to sit down at the table, which she does. He brings her over a plate of stew, which she hungrily begins to devour.]
Dan: "Well someone must've been hungry. How'd you like it?"
Sylvie: "I've had better. Can't complain though."
Dan: "I'll take that as a compliment. I'm Dan."
Sylvie: "Cool. What is this place?" 
Dan: "Wisteria."
Sylvie: "What kinda dumb name is that?"
Dan: "Well it's a flower. Meant to bring good luck." 
Sylvie: "Right, because we're rolling in good luck, huh? Also, you know that flower's probably extinct now?"
Dan: "Probably. But it's my wife's favorite flower... [he pauses briefly, a hint of a sad grin paints his face]. WAS her favorite flower."
Sylvie: "Oh. I'm sorry. That was kinda rude of me. I guess when you aren't used to being around people, your manners sorta go out of the window."
Dan: "You're fine. You didn't know."
[He sits at the table. There's an awkward silence.]
Sylvie: "I lost my mom. Within a month of... y'know." 
Dan: "I'm sorry. You don't have any other family?"
Sylvie: "Yeah. No. Kind of. I don't know if my dad's alive, but I don't know if he's dead either. Anyway. Thanks for the food."
[Sylvie picks up her backpack and heads towards the door. She smiles at Dan.]
Sylvie: "Oh by the way. My name is Sylvie."
