Mary needed to get away. Her city apartment was suddenly far too small, and she was going crazy. 

She found the perfect rural cabin online for rent several hours north.

When she arrived at the cabin, she couldn’t believe her luck; it was idyllic. Tucked away in the woods without a road or house around, she could really escape it all here. 

After unpacking her few belongings, making a fire, and making a light dinner, Mary settled into one of the big chairs to read the book she’d been looking at on her shelf for months. 

But only a few minutes later, she heard a rapping on the window. Surprised at the intrusion of the noise in the silence of her oasis, she got up to see what it was.

She saw a branch waving in the wind, obviously hitting the window as it swayed. Mary went back to her book, determined to drown out the sound and remain serene. 

But she couldn’t even get through one more page before she heard the noise again, this time on a window in the bedroom. 

Annoyed, Mary walked into the bedroom to check for another branch to see if she could move this one away. But when she got there, there was no branch. 

Mary wasn’t one to get spooked easily. But all of a sudden, she felt a shiver down her spine and realized, for the first time, that she was completely alone.

Calming her nerves, Mary told herself she was being ridiculous. It was nature, nature made sounds. She would simply go back to her book but lock all the windows first.

Mary couldn’t shake the feeling that something, or better yet, someone, was at the window again. When she finally looked up from the pages, she saw a shadow moving behind the window. 

Officially scared, Mary went and got a sharp knife from the kitchen. 

An hour later, nothing else had happened, and Mary started to feel quite silly sitting with her knife. 

But right when she started to relax, a bang came from the floorboards directly above her. It was then and there that Mary decided to get the hell out of there. 

She grabbed her belongings and headed for the front door. But when she reached for the handle, she couldn’t open the door. It was locked from the outside…
