Here we see the T-side player in his natural habitat. At his point in his development, he has many trials ahead, though the objective is clear. After an unfortunate stroke of hard luck, there is little in the way of the economy that he may use to prepare. The call is made for a desperate -- but not uncommon -- play. He purchases what little he can from the store and readies himself for the difficult journey.

His spawn is favorable. Knife in hand, he takes the Western path from his spawn down into the shaded upper tunnels. This is where he must face his first hurdle -- one that all too often ends in a deadly outcome. The narrow corridor leading to the B-Site lies ahead. As expected, an incendiary grenade is lobbed in creating a dangerous hazard for him and his team. Luckily, he prepared for this. Dropping a smoke while he runs, the smoke dissipates the inferno -- creating safe passage at the cost of visibility. 

He bursts through the smoke from the end of the corridor. On the site now, he scans for enemies. Detecting one in the Car position and one in the Window position, he relays this information to his team using short specialized barks frequently referred to as, "calls." He trades damage with the enemy from Window before dispatching him with his less-than-optimal tools. The enemy at Car is dealt with by his teammates, though not without suffering casualties themselves.

The T-player sets the fuse, and the countdown timer to success begins. He holds an angle deep within the site checking the route he took earlier. Flanking enemies can be deadly. Patience is key. Seconds tick down toward the end. The enemy is out there. With no information, he can do little about it until they decide to engage. 

Then it happens. A flash. He tries to look away, but he is too late. His vision fills with white followed quickly by his own demise. The countdown ends as the opponents defuse the objective. Though the round was lost, with a plant on site, the T-side Player will have a better advantage on his next attempt.
