They had begun to appear at the normal time this year, fully-grown burgundy scarabs searching for food and mates. They were a normal part of the late spring like the nesting birds chirping or mowing the now-growing lawn. June bugs had never warranted even a second glance from me. 

The day began routinely, a rush to work, slightly late from sleeping in. 
I’d opened the door and idly stepped on a glossy beetle that had come inside, no doubt seeking warmth from the misty night. The workday was an average, forgettable one full of monotonous meetings, and I was glad when it was finally over. The ride home was equally uneventful. 

As I pulled into the driveway though, I could see a wine-colored tower of five or six shiny beetles in the doorway, jockeying to get in. I brushed them away and closed the door behind me. 
“Finally home”, I thought. I was tired, and decided to cook something simple; a frozen pizza sounded nice. 

The pizza was delicious, and I dozed off on the couch, content and full. I wasn’t asleep for long though, when a persistent noise clawed through my dreams. *Scritch Scritch Scritch* I put the pillow over my head to block it out. *Scritch Scritch Scritch* It was probably a branch on a window, or the neighborhood cat wanting in. *Scritch Scritch Scritch*

*Scritch Scritch Scritch* “Ugh”, I said, finally rolling over. I must have slept even longer than I had thought, as it was pitch black outside. I sat up and looked closer. I froze. Every window was covered by what must have been hundreds of swarming beetles, clawing for purchase. Not one beam of moonlight could make it through the teeming horde, which no doubt wanted revenge for their fallen comrade. 

*Scritch Scritch Scritch* I stumbled up and around the room groggily, looking for my phone. I needed to call for help before it was too late. The June bugs had never been an issue before; their life span was too short. But maybe this time, it would be me who was gone by the end of summer…

More frantic now with that thought, I panickedly searched the room. I stopped when my eyes reached the small end table. Atop the clean white marble, like a warning or a promise, was a solitary glossy beetle wing.
