Here are a few practices used by Instagram influencers and business owners to attract and engage with their followers. 

1. Create an Effective Bio - One of the first things you should do to attract more followers on Instagram is to create an effective bio. You have a limited amount of characters to work with and one URL, so you need to make each word count. It may seem obvious that you should put your website's URL on your bio, however, if you do you will not have the opportunity to engage as much with your followers. Instead, it is better to use this link to direct people to a landing page that has a list of links to offer. By doing this, you can direct your followers to an endless number of links simply by pointing them to your bio. 

2. Use Organic Tactics to Enhance Brand Awareness - Growth hacking is a term that is used by many digital marketing experts. It is the process of trying out various online marketing strategies to find out which tactics work the best. While there are many applications and programs out there that are designed to help you boost your follower count fast, you may not always end up with followers who are genuinely interested in your brand or what your company has to offer. The best way to make sure your follower count grows is by using organic tactics. By choosing the right hashtags and keywords to add to your profile and your captions, you will guarantee your followers are there because they want to be and are interested in what you are selling. 

3. Create a list of Hashtags that Work - Hashtags are the keywords for your Instagram posts, and they play an important part in helping you increase traffic to your account. Create a list of hashtags related to your brand and keep them in a place where they are easily accessible. You can store them in your phone's notepad app, and you will be able to quickly cut and paste all your hashtags at once into your posts instead of having to type them in manually. 

4. Use Story Highlights - Story highlights on Instagram make it easy to save the best stories you have created and showcase them on your profile for your followers to view anytime. This is a great feature when you want to add more details to your profile page but you aren't able to due to limitations on character count. 

5. Make Each Caption a Mini-blog - Your captions are very valuable, and it's a good idea to plan and create intriguing captions that will get the attention of your target audience. Some customers may like a long caption that gives them more details about your company. Others may prefer to read a shorter post that features videos or graphics. Over time, you will eventually learn which option works best for your audience. 

6. Add a CTA To Your Posts - When you make an Instagram post, you want to include a call to action. There are many ways you can do this, and a CTA doesn't always have to be a sales push. You can ask your followers to like the photo, tag a friend who may be interested, or ask them to leave a comment letting you know what improvements they would like to see in your products. 

7. Take Advantage of Live Chat or Live Streaming - Sharing fun live-stream videos focused on your brand's products is an excellent way to get the word out to your target audience. Your followers can choose to get a notification whenever you go live, and they can also ask questions during your live stream. It's like an interactive infomercial that allows you to reach out to those who are interested in the products or services you have to offer.
