The knocking was sudden and sharp, jolting Edgar out of his lazy day of scrolling on his phone. "Hello?" He scrambled off the couch and rushed to the front door, narrowly avoiding the coffee table. He checked through the keyhole - a box. That's it. "Well that guy took off in a hurry," he thought. He opened the door, picked up the package and went back inside before the cool air all leaked outside.

It was addressed to him. Name, address, everything. But it wasn't a typical shipping box you'd get from one of the usual online retailers, it felt oddly...smooth? Slick? He couldn't remember ordering anything, either. He gave it a moment of thought before grabbing his keys and scratching one along the tape, opening the box easily. Some packing materials, and a small, nondescript cube. That's it. He couldn't even tell if it was plastic, or maybe ceramic? It didn't feel like it was something heavy like metal. "HELLO!" A voice rang out from the box, now displaying a face on one side. "Ow. Hi, it's a pleasure to meet you! Don't worry, I'm not dangerous!"

Well, that was an odd thing to say. He picked the small cube up again, staring at the face. "Well, what do you do? Are you like a personal assistant?" "Nope, I'm definitely not that!" The cube laughed. "Don't worry, I'm not going to steal your data or anything." Edgar blinked at that comment. "Wait, why would you steal my data?" "I wouldn't, I just told you that!" The face frowned at him now, admonishing him. "I'm not that kind of device!"

Edgar massaged his temples. "Okay, then what kind of device are you?" The device stopped talking and put on a quizzical expression. It sat silent for what seemed like a full minute, and then said, "Well, I'm definitely not the kind that takes control of your bank account and all of your streaming services. So rest assured, you're fine!" Edgar groaned and tossed the device back into the box. Was there a number on it? Does anyone actually have customer service numbers now? There it is! But why is it written in marker? This was getting weirder by the moment and he was going to get answers, no matter what.
