Page 1: Tommy was so excited that Saturday had finally arrived. Today was the day his parents were taking him to the animal shelter to adopt a new furry friend!

Page 2: Tommy didn’t know what type of pet he would be bringing home. Maybe it would be a dog he could play fetch with! Or maybe a cat that would hang out with him while he read books.

Page 3: On the drive to the shelter, he thought about what names he might choose. Mabel is too common, and so is Spike, he thought to himself.

Page 4: Upon arriving at the shelter, a nice lady met them at the door, introduced herself as Joyce, and asked if we wanted to take a look around. “There are so many pets available for you to adopt!” she said.

Page 5: Joyce walked them through the shelter and showed them the different animals that needed a good home. There were so many dogs and cats in cages that Tommy didn’t know how he could possibly choose one.

Page 6: Then, Tommy spotted a baby kitten in one of the smaller cages. This kitten had all-white fur with blue eyes and stared directly into his eyes. He felt an instant connection.

Page 7: “This is the one!” Tommy exclaimed as he pointed at the white kitten. His parents beamed back proudly and turned to face Joyce. “I believe we have found our new pet,” Tommy’s mother told her.

Page 8: “Great! I will get the adoption paperwork ready for you. Would you like to hold your new kitten while you wait?” Joyce asked Tommy. “Of course I would!” he said excitedly.

Page 9: Tommy sat down on the floor as Joyce put the kitten into his lap. The kitten immediately started purring, and Tommy couldn’t help but to have the biggest grin on his face.

Page 10: “I think I’ll name you Cloud. Because clouds are white and fluffy, just like you!” Tommy said to the kitten.

Page 11: Joyce came back into the room. “The paperwork is all done! You are all set to take your new kitten home with you,” she told Tommy. “Did you pick out a name yet?”

Page 12: “Her name is Cloud. She will be my best friend forever,” Tommy said with pride.
