Not everyone is an early bird, but many night owls still have AM responsibilities. Here are six ways to rev up your brain to feel more alert and attentive in the mornings when it’s hard to get out of bed! 

1. Take a cold shower with revitalizing scents to jolt your nervous system! 

Most people don’t want to get out of the warm embrace of their blankets, so a cold shower may take time to work up to. The cold water is an immediate wake-up call to your nervous system, but a lukewarm shower with revitalizing scents in shampoo and body wash can be just as effective. The best scents for alertness are spicy or have citrus notes, such as orange, cinnamon, rosemary, and peppermint. 

2. Avoid the allure of sugary cereals and other sweet breakfast foods. 

While it may be tempting to grab a doughnut and a Frappuccino on the way to work, resist the urge. Sweet breakfasts will increase your blood sugar, which can make you feel alert for a few hours before a hard crash of fatigue in the afternoon. 

Stick to a hearty, healthy breakfast with protein and heart-healthy fats instead. Eggs and bacon are a classic, but you could also blend a smoothie, have a slice of avocado toast, or opt for rolled oats with berries and a glass of whole milk. 

3. Drink a glass of ice-cold water before your morning cup of coffee. 

Many people can’t wait to have their cup of coffee in the mornings but steer clear until you’ve awakened your mind and body with a cold glass of water. Dehydration is a common cause of fatigue, so a glass of cold water will refresh your nervous system to get you moving in the AM. 

4. Listen to something upbeat, like a comedic, engaging podcast or your favorite “get up and go” music. 

Putting yourself in a good “go-getter” mood will help you awaken your senses in the mornings. Upbeat music or laughter are both great ways to help you feel more alert and prepped to take on the day. 

5. Stretch and work out fatigue with a quick walk outdoors. 

Not only will a good stretch and regular exercise help you sleep better, but a quick stroll outdoors in the morning is a change of scenery that tells your body and mind that it’s time to wake up for the day. Slow stretches work out kinks that accumulate in muscles while asleep.

6. Allow natural sunlight to permeate your surroundings in the mornings. 

This one may make you groan with dread, but sunshine suppresses melatonin production within your body. Melatonin is the chemical that makes you sleepy, and that’s encouraged in dark environments. Standing in sunlight for a few minutes after you wake up tells your mind and body that the day is getting started.
