Nursed back to health by doctors who adopted him feeling like they found their child back in the form of Zareb who they lost during a car accident in 2004, Zareb arrives at his new home in the UK and is sent to meet his Grandfather who is impatiently waiting for him. 
Zareb takes in the splendor of the mansion he’s entering. The wait-staff bow to him as they welcome the adopted heir to the Hanlon Empire. 
Diana Scott continued her interview of Zareb Hanlon, asking him about how his life changed after meeting his grandfather and growing up under his care. 
Zareb indulged deeper in his memories and disclosed how it was his grandfather who taught him the importance of keeping the family first and taking care of everybody under his wing. It was Connor Hanlon, Zareb’s grandfather who groomed Zareb and trained him to be a cutthroat competitor in business and made sure Zareb’s personality was better than the best. Connor Hanlon made him train from the best coaches in Mix Martial Arts and Krav Maga, even Connor McGregor trained alongside Zareb. 
The interviewer inquired about the future plans Zareb holds for the company and how he wants the distillery and wing companies to grow. She hints about undercover businesses Zareb has which he negates saying that the competitors need to meet him in the market and not fabricate rumors and lies about him. 
He wanted to rule the world when he stepped into the business and that is exactly what he will do. 
Zareb goes home that day to his wife who sticks by every decision he makes and is there for him like a rock. He discusses the weapon supplies to third-world countries and supports rebellions to overthrow dictators. 
A strong man sat on the table with Aidan Hanlon, a hot head and Zareb’s cousin. This man was Alexander Owen, coming from a troubled past but setting himself up as the one man Zareb relies on. 
Aidan does not like Zareb leading the company considering he was adopted and feels that it is his right. He made it clear when Hanlon Holdings held a board meeting and Alexander advised him to talk privately to Zareb as he always puts family first and will respect what Aidan has to say. Aidan had other plans and did not care about honoring Zareb.
