7 Ways to Cheer Yourself Up

Life can be hard sometimes, right? Whether you've got the winter blues, or maybe work is getting you down, here are 7 little things you can do to make yourself feel better: 

1. Talk to a friend. Telling someone what's been getting you down can be very cathartic. Maybe they will lend you an empathetic ear or offer you advice. Either way, it's helpful to know you have people who are on your side, and you're not alone.
2. Listen to music. I once heard a phrase that resonated with me: "When words fail, music speaks." No matter what you're feeling, I can guarantee there's a song that explains the way you feel. Put on your sad song playlist and have a good cry (this seems counter-productive, but I promise you'll feel better afterward), listen to something high-energy and upbeat, or just indulge in your all-time favorites. 
3. Treat yourself. Rewarding yourself is a great way to make yourself feel better. Maybe you've been eyeing up a new outfit - don't think twice. You deserve it! 
4. Eat something you love. If you're feeling down, food can be a real mood booster. Sometimes a slice of cake or a juicy cheeseburger is just what we need to perk ourselves up a little.
5. Cook or bake. Even if you're not so good at it, cooking or baking something is a fun way to cheer yourself up. Learning a new recipe, or having a loved one over to bake some delicious sweet treats, is a great distraction from stress and sadness.
6. Play a video game. No matter what kind of games you like to play, playing a video game is a great way to cheer yourself up. Maybe you're taking your stress out on some zombies in a shooter or exploring some breathtaking scenery in an open-world adventure. Either way, video games are a great distraction and a mood booster.
7. Spend time with furry friends. Nothing cheers me up more than hanging out with my pup. If you don't have your own 4-legged friend, go visit a family member or friend who does, and you'll see exactly what I'm talking about.
