

Tim slingshot forward out of the bike lane and into the adjacent lane, narrowly missing connecting with a Honda Accord's rear bumper. This was directly followed up by the screech of a horn and the slamming of brakes from the rather large Dodge behind him, which was virtually inches away from scraping his back wheel. Following suit were rather less than polite remarks from the extremely irate gentleman waving his fists out the window in his direction, but Tim simply feigned remorse as he signaled apologies and continued on to the next block.

He was making excellent time. This latest delivery marked his tenth of the day so far and assured him the weekly bonus. He hadn't missed it in over a year. His thoughts drifted to the fact that he was just a little over a thousand dollars away from a down payment on his house. He had lived in a five-story walkup his whole life with nothing more than a dresser and a bed. He longed for space and the freedom to walk more than five feet in any direction without running into something. He just wanted to sta...
                                                                                      
                                                                        *          *           *

Tim began to slowly open his eyes, but immediately regretted it. The ambient light seemed to be the cause of the cascading waves of pain that began to course through his body. His whimpers were met with a calming, albeit unfamiliar, voice assuring him that everything was going to be alright. He forced himself to glance in its direction and saw the teary-eyed face of a woman staring back at him. As he continued to take inventory of her, he scanned down to her hands and noticed that her knuckles appeared white as she fiercely gripped Kleenex in both fists, while she seemed to be searching his eyes for something. 

"Don't worry Tim", the woman said as she started to mindlessly fidget with his covers. "The doctors will have you fixed up in no time, and before you know it you will be back home where you belong".
   
 Soon he began to panic and his thoughts began to race. 'Who was Tim and who was this woman? Where am I, who am I and what happened to me?!'
