Michael traveled back up the road leading from Satan's throneroom to the surface. Justin, who followed him close behind, looked back at the billions of condemned souls who were not so lucky to be leaving this place. Justin began to weep for them, a feeling of true sorrow blanketing his soul for the first time since he was created by the Almighty Himself.

Justin was judged once by God and found to be so evil that He could not accept Justin into Heaven. However, in this instance, God had requested Justin be brought back to Him to face a second judgment. Neither Michael nor Justin understood God's plan, but at this point, Michael knew not to question it, and Justin was just relieved to be away from Hell's scorching heat.

Michael escorted Justin up to the pearly gates of Heaven, where they were greeted by God. "You have returned him to me, Michael. In you, I am pleased," God's voice boomed like thunder. "Bring the soul of Justin to my feet, so I may judge him accordingly." Michael looked at Justin and gestured for him to step forward and come face-to-face with God.

Justin approached God's throne and bowed at His feet. God called out to him: "Justin, rise." Justin stood and faced God with fear in his heart and a feeling of awkwardness as if he did not belong in this hallowed place. God placed his hand on Justin's left shoulder, which caused Justin to finally feel a sense of relief for once in his pitiful life. "Your second judgment is part of a greater plan I created when I created the world. You were sent to Hell for your transgressions; however, after 1200 years in Hell, you will now be brought back to serve me. Your time in Hell was your payment; consider your debt paid. Now you will serve at my pleasure, first by bringing me the souls of all those who are condemned to Hell. You will shepherd them to me with the assistance of Michael, and you will do so once I have commanded the stars of the firmament to fall to the Earth, and the mountains to crash into the ocean. This is what I decree, and this will be done."

Justin bowed to God, thanked Him for His mercy, and departed on his quest.
