Mua ha ha ha ha! They may think I'm mad, but I will give you the greatest coconut bundt cake recipe ever created!

First, make sure that you have a bundt pan. This recipe is perfectly calculated for a 6-cup pan to make two cakes, but you can use one 12-cup pan to make one larger cake as long as you increase the overall cook time to an hour.

Here are the ingenious ingredients that will make a cake so good the world will think you're an evil genius like me:

1. Cake Ingredients
    a. 2 teaspoons of coconut extract. This is the most important one!
    b. 1 teaspoon of baking powder
    c. 4 eggs
    d. 2 1/4 cups of flour
    e. 1 teaspoon of vanilla extract
    f. 1/2 a cup of milk
    g. 1 cup of sweetened shredded coconut
    h. 2 1/2 cups of sugar
    i. 1/2 a teaspoon of salt
    j. 1 cup of butter (softened)
2. Glaze ingredients
   a. 1 1/2 cups of powdered sugar
   b. 1 teaspoon of coconut extract
   c. 2 tablespoons of milk
   d. 2 tablespoons of melted butter
3. Topping ingredients
   a. 2/3 a cup of shredded sweetened coconut

Now that you have gathered the ingredients for your cooking experiment, it is time to begin bringing your creation to life! Mua ha ha ha ha!

- Preheat your oven to 325 degrees F. Grease and lightly flour your bundt pans and set up your oven rack in the middle of the oven. Setting up all of this in advance separates normal scientists from true mad scientists!
- Whisk your flour, baking powder, and salt in a medium mixing bowl and set it aside.
- In a bigger mixing bowl, beat the butter and sugar together until they are fluffy and light. Add the eggs and two types of extract and continue to beat this new mixture until it is smooth. Add the milk and beat again on low speed. Then add the flour mix from the other bowl and beat it until the two have become one. Stir in your coconut.
- Pour this batter into your bundt pans and put them in the oven for fifty to fifty-five minutes. You should have plenty of time to plot your next experiment while you're waiting!
- When your cake is finished, set the pan on a wire rack to cool for fifteen minutes. After this, place the cooling rack over the top of the pan and flip the whole thing over. The cake should drop out with no problem if you have followed my brilliant instructions correctly!
- Now, the time of the glaze has arrived. Melt the butter in a glass bowl, then add the rest of the three ingredients and whisk it all together until it is smooth. Add more milk to thin it or more powdered sugar to thicken it.
- Drizzle the glaze and sprinkle the coconut over the cake, and your experiment is finally alive! Cackle aggressively to mark your success and enjoy your cake.
