The Simpsons is the longest-running animated show of all time. It first aired on December 17th, 1989 on FOX and is still currently airing new episodes in 2023. Homer and Bart are two of the most iconic characters in the recent history of television. It has inspired many other shows in various ways, such as South Park, Family Guy, Beavis and Butthead, and many more.

The Simpsons is a modern interpretation of an everyday American family. Bart, the son, is a prototypical troublemaker with a knack for being much more intelligent than he makes people believe. Lisa, the daughter, is far above average intelligence and gets frustrated by the lack of others' intellect in the family. Homer, the father, is a working-class male who loves beer and works at the local power plant for minimal wages. Marge, the mother, is a housewife who loves her husband unconditionally and cares very much for her children's wellbeing. Maggie is the baby of the family and is almost always seen with a onesie on and a binkie in her mouth.

While The Simpsons is most well-known for its longevity and iconic characters, the earlier seasons are peppered with insights into adolescent struggles and triumphs as well as the struggles that parents go through while navigating raising children and trying to maintain a healthy relationship like Homer and Marge do. Homer and Marge truly love each other, but the show isn't afraid to reveal that their marriage isn't always perfect and is often hard work. Self-deprecation from Homer is a part of most episodes, and the relationship between Bart and Homer is closer to that of a friendship than father and son.

Part of the charm of The Simpsons is how unique and realistic the plots tend to be.  Many shows today still aren't willing to explore what The Simpsons were doing in the early 90s. The Simpsons have also correctly predicted many things that happened after the episodes aired, such as Donald Trump becoming president, the invention of smartwatches, and FaceTime. These are just a few examples.
