Even as I embark on this journey of college, I can tell you I'm nervous. I've read all about the decline of high school graduates going to college. No one wants their parents or themselves to spend all that time and money. I had no idea why there was so much news about this topic. I got down to business and started researching. After all, I'm about to go on this journey and I want to know what I'm getting myself into. 

First, the economy stinks. The U.S. economy has been on a downward slope for some time. What does that mean? While scouring the internet, I found some information from the Director of the Center for Business and Economic Research and Ball State University. Michael Hicks stated, "With the exception of wartime, the United States has never been through a period of declining attainment like this." What does this mean? I'm not sure, so I had to dig some more. Currently, there are 4 million fewer students in college than a decade ago. Of course, Covid-19 hurt these numbers. More young people went into the workforce, instead of going to college. That concept does not agree with me. I wanted a gap year off before college but not one that involved working. 

Even before the pandemic, college applications started declining. We can't blame the pandemic for everything. Different focus groups and surveys showed that people were skeptical that the college degree would prove results that some were willing to pay for. Statistics show that one in three don't think the degree is worth the amount of money shelled out. Think about it. When my parents went to college, the cost was less than $30,000 in some states. Now, my college education will cost closer to $50,000 with loans that will haunt me until the day I die. The conversations about worth keep coming up time and again with my friends and their parents. When my parents went to school, everyone went to college. If you didn't go to college, you were considered a bum. Not anymore. Now parents seemed relieved if their child opts out of college. 

Student loans. Don't get my father started. He has been paying off his loans for the past 20 years. It seems like he will always be paying. While my parents wait to find out if the government will forgive student debt, they pay every month like clockwork. This does not appeal to me in the least. Imagine if you bought a car, but never paid it off, no matter how many years passed. Why would you want to pay off a car for 20 years? College is no different. People who don't even graduate from college still have to pay off student loans. That is a real insult. Do you think the universities are addressing this issue? Nope. 

Having a degree is indeed necessary in some industries. It is also true that college grads tend to make more. However, the attitude about college being necessary has dropped from 60% to 45% according to the nonprofit Educational Credit Management Corporation. Even the ones who are already committed to college are doubting the decision.
