Being an adult is great! Who doesn't love having every waking moment scheduled to do something, mostly work? You get up early in the morning, feed the cat, walk the dog, get presentable, then sit in traffic for an hour to get to your office.

Once there, you enjoy being fake-nice to people you don't like, pretending that you're busy all the time, and having meetings with people of dubious intelligence, including your boss. But that big paycheck is worth it, right? Sacrificing your independence and self-respect and producing average work to be yet another cog in the machine is incredibly fulfilling.

When you're not at work, life is grand! The price of your groceries includes admission to a delightful experience in the store, where the melodious tones of crying babies serve as the backdrop for a supermarket full of overpriced, over-ripe produce and meat you need to take out a second mortgage to afford. The lovely dent someone's cart left in your front passenger door just adds character.

It's a shock when you get home from work and shopping and find the little elves on loan from the shoemaker somehow neglected to stop by your house and clean it while you were gone. But that's okay, you're always in the mood for spending an hour cooking something you'll gobble in ten minutes. You could vacuum, dust, and scrub the toilet afterward but the grime only enhances the ambiance of your apartment no bigger than your parents' garage.

An adult's reward for the stress and hard work is the joy of paying bills. Sure, $250 for electricity in your palatial abode seems reasonable. After all, those dust bunnies need to be kept at a comfortable temperature while you're at work. Rent is worth it, for the scenic view of another apartment complex out of your window. There's no place like home.

The other reward is the weekend, when you have abounding energy to run errands, call your elderly parents, wash the dog, visit an urgent-care clinic to check out that pneumonia that you didn't have time to be seen for during the week, and catch up on your needlework.

Being an adult is wonderful. Everyone should try it. There is no greater feeling than being an adult!
