Here are five cheap foods in the USA that are high in calories. It's important to note that costs will differ based on location!

1. Canola Oil
You wouldn't eat canola oil alone, but that's why it's great for weight gain. You can easily add it to other meals and boost your calorie intake with little effort. With 240 calories in 2 tbsp of canola oil, it certainly packs a punch. Canola oil is comparatively really cheap, also. You can usually buy a gallon for around $10. 

Canola oil is pretty versatile as well in terms of how you can get it into your diet. You can drizzle it on salads, fry things, or baste your meat with it. There is no shortage of ways to easily add calories when you use canola oil. 

2. Potatoes
Potatoes are perfect for gaining weight. High in carbs, high in calories, found everywhere, and pretty cheap, too. There are many ways to cook potatoes and have them as the main ingredient or the side of a dish. In terms of calories per dollar, potatoes are very competitive, with a pound of potatoes costing around $1. Not as cheap as canola oil, but potatoes are also far easier to have a lot of, especially when butter is added. 

Potatoes can be added to so many dishes. Making up a bulk of mashed potatoes and eating them as a snack is pretty easy. They can be boiled, mashed, baked, stewed, or fried when cooking.

3. White Rice
White rice has been a high-calorie food used worldwide for a long time. Rice can be found everywhere. It's extremely cheap, and best of all, it can be the base of so many great-tasting dishes or even just added as a side to many others. Rice has a staggering 2,860 calories per roughly $1 when you buy in bulk, which is a great price.

Rice can be used as the base of curries, added to soups and stews, go in tacos, burritos, and so much more. Rice is easy to cook and can be stored in the fridge for leftovers.

4. Pancake Batter
Why not start your day with a high-calorie-dense breakfast that leaves you wanting to eat more throughout the day? Pancake batter is delicious, cheap, and high in calories. A 2lb box of pancake mix will cost somewhere around $2 and give you over 2,000 calories on its own, but when you add butter, milk, and syrup, you'll get an even higher calorie content.

You can also use pancake batter to make other things, such as muffins. 

5. Whole Chicken
Whole chickens are incredible for calories and are usually in every major grocery store for bargain prices. These usually come pre-cooked, too, meaning you won't have to worry. You can buy a whole chicken cooked for $4.99 at Costco. That chicken should provide you with over 3,250 calories. That equals 650 calories a dollar. 

Chicken isn't the best on the list for calories per dollar but it's probably the best for versatility and ease of cooking. Consider trying a rice meal with chicken to get an easy high, calorie meal.
