1. Dr. Peter Bishop. Peter is a mid-30s neurologist with boyish good looks who is known as a playboy who spends money lavishly. The Bishop family is a highly-regarded family of wealth in this town, and the matriarch, his grandmother, is tired of his antics.

2. Amanda Peterson. Amanda is a lawyer in her late 20s, working for the district attorney's office and hoping to get a reputation as a tough prosecutor. She has the determination to succeed...and to hide a secret about her past in another city that no one can find out about.

3. Anthony Patrelli. Anthony owns a sleazy nightclub on the wrong side of town where shady dealings go on behind closed doors. While many federal agents have tried to bust Anthony, no one has yet succeeded in charging him with anything that would stick.

4. Isabelle Canella. Isabelle is 21 and wants to get out and enjoy as much life as she can while she's young. Without a lot of money or much of a work ethic, she uses her womanly charms to manipulate men to spend money on her and take her places, and she is plotting to make Dr. Bishop her next sugar daddy.

5. Patricia Nixon. Patricia is a middle-aged therapist at the hospital where Dr. Bishop works, and all of the hospital employees go to her for advice. Her husband, a police officer, was killed in the line of duty attempting to talk down a barricaded armed robbery suspect, and although it's been 8 years, she hasn't dated anyone else yet.

6. Chief Patrick Reilly. Patrick has spent his entire police career at this police department, and in addition to knowing many of the locals, he has informants who feed him valuable intel about any criminal misdeeds afoot. The former partner of Patricia's husband, Patrick is tough, has no patience for criminals, and is intent on bringing down Anthony.

7. Marcus Farmer. Marcus graduated from the police academy about six months ago, and he is an enthusiastic rookie liked by his fellow officers, even though he's a little naive. Marcus has his sights set on Amanda, who he sees sometimes at the police station, even though she is a little older and doesn't seem to have any room for anything else in her life but work.
