Sure. Here are 10 suggestions for specialty pizzas, per your request: 

1. The Classic: Red sauce with a 3 cheese blend, pepperoni, bell pepper, and sliced black olives
2. The Californian: Pesto sauce with fresh mozzarella, sun-dried tomatoes, artichoke hearts, and grilled chicken
3. The Class Act: Red sauce with mozzarella and ricotta, prosciutto, arugula, balsamic glaze
4. The Full Moon: Alfredo sauce with a 3 cheese blend, onions, artichoke hearts, and white mushrooms
5. The Meathead: Red sauce with a 3 cheese blend, pepperoni, sausage and prosciutto 
6. The Harvest: Red sauce with a 3 cheese blend, mushrooms, bell peppers, artichokes, and asparagus tips
7. The Guru: Red sauce and vegan pesto blend, no cheese, roasted red peppers, mushrooms, artichokes, and zucchini
8. The Fiesta: Red sauce and salsa blend, 3 cheese blend, bell peppers, sliced jalapeno, and ground beef
9. The Caesar: Alfredo sauce with mozzarella and parmesan cheese, roasted garlic, arugula, and anchovies
10. The Sophisticate: Olive oil with mozzarella and goat cheese, caramelized onions, prosciutto, and fig jam

And here are 10 recommendations for dessert pies with memorable names: 
1. The Mud Pie: Chocolate cookie crust, chocolate pudding with crushed Oreo cookies, and whipped cream
2. Ma Cherry Amour: Classic shortcrust, cherries, lemon juice, and almond extract
3. The All-American: Classic shortcrust, apples, cinnamon, and a scoop of vanilla ice cream
4. Lime Time: Graham cracker crust, key limes, egg yolks, and sweetened condensed milk
5. The Sweet Tooth: Butter pie crust, caramelized brown sugar, pecans, and whipped cream
6. Thank Blue Berry Much: Flaky pastry crust, blueberry filling, and a scoop of vanilla ice cream
7. The Zest is History: Classic shortcrust, lemon curd, and lightly charred vanilla meringue
8. The Old-Fashioned: Classic shortcrust, custard filling, bourbon caramel glaze, and candied orange
9. Gourd Vibes Only (vegan): Graham cracker crust, pumpkin puree, brown sugar, and cinnamon
10. The Identity Crisis: Cookie dough crust, brownie filling, caramel syrup, and a scoop of vanilla ice cream

I hope this is helpful. Let me know if you'd like me to make any edits to this list.
