United Airlines decided it might help business if they hired celebrity flight attendants. Their first celebrity hired was chef Gordon Ramsey.

Gordon was quiet and polite during his flight attendant training, and he paid close attention to all guidance provided. Soon, he was ready to begin his new position and was assigned to United Flight 15, from Jackson, Mississippi to Los Angeles, California.

Nattily dressed in his crisply-starched United Airlines uniform, Gordon stood at his assigned station at the plane's entrance and greeted each passenger as they boarded.

“You! Slow-poke! Speed it up, we have 200 passengers behind you and we don’t have all day for this!” he said to an elderly woman.

A woman with a baby was advised, “Keep that kid quiet on my flight! Nobody wants to hear a baby screeching at 12,000 feet!”

“Is that supposed to be an emotional support dog?” he demanded of a bald, emaciated young man. “He’s so mangey, you’re his emotional support human! Sit down!”

The next passenger was Gordon’s doppleganger. They had not yet met, but the man was on his way to L.A. to be Gordon’s double in an upcoming action movie. Gordon slowly looked him up and down, then nodded and didn’t say a word.

Finally, every seat on the plane was full, and Gordon's duties were complete. He went to the galley and strapped himself into a seat for the remainder of the flight.

Comment cards and pencils were handed out to all passengers for feedback on the new celebrity flight attendant program, and the seasoned flight attendants were shocked:

"I need to get that hip replaced soon!"

“Best flight ever! I do need to lose some weight!”

"I hate screaming babies on planes, too!"

“He’s right, I should probably get my emotional support dog to the vet.”

“Gordon is a fine-looking man and anyone would be lucky to play his double in a movie.”

Gordon was a unanimous success, and United Airlines is now rolling out this program throughout the fleet. Celebrity flight attendants will include Simon Cowell, Judy Tenuta, and Roseanne Barr. Book your flight today!
