Clay eventually stopped cowering, slowly unfolding himself from his fetal position on the ground. The sound of crashing metal and exploding pavement quickly faded into the sound of smoldering. A brilliant green light cast itself from behind the now-ruined mailbox, shreds of former letters and packages smoking on the ground and floating slowly down on a gust of wind. 

Pulling himself back up to a standing position and checking to make sure that no one saw his temporary cowardice, the young man slowly crept up on the glow, a small voice in the back of his mind worrying at him about radiation and Marie Curie. Instead, what looked like a square plastic (or maybe ceramic? or steel?) container sat in the remains of the mailbox, nearly cracked in two, the green light spilling out. "If it's radioactive, then I'm already boned," he mused, ignoring the nagging, fearful voice of "reason."

A small green ring. Neat. Like one of those Green Lantern ones. Is it a Power Ring? "There's no way. Literally no way," he thought, followed by, "Stop saying literally all the time. Ugh." He slid the ring onto his hand without a single thought. A moment later, the form of a giant blue old man loomed above him, imposing itself over the real world. 

"Zuvan Sur?" the man said.

"Sorry, no. I'm not him. I'm Clay." 

"Clay. That sounds human. Earth." Was the old man grimacing? "Again." Yep, and there's his hand, over his face. "Again. What is even—I take it you're from Earth?"

"Yeah, where should I be from?"

"You should be from Ungara and your name should be Zuvan Sur. But you're Clay. Okay. We did it before. Right. Yes, that's a Power Ring, and yes, that makes you a provisional Green Lantern. Please stand by while we send someone to bring you in and get you up to speed, I guess."

"Wait, whoa! Do I get a say in this?" Clay's left hand instinctively clawed at the ring on his right.

"Eventually, sure. But right now, we need to deal with this. See you soon." The image fades, leaving the real world, and a quickly approaching Green Lantern sporting bright red sidecut hair, for poor Clay to consider.
