1. How did Ashley Daniels know that her second-grade son would need extra support even though he earned a good grade on the assessment he took on about the material? Where does Daniel's son go to school?

Daniel's watched her son as he sat at the dining room table and got lucky as he guessed the answers. The second grader attends a virtual school program in Rio Rancho School District in New Mexico. 


2. How did Rio Rancho handle the requests for online programming even after most students had returned to the school building? How many students participated in 2021 as compared to the present? 

The Rio Rancho School District assigned 10 teachers to serve the students in a program where students were in the building one day per week and online the other four days. When the program started in 2021, over 250 students were being served, however, in the past two years enrollment has dropped to it current level of 87 students. 


3. How did the virtual program called the SpaRRk Academy operate when it opened? How has the enrollment drop affected the operation and cost per pupil of the school? 

Even though initially the students came to the school only one day per week, the teachers and principal as well as other staff were in the school building almost every day, and initially planned to gradually increase the number of days students were in the building. With the enrollment dropping steadily for the past two years, the plans have not been fully implemented and the cost has increased 121% and nearly $3000 more than the average per pupil expenditure in the 17,000-student district. 

4. How has the school board reacted? How does Rio Ranch compare to the national landscape? 

The school board announced in 2022 that they would vote in the spring of 2023 on the school's status and whether the school would remain open. In 2021, a nonprofit think tank surveyed school districts with 41% of systems in the nation indicating that they would open an online school and 32% planned to maintain the program in the long term beyond the pandemic.
